









Monday, 5 September 2005
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
[The witness entered court]
--- Upon commencing at 2.20 p.m.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  My monitor isn't working, but we can proceed.
Mr. Kay, do you remember at the last session Mr. Milosevic was
seeking to lead through this witness evidence which he said would
discredit Prosecution witnesses Dulovic and Anastasijevic insofar as it
would show discrepancies between the evidence that they had given in a
special court in Belgrade.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I can barely hear this.  The volume
is down.  I can barely hear the interpretation.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, it's better now.  Yes.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] It's not better.  It's not better.
[In English] You can try it.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Is it any better, Mr. --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, now it is better.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Okay.  Yes, we'll proceed.
I was recalling for Mr. Kay's benefit, and Mr. Milosevic's, the
evidence which Mr. Milosevic sought to lead through this witness of what
he said were discrepancies between Prosecution witnesses Dulovic and
Anastasijevic's evidence given in this court and evidence which they gave
in a special court in Belgrade.  I had indicated to him that there are
other ways of introducing that evidence which he felt was important to his



case, and I'm going to ask the assigned counsel to investigate this
matter, to get hold of the transcript, and I would leave it to their
discretion to -- whether to seek to lead that evidence through whatever
means is appropriate.
MR. KAY:  Thank you, Your Honour.
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone please for Mr. Kay.
MR. KAY:  It seemed to us on Friday whether we discussed this
issue, Ms. Higgins and myself, that the obvious way forward was to have
the original transcripts of the hearing set against the evidence that was
given here so that the issues of the discrepancies can be seen from the
primary material.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  Yes.  I would not want this evidence to be
lost to the accused, and that is why I'm asking assigned counsel to
investigate the matter.
MR. KAY:  We will.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thanks.
Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
WITNESS:  VOJISLAV SESELJ [Resumed]
[Witness answered through interpreter]
Examined by Mr. Milosevic:  [Continued]
Q.   [Interpretation] Mr. Seselj, at the end of the last day I put some
questions to you that had to do with paragraph 28 of the Bosnian
indictment, that have to do with the "Rump Presidency" as it's called
here.  You have partly answered that.  It says:  "The Rump Presidency
carried out Slobodan Milosevic's policies," and so on and so forth, "had



effect and control over the JNA as its Commander-in-Chief."
I'm not going to ask you to repeat what you've already said, but
in relation to that please answer my question.  The representatives of
Serbia -- Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, why did they
not take part for a certain period of time in the work of the Presidency
of the SFRY, and were there any obstacles in Belgrade?  Did they have any
objective reasons that threatened them in any way and prevented them from
carrying out their functions, or were there some other reasons for this?
The question is:  Why did the representatives of Slovenia,
Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia not take part in the work of the
SFRY Presidency in Belgrade?
A.   In Belgrade there were no problems in terms of them coming,
staying properly, and carrying out their political duties.  There was
never a single incident involved.  No one ever prevented them from
carrying out their work.  However, first it was Janez Drnovsek who stopped
coming to the sessions, and in this way he showed that Slovenia had
practically already seceded.  Then he was similarly followed by Stipe
Mesic, Bogic Bogicevic and Vasil Tupurkovski.  At first they were saying
that they could not come because they could not strike a balance in
relation to the representatives of Serbia, Kosovo, Vojvodina, and
Montenegro, because they would always be outvoted four to three.
The representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia were
not expressing the -- any separatist views at that point in time that was
actually showed by their leaderships, and even Stipe Mesic did not display
such feelings at the time.  It's only when he left Belgrade and when he



came back to the Croatian parliament that he said, "I've completed my
duty.  Yugoslavia is no more."
He pretended to be a Yugoslav for a very long period of time.
Also, as a person who wanted to engage in dialogue.  He presented him
sufficient as such to the representatives of the European Community and he
condemned the Serbs of being uncooperative.  He pretended to be the most
cooperative of all.  However, at the very end the mask fell and he was
what he was.
I already said that according to the constitution of the then
Yugoslavia it was not possible to have a Rump Presidency.  Had only one
single member of the Presidency been in Belgrade and had all others been
prevented from coming, somebody could have gotten killed, somebody could
have gotten sick, somebody could have been taken prisoner, somebody could
have refused to come to attend a session, a single member of the
Presidency was sufficient to pass legal decision because we represent the
Presidency.  That is the kind of general legal document that existed
within the Presidency of Yugoslavia, and it was adopted considerably
before Yugoslavia disintegrated.  That is why I insist on the fact that a
Rump Presidency is impossible.  It is inconceivable to have the notion of
a rump Presidency.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you, Mr. Seselj.  Next question, please.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   In paragraph 56 it says, inter alia, that:  "Slobodan Milosevic,
in his capacity as president of the Republic of Serbia, declared that
Yugoslavia was finished."



Please, you've got that paragraph number 56 before you.  I'm not
going to read the whole paragraph out because that would take up too much
time.  Either after that session of the Presidency that is referred to
here or before that or after that, did I in any way declare that
Yugoslavia was finished?
A.   I personally think that not even today you are prepared to say
that Yugoslavia is finished.  But while you held these high offices you
never said any such thing.  You expressed your dissatisfaction though.  I
remember that speech of yours that you made in 1991 concerning the
behaviour of the members of the Presidency of the SFRY.  When Serbia went
through a referendum in 1990 and adopted its new constitution or, rather,
constitutional amendments that had to do with its federal competencies,
but then they were immediately suspended by a particular constitutional
provision saying that it will only enter into force if Yugoslavia ceases
to exist.  I cannot quote it verbatim, but that was the gist of the
matter.
The leadership of Serbia never acted against Yugoslavia and never
did it contribute to the disappearance of Yugoslavia.  When Slovenia and
Croatia seceded, when the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Macedonia was recognised, the leadership of Serbia and Montenegro
proclaimed the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as a federation consisting
of two federal units.  So even then there was this very marked aspiration
on your part to keep some kind of Yugoslavia alive.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]



Q.   "In March 1991 the collective Presidency of the SFRY reached a
deadlock on several issues."  That is paragraph 56.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  [Previous translation continues]... that sentence
which is at the beginning of the paragraph.  There's another allegation in
that last sentence which is that you declared that Yugoslavia would no
longer be bound by decisions of the Federal Presidency, so I want to ask
Mr. Seselj whether that is so.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  No.  As far as I can remember
at that time, and this speech, which is generally known in the Serbian
public, Mr. Milosevic did not say that Serbia would not be bound by the
decisions of the Federal Presidency.  His statement was to the effect that
Serbia would think about what it would do in the future in that situation
when the Federal Presidency was behaving rather irresponsibly.
I would like to remind you that in that same month, March, there
was a meeting of the Federal Presidency in the building of the
headquarters of the General Staff of the JNA.  There was a very long
debate that went on; I think a day and a night.  It had to do with the
demand of the military to declare a state of emergency.
The top echelons of the military was quite dissatisfied with the
behaviour of some members of the Presidency, and when there was finally a
vote not a single position prevailed.  It was a draw.  As far as I can
remember --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You have answered the question I asked, thanks.
Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]



Q.   That is what is referred to here.  It says the representatives on
the Presidency from the Republic of Serbia, the Republic of Montenegro,
the autonomous province of Vojvodina, and the autonomous province of
Kosovo and Metohija all resigned from their posts in March 1991.  So what
was so controversial about this proposal that was presented to the
Presidency and who was it that submitted this proposal?
A.   The essence of this proposal was that the Presidency should also
start the disintegration of Yugoslavia.  I haven't got the document here
so I cannot quote from it.  But some members of the Presidency were
actually instigated by emissaries from Western Europe and they already
started putting forth such demands.  Actually, they wanted to bring the
Presidency into the position of declaring the end of Yugoslavia, for the
Presidency to declare the end of Yugoslavia.  Since the atmosphere was not
very constructive, as far as I can remember three members of the
Presidency resigned:  Borisav Jovic from Serbia; then Nenad Bucin, was it,
or Branko Kostic from Montenegro; and the representative from Vojvodina.
I think the representative from Kosovo was Riza Sapundziju and he had been
recalled in the meantime.
Q.   All right, Mr. Seselj.  A few moments ago you said after that
session or before that session or in relation to that session I never
declared that Yugoslavia was finish.  What about other politicians?  Did
they declare that Yugoslavia was finished?
A.   I've already said about Stipe Mesic.  And then all Slovenian
politicians were saying that Yugoslavia was finished and their policy was
one of unison, that is to say of the Slovenian leadership, and it would be



hard to find anyone who was not speak along those lines.
As for the Serbian leadership, no such thing ever happened; in
Montenegro either.
Q.   After these reactions, was the work of the Presidency returned to
normal, because Borisav Jovic withdrew his resignation and Branko Kostic
was elected on behalf of Montenegro, and Jugoslav Kostic represented
Vojvodina at the time.
A.   Well, it could not be put that way, that the normal work of the
Presidency continued.  The Presidency was reconstituted.  It started
working again, but Stipe Mesic was putting obstacles in the way of its
work.  Drnovsek never came back, I think, and the representative of
Bosnia, Bogic Bogicevic, and the representative of Macedonia, Vasil
Tupurkovski, started behaving worse and worse.  There would be a new
crisis soon after that in the month of May, when Stipe Mesic failed to be
elected president of the Presidency.
There was a principle involved that the president of the
Presidency was elected from a different republican province every year but
nobody's election was guaranteed.  There had to be a vote.  Stipe Mesic
did not enjoy the confidence of the Presidency, and then Western European
envoys came and exerted great pressure on the members of the Presidency to
elect him nevertheless.
Q.   What was my attitude towards Yugoslavia?
A.   Your attitude was always a consistent one in terms of supporting
the preservation of Yugoslavia as a modern federation.  You acted from
those positions.  I think that there is not a single exception to that.



Q.   Do you recall what is referred to in paragraph 57 where it says
that Slobodan Milosevic and Franjo Tudjman met in Karadjordjevo and
discussed on March 25, 1991 the partition of Bosnia-Herzegovina between
Serbia and Croatia?
A.   Yes, I remember that.  I was not present at that meeting, but I
remember what the official press release was.  And I also know that what
was skilfully being bandied about was that you and Tudjman were reaching
agreement on the partition of Bosnia-Herzegovina primarily to upset the
Bosnian politicians, Alija Izetbegovic and others, and also to create a
situation that would be as unpleasant as possible, that would make it
increasingly difficult to find a way out of the problems that beset the
country at the time.
At that time, I -- as I've already said, the presidents of the
presidencies of the different federal units had changed.  European envoys
had actually mediated in that effort too.  It was very hard to reach
agreement because Slovenia had already opted for secession and Croatia
increasingly so.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Who was bandying this about and what -- through
what medium?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, these rumours were skilfully
being bandied about.  I could not say exactly by who, but in several media
this kind of idea appeared, and as a rule these were media that were
already at that time being financed from the West by different Western
intelligence agencies, so that's the kind of media I'm talking about.  In
Belgrade, for example, it was the Borba Daily.  Borba before that was a



federal communist newspaper.  During the time of the Ante Markovic
government, it did not only have an opposition view towards the government
in Serbia but it openly advocated a Western policy, the policy of the
Western powers.  It is possible that quite a bit of this came from Ante
Markovic's government because Ante Markovic was afraid of a possible
agreement between Milosevic and Tudjman, which would keep Yugoslavia
together under certain conditions, but Ante Markovic would have been
eliminated.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   I wish to draw your attention, Mr. Robinson, to the fact that at
one stage we had the transcript here from a secret meeting of the Defence
counsel of Croatia presided over by Tudjman.  He was meeting his closest
collaborators and commenting on this story about Karadjordjevo.  This
denies the idea that what we discussed was some sort of division of
Bosnia.  I will, however, check whether this has already been admitted
into evidence and if not we will find this transcript.
However, what matters here, Mr. Seselj, is something to do with
you as you were an active participant in all political events.  This
meeting took place on the 25th of March, and allegedly we discussed the
division of Bosnia.  Did I or any other politician from Serbia or any
member of the leadership of the time in all of that year, at the beginning
of which this meeting between Tudjman and me took place, did we in any way
even indirectly raise the issue of a division of Bosnia?
A.   No.  On the contrary.  You tried to convince Izetbegovic that even



if Slovenia and Croatia seceded Bosnia should remain in a Rump Yugoslavia
as an equal federal unit, that the Bosnian Muslims would be recognised as
a constituent nation as they had been before in the previous
constitutional theory and practice, and that Izetbegovic would be the
first president of such a Rump Yugoslavia, in order to demonstrate that it
was not the aim of the Serbs to dominate but simply to preserve the joint
state.  At one point Izetbegovic agreed to this, but then the Americans
persuaded him to call off the agreement.
Q.   Look at paragraph 63 now.  It repeats this allegation.  It
says:  "On the 3rd of October, 1991, the four members of the SFRY
Presidency from Serbia and Montenegro, Borisav Jovic, Jugoslav Kostic,
Sejdo Bajramovic, and Branko Kostic, assume the function of the SFRY
Presidency, circumventing the controls and responsibilities of the
Presidency members from Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Macedonia."
On the 3rd of October, 1991, they assumed the function.  Was this
a kind of takeover of the function of the Presidency or were these
functions being carried out by the legal representatives?
A.   There was absolutely no takeover.  When four of the members of the
Presidency withdrew and some of them officially gave notice that they were
no longer members, like Drnovsek, for instance, while others simply
stopped attending the sessions.  The Presidency continued working with the
members who -- whom it was possible to gather together.
I suggest that the Chamber get hold of this piece of legislation.
I cannot quote it verbatim right now, but I'm absolutely sure it existed.































And according to this piece of legislation, even if the majority of
members could not meet, the Presidency under certain circumstances would
continue working with the members who were present.
Let me remind you that in the spring of 1991 or in the early
summer, there was a vote taken to declare a imminent threat of war.
Q.   In paragraph 65 it says:  "On or around the 22nd of October, 1991,
Slobodan Milosevic, together with other members of the joint criminal
enterprise, continued to advocate for a unitary Serb state governed from
Belgrade, Serbia.  On the same date, the Rump Presidency called for the
mobilisation of reservists in Serbia and other regions that want to stay
in Yugoslavia."
First of all, let's establish when I began advocating a unitary
Serb state, because it says here that I continued to advocate it.  And
secondly, was this anyone's idea that there should be a unitary Serbia,
and is a unitary Serbia the same thing as Yugoslavia, and has Serbia ever
been a unitary state?
A.   No.  You never advocated any kind of unitary state either as
Yugoslavia or as Serbia.  We Serb nationalists criticised you personally
and your government in 1990 at the time the referendum was held to adopt
the new non-communist democratic constitution of Serbia because the
autonomous provinces were not abolished in that constitution.  We, the
Serb nationalists, felt there was no longer any need for the existence of
autonomous provinces.  I was one of the loudest advocates of such an
option.
Furthermore, when the four former federal units had already been



recognised, and this ended on the 6th of April, 1992, you agreed with the
Montenegrin leadership that a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia be
promulgated and that Yugoslavia be preserved even if it was a Rump
Yugoslavia and that it should remain a federation.  In my view, it would
have been possible for you to convince the Montenegrin leadership -
because that was the mood of the Montenegrin people - to accept a unitary
Serbian state to dispense with the federation.  You could have done this
but didn't want to, and I am sorry that you didn't do that, because up to
the point when you left your position of power in the former Yugoslavia --
in Yugoslavia, none of the leaders advocated a separatist option.  It
appeared in Montenegro only after the 5th of October, 2000.
Q.   Did you hear at that time or any other time either from me or any
of my close collaborators, any government officials, including those who
were allegedly together with me in a joint criminal enterprise that we had
any kind of plan to create a unitary Serbian state?
A.   No.  No state official who belonged to your party or collaborated
with you advocated such an idea.
Q.   What do you know about the mobilisation of reservists?  Because it
says here that the Federal Presidency called for the mobilisation of
reservists.  So what do you know about this?  What do you know about the
reasons, the time, and the conditions under which this mobilisation was
called for?
A.   I'm not sure that the Federal Presidency called for a mobilisation
of reservists at all, because it is the JNA organs who are competent to
mobilise reservists.  It was the Federal Presidency that ordered the JNA



to take necessary measures to preserve the constitutional order, the
territorial integrity, and the sovereignty of the country.  I know that
this mobilisation didn't go well.  The response was very poor, because
Veljko Kadijevic, as minister of defence, didn't want to remove the
communist insignia from the military uniforms.
The Presidency, primarily the federal government but also the
Presidency, at the insistence of Stipe Mesic and Ante Markovic, who was
Prime Minister, issued a decision on the intervention of the JNA in
Slovenia.  As far as I know, the leadership of Serbia was not in favour of
such an intervention.  It was not in favour of sending additional troops
into Slovenia, nor was it in favour of the JNA clashing with the then
leadership of Slovenia in spite of their separatist tendencies.  As far as
I know, Serbia wanted negotiations.  However, the Slovenian leadership
which had been encouraged by the West no longer wanted to talk.
Q.   Thank you.  Witness B071 mentioned on more than one occasion your
name, so just as I asked you about a whole number of witnesses, I will ask
you now to briefly tell me whether what he said was true.  B071, on 1st of
April, 2003, on page 18347 of the transcript said that Arkan's and
Seselj's men looted property and took everything off to Serbia.  Do you
know anything about this?  First of all, did your people loot property and
cart it off to Serbia; and secondly, did your men have any kind of
cooperation with Arkan's volunteer guard?
A.   No and no.  First of all, the volunteers of the Serb Radical Party
did not loot property anywhere or take it off to Serbia.  When I assert
that, I'm saying that there was no organised looting anywhere and no



organised taking off of war booty.  Perhaps certain individuals stole as
much as they could stuff into their pockets or into their shirt-front.
That's a different matter.  But as far as the volunteers of the Serb
Radical Party go, there was no organised looting or carting off war booty
to Serbia.  I guarantee that.
The volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were under strict
instructions to avoid any contacts or encounters with Arkan and his Serb
volunteer guard up to the --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm asking why was that instruction given to the
volunteers of the Serb Radical Party?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] We were afraid of being compromised.
We didn't want to lose our honour, our good name, our dignity.  We didn't
want people's awareness of our honesty and morality to be upset.
As I told you, I already had conflicts with Arkan in the 1980s,
long before the war, and this was repeated again and again.  We had
quarrels.  I was even once told by the state security service that I was
in danger of being assassinated by Arkan.  Stanisic Jovicic repeated this
in the Detention Unit of the Tribunal before many inmates.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Seselj, how can you be sure, notwithstanding
that instruction, that your men, the volunteers, did not associate with
Arkan and did not, in fact, loot?  I mean, how can you be sure?  You're
not there with them.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I can't say that not a single
volunteer of the Serb Radical Party cooperated with Arkan.  There's one
instance that I remember very well.  In Eastern Slavonia, a certain man, a



teacher from Zemun, arrived there as a volunteer of the Serb Radical
Party.  When his group returned from the battlefield, it was a group of
about 100 men who came home after a month, he decided not to come back
but, rather, to remain, and he joined Arkan.  He was killed as one of
Arkan's men.  Arkan and I met at his funeral.
So, yes, there might have been exceptions, but there was no joint
military activity.  There might have been individuals who cooperated with
Arkan because they had interests of their own, but I constantly kept a
distance from Arkan.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.  That evidence is clear.
Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   This same witness, B071 says, on the 10th of April, 2003, on
transcript page 18949, the beginnings of the aggression against Croatia
took place from Mrkovci and Jankovci and with infiltration of Seselj's
White Eagles.
First of all, what kind of aggression against Croatia is this; and
secondly, what kind much men were these, these Seselj's White Eagles?
A.   There could have been absolutely no kind of aggression.  The Serb
people organised their own defence wherever they felt at threat.  I have
already said that before sending volunteers to the JNA we sent a group of
volunteers to Borovo Selo at the invitation of Sacorcanin [phoen].  After
that, as far as I can recall, because I visited Mrkovci during the war, we
had volunteers in Mrkovci as well but only as part of the JNA.  We never
had anything to do with any group called the White Eagles.



There was one volunteer from the Serb national renewal in Borovo
Selo but their name then was not the White Eagles but Dusan Silni, and he
was killed as soon as the Croatian attack began even though he was not
carrying a weapon at the time.  After that, we had no cooperation and no
joint military activities.
Q.   Let's clarify this.  It doesn't say here that you cooperated.  It
says here:  "With infiltration of Seselj's White Eagles."  So the White
Eagles are being ascribed to you.
A.   Unfortunately, this is not the only instance of Office of the
Prosecutor bringing witnesses here who don't no anything about what
happened on the ground.  It's simply nonsense to talk of a group called
Seselj's White Eagles.  This simply serves to impeach both the witness and
the Prosecutor who called such a witness, because this witness didn't know
what he was talking about.
Q.   This same witness, B071, B means Bosnia, on the 10th of April,
2003, on page 19003 of the transcript said that "Seselj collected men in
Erdut, trained them there, armed them, and sent them to Bosnia."  Is that
true, Mr. Seselj?
JUDGE KWON:  Mr. Milosevic, I have to tell you that it was B1493
who testified on 10th of April.  Proceed, Mr. Milosevic.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Yes.  Well, perhaps I made a mistake
in my notes.  However, that is the assertion that is to be found on that
particular page, and the page is 19003.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Now, did you rally people in Erdut, train them, arm them, and send



them to Bosnia?
A.   During the war in Eastern Slavonia, only on one occasion was I in
Erdut, and I think that I mentioned meeting Radovan Stojicic, Badza,
nicknamed Badza there in Erdut on that occasion.  So that is the only
time.  I would pass by Erdut in the car but without stopping.  So I was --
we never sent any men there and we never had any training centre there
either, and I can state that quite categorically.
The people from the Serbian Radical Party who went prior to the
war and at the beginning of the war to Bosnia and Herzegovina were
exclusively within the composition of the JNA.  They were JNA men.  So I
absolute -- they absolutely had nothing to do with Arkan's centre in Erdut
later on.  We never had anything to do with it.
Q.   Witness 1070, on the 7th of May, 2003, and the transcript is
20294, says that Arkan's and Seselj's men shot above the heads of the
civilians who had been taken prisoner in the gym -- secondary school in
Bratunac.  Now, did you have any men in Bratunac who did this, who
mistreated and abused the civilians?
A.   At the beginning of the war and never again later on the Serbian
Radical Party never had any volunteers in Bratunac, and to the best of my
knowledge Arkan didn't appear in Bratunac either.  Arkan appeared in
Zvornik, for example, and Bijeljina.  As far as I know, he was never in
Bratunac either.  And I've already said that in Bratunac there was
Deronjic who brought in the White Eagles.  Now, what things they did there
I was not a witness to, but I know what Deronjic did there, and I have
very certain knowledge about that, reliable knowledge.



Q.   That same witness, on transcript 20351 says that Seselj's men were
in Bratunac on the 17th of April.  Between the White Eagles and Seselj's
mean there is no difference, says he.
A.   That just shows how reliable the witness is.  If he can't see any
difference between the volunteers of the Serbian Radical Party and the
White Eagles on the other side, then he is not well-versed in matters at
all.  And that's not the only case.  I have seen similar instances in some
judgements that were made whereby witnesses stated that they happened to
see in some other places Seselj's White Eagles.  But as I say, that is the
problem of The Hague Prosecutor and the unreliability of the witnesses
which it manipulates.
Q.   Witness Dzemail Becirevic also testified here and mentioned you on
several occasions, and this one is on page 20516.  He says that he saw --
MR. NICE:  Your Honour, I haven't been able to check this myself
because the accused hasn't been getting the references correct, and it's
quite difficult to follow this material, but I think, and I'm grateful to
Ms. Dicklich, the last reference said to come from the same witness came
(redacted).
But, really, I'm afraid we've got to have correct references for the
witnesses.  We can't simply just go to the page in the transcript.
Frequently our page numbers don't necessarily coincide here in court, and
without reference to the witnesses it's very difficult to pick it up
later.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, I ask you to be more careful in
pinpointing the names of the witnesses to whom you're referring.  Now,



Judge Kwon has already corrected you once, and apparently there is another
mistake in the reference.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Well, perhaps there might be a
mistake with the name, but there is no mistake with the quotation from the
transcript, and my question relates to the material facts which are being
mentioned here.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, we have to follow it, Mr. Milosevic.  There
is duty on you to be more careful.
Please proceed.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Certainly, Mr. Robinson.  And I'll
check this out to see whether indeed it is the same witness from
page 20352, the transcript line and page, the quotation that I mentioned
earlier on or, rather, 20351 is the exact number.  I'll check that out
during the break.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Now, Witness Dzemail Becirevic, on page 20516 of the transcript
said that on television he saw the occupation of Bijeljina on the 31st of
March, 2002 -- 1992 and Zvornik in which Arkan's men took part as well as
Seselj's men and the JNA.  Do you know anything about that, about the
occupation of Bijeljina in fact?  Did anybody in fact occupy Bijeljina on
the 30th of March, 1992, and Zvornik, and what the participation was of
your volunteers in those events or did they take part at all?
A.   First of all, nobody occupied either Zvornik or Bijeljina.  What
happened there or, rather, in Zvornik there was an armed conflict between
the JNA on one side and the Muslim paramilitaries on the other.  The



Muslim paramilitary units in the town of Zvornik were routed very quickly.
However, there was much fighting on the fortress above Zvornik.  It went
on for days.  The fighting went on for days there.  And in that fighting
the volunteers of the Serbian Radical Party did take part.  Arkan was
there, too, as was the Serbian volunteer guards.  To the best of my
knowledge, they did not arrive with the JNA, but they came at the call of
the local Territorial Defence there.  And I think that it would be easy to
establish that on the basis of documents and the way things stood on the
ground there.
I know -- have reliable information that the commands and the
officers of the JNA also tried to sidestep collaborating with Arkan's and
the Tigers or, rather, the Serbian volunteer guard, and that there was a
great deal of animosity between the two sides throughout the war, and very
rarely did any JNA officer wish to collaborate with Arkan.
As far as Bijeljina is concerned, to the best of my knowledge,
over there the JNA was not involved in the local conflicts but Arkan did
appear.  To the best of my knowledge, most probably he appeared at the
call of Biljana Plavsic.  I can't prove that, but I do know that Biljana
Plavsic arrived in Bijeljina subsequently and that she had a very friendly
meeting with Arkan in front of the television crew and in public.  The
volunteers of the Serbian radical guards during the conflict in Bijeljina
were not there, but there were people who had already joined up in the
Serbian Radical Party, but they were locals from Bijeljina.  They were
residents of Bijeljina, and they rose to arms, and they took part in the
conflicts in Bijeljina.  But they also set a distance between themselves



and Arkan, especially with Mauzer who was Arkan's right-hand man.  And in
Serbia we didn't send a single volunteer to Bijeljina ourselves.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Nice, may I ask you just to clarify something
for me in relation to the Prosecution's case.  In the Bosnia indictment
the allegation is that the accused either alone or in concert with other
members of the joint criminal enterprise committed certain crimes.  As the
Prosecution case unfolded, you're not saying, are you, that he acted
alone.  Your case is, as I understand it, that he acted in concert with
other members of the joint criminal enterprise.
MR. NICE:  Correct.  I haven't reviewed each and every allegation
to check that there isn't one there that may be susceptible to individual
perpetration, but, no, the allegation is working with others.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Is that he's working with others.
MR. NICE:  Yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  It seems to me that is -- that is virtually
your case.  It's not that he acted alone.
MR. NICE:  Subject to the point I've just made.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Subject to the point you've made, yes.
MR. NICE:  Yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Okay.  Thank you.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Very well, Mr. Seselj.  You've just heard that explanation too.
Now, since you know the relationships very well between people at that
time, you know the situation, you said that Arkan was in Bijeljina and
Zvornik yourself.  Now, did I or any organs of power and authority have































anything to do with Arkan's volunteer guard?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Nice is on his feet.
MR. NICE:  I was just reflecting on the initial answer I gave and
I think perhaps there's this qualification, although I don't think it is a
qualification:  Of course one of the things that we say as against this
accused is that by setting in train the things that he does at the top
political level, he causes events to happen on the ground which are
criminal in nature.  It's the standard method of generation of
genocidal-type acts as we revealed in, for example, the report of Mr. Zvar
[phoen].
Now, of course, in those circumstances, one is acting with other
people.  The degree to which those people will be associated together may
be minimal or non-existent on a personal and practical basis and so in
those circumstances it might be appropriate to think of the accused acting
alone in certain circumstances, but that's the only qualification I think
I should make.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I think it's a point that will warrant some
consideration later on, yes.
Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   So Arkan is mentioned here as well as Mauzer.  Did I or anybody
else from the leadership of Serbia have anything to do with Arkan at all
and with Mauzer separately?  Could you explain that to us, Mr. Seselj?
A.   I'm quite certain that you had nothing to do with Arkan or Mauzer.
On the Serbian political arena, everybody held back from having any open



contacts with Arkan.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, you ask of this witness so many
questions of a general nature without establishing the basis for the
evidence he's giving.  So that, for example, in relation to this, I mean,
how is the witness able to say whether you had anything to do with Arkan
or Mauzer?
He's giving evidence.  He's saying that you had nothing to do with
him.  But in order for it to be more credible, it would be important to
establish how he's in a position to make that statement.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, is it - how shall I put this - something secret that
cannot be known by others or can we claim in any way that somebody from
the authorities, I, myself, or somebody else had any contacts or
relationship with Arkan or Mauzer?
A.   In Belgrade you couldn't hide anything like that.  It would be
impossible to hide anything like that in Belgrade, because Belgrade is
that kind of city.  Even the biggest secrets trickle down and become
public.
Second, Arkan on the Serbian political arena had close contacts
only with Zoran Djindjic.  And I've already spoken about the relationship
between Djindjic and Mauzer.  Mauzer was Djindjic's vice-president and the
president of the party for Republika Srpska, and Djindjic took part in his
pre-electoral campaign.
Q.   Let's clarify one more point now.  In Bijeljina, for instance, did
you have the kind of structure of the Serbian Radical Party as would be



able to inform you precisely about all the events that took police in
Bijeljina?
A.   Yes.  The Serbian Radical Party was not organised in Bijeljina
sufficiently at that time.  However, the people that we had there,
including Mirko Blagojevic who is mentioned in some testimony during this
trial, kept me well-informed and reliably informed about all the events
that went on in Bijeljina.  And at any rate, our Municipal Board in
Bijeljina, for example, on a number of occasions made public statements
and held press conferences at which they energetically condemned and
severely criticised Mauzer's conduct, especially Mauzer's conduct towards
the Muslim civilians, for example.  And those documents exist, and I am
preparing them for my own trial, which doesn't seem to be starting.
Q.   The same witness, Becirevic, on 20521, says that during the attack
on the area around Konjevic Pole, Cerska and Kamenica, in addition to the
JNA and the so-called local Serb units, there was also participation by
the Red Berets or, rather, Arkan's and Seselj's men.  So that's the
quotation.  And now what is being linked and defined here is that Arkan's
and Seselj's men were together with some Red Berets.  What kind of Red
Berets were they?  What Arkan's men were they, Seselj's men were they
around Konjevic Pole and Kamenica that the witness is referring to?
A.   In testimony seems to be very confused quite obviously because the
witness don't seem to know what the Red Berets are.  Perhaps he happened
to see some soldiers wearing red berets in the form of a cap, just a red
cap, and then came to the conclusion that that was the name of the unit.
And then he -- the witness doesn't know whether they were Seselj's men or



Arkan's men or it seems to be all the same to this witness.  So it's
highly imprecise, a highly imprecise testimony, a testimony off the top of
his head.  And I insist upon the fact that it is impossible to identify
so-called Seselj's men and Arkan's men and these alleged Red Berets.
As for the Red Berets, I've already given you reliable facts about
them and said that name appeared in different situations relating to
different military formations and units, starting with the Srpska Krajina
area where these people were linked to the Captain Dragan camp, and then
the army of Republika Srpska where the Red Berets were warn by members of
the intervention or reconnoitering units, reconnaissance units, up until
the special purpose units, too, belonging to the State Security Service of
Serbia which was established in 1996.  And there intentionally this
misunderstanding is being developed so that certain things can be ascribed
to people with -- which they had nothing to do with.
Q.   Witness Osman Selak on page 22312 of the transcript says the
following:  "Seselj said that all the officers of the army of Yugoslavia
who were Muslims and Croats had to be replaced and this part was done."
That's when this witness claims.
A.   Osman Selak is not somebody who is not serious.  He's a colonel by
rank, and throughout the war, as far as I know, he was the Chief of Staff
of the 1st Krajina Corps of the army of Republika Srpska.  So he was the
number two man after General Momir Talic, for example, if that's the same
Osman Selak that you're referring to.
Q.   Well, I can't tell you that.
A.   Osman Selak was a high-ranking officer of the army of



Republika Srpska, and when he says that I said something somewhere, made a
statement somewhere, then he must say where I said it, when I said it,
what the circumstances were in which I said it.
I did give a similar statement in Belgrade, for example, after the
secession of individual federal units.  I called from the JNA.  Slovenia
seceded, and I asked that the Slovenians step down from military service,
and for the most part, including Admiral Stane Brovet retired, and he
personally was against Slovenian separatism might I add.
As far as the Muslims are concerned, the Muslims from
Bosnia-Herzegovina no longer had any grounds for remaining in the army of
Yugoslavia but the Muslims from the territory of Serbia or Sandzak and
Raska they stayed on; they remained there.  And we have a series of
examples of Muslims of that kind who were officers of the Yugoslav army
perform their duty very honourably.
So the citizens --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
JUDGE BONOMY:  I would be assisted by knowing whether you are
saying that you did make such a statement or you didn't make such a
statement.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, Mr. Bonomy, how can I know if
you don't show me something like that here, where and when.  Let us see
the statement concerned.  Let me identify it.  I gave thousands and
thousands of statements in public.  They were publicly recorded.  They
were published.  So let's see.
My objection is precisely in that.  Why did this Osman Selak not



say where and when?
JUDGE BONOMY:  That's helpful to some extent.  Does it follow from
the answer you've just given that you could have said it?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I could have said it along the
following lines, that those in the army who came from the renegade
republics in principle should not remain at positions in the Yugoslav
army.  You see, if Slovenia seceded and if all the Slovenian people live
in Slovenia quite literally, then why would there be Slovenian officers in
the army of Yugoslavia, and what kind of authority can they have as
officers?
JUDGE BONOMY:  That's simply confusing me further.  The quote was
that you said that all officers of the army of Yugoslavia who were Muslims
and Croats had to be replaced and that was done.  Now, are you saying that
you could possibly have made that statement in these terms?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I'm not saying that I made that kind
of statement.  I did not give the kind of statement that Osman Selak
testified about.  I could have made a similar statement along very precise
lines, but that statement has to be found.  Where, to who, when?  Osman
Selak saw that in the newspapers or on television, but that has to be
established.  I assume that would be the practice of this Office of the
Prosecutor as well, to fine the mentioned newspaper and to see exactly
what I said.
I am never going to refute any statement I ever made to anyone,
but it has to be a precise reconstruction.  What you're asking me to do is
to comment upon a version of an alleged statement that I made in Osman



Selak's view or how he perceives my statement.  Well, I cannot really make
my statements suit what he believes my statements might have been.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Mr. Seselj, I'm not asking you to do anything.  I'm
trying to understand the answer you've given to the question asked by
Mr. Milosevic.  And I think from what you've just said, the problem is
that you've been studying this yourself, and you're trying to justify a
position of your own without really dealing specifically with the question
that's being asked of you, and the simple answer to the question appears
now to be that you couldn't possibly have made a statement of that nature,
although you might have said something much more specific about different
people but not just in general about Muslims and Croats.
Now, is that a fair summary of your position?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, I'm not sure, by think you're
very close.  However, in order to help you, I'm going to give you an
example.
Throughout 1991 and even in 1992, from time to time we were
informed of the following:  Such-and-such an officer, an ethnic Croat,
escaped from Serbia to Croatia.  Many of them took carloads of
confidential documents with them.  As a matter of fact, sometime in 1998
we had the following situation:  Robert Ivanovic, a Croat, commander of
the military music band of the 1st Army District in Belgrade went with his
family abroad legally and then he went to Croatia and he still lives
there.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Mr. Seselj, this doesn't remotely sound as if it's
going to be at all helpful to me, so we'll proceed with Mr. Milosevic's



questions.  You have to bear in mind that the question that was put to you
was about a statement made by a witness that was plainly a racist
statement, and why it should be so difficult to deal with such a simple
issue I'm not at all sure.  However, Mr. Milosevic can explore it further
if he wishes.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Sir --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let Mr. Milosevic ask the next question.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I have to --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Please, Mr. Robinson.  I protest in
no uncertain terms because of the qualification made by Mr. Bonomy that
any statement of mine could have considered racist.  First of all, never
in my life have I made a racist statement.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Judge Bonomy never said that, Mr. Seselj.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] He just did.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  No, he never said that.  Not at all.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, he just said so just now.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  There's nothing for you to respond to.
Mr. Milosevic, the next question.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, I'm afraid that this is a pure misunderstanding.  I
put a concrete question to you.  In order to spell it out in more specific
terms and in order to avoid any kind of misunderstanding it was stated



here that "Seselj had stated that all officers of the army of Yugoslavia
who were Muslims or Croats would have to be removed."  Did you ever state
that?
A.   No, I didn't say it that way.
Q.   So you didn't say it that way --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  [Previous translation continues]... matter.
JUDGE BONOMY:  And why on earth it should take all this time to
establish that simple issue, I do not know.
Perhaps it would help, Mr. Seselj, if you just listened to the
questions and answer the question that's actually asked rather than try to
make political statements about your own position.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I'm not making political statements,
Mr. Bonomy.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, Witness Baron van Linden spoke about you here.  He
mentioned only a few facts, so I would like to ask you to check whether
those facts are correct.  And first of all, I'm interested in the
circumstances involved if it did happen.  The page is 26758.  "Just after
the bombing Seselj came to Pale."  And then on page 26762 he
says:  "Seselj came to Pale immediately after the first NATO ultimatum to
support the Bosnian Serbs."  These are a few facts that referred to.
Could you please explain the circumstances involved.  What is this
actually all about?
A.   I went to Pale several times, and whenever the leadership of



Republika Srpska was under pressure from the West I publicly supported the
leadership of Republika Srpska, because the Western powers were openly
engaged in an anti-Serb policy.
As for the Markale Market, the two explosions, one at the market
itself, and the other one near the market as well as the explosion in the
street of Vasa Miskin at the partisan cemetery near the old brewery, these
are explosions that were organised by the Muslim leadership, regardless of
whether the explosives were planted on the actual spot or whether mortar
shells were fired from elsewhere at one of these sites.
This was a trigger event that was staged in order to accuse the
Serbs and to justify the sanctions that were imposed immediately, the
threats that were made, and so on and so forth.
Q.   So, Mr. Seselj, if I understood you correctly, when you went there
you did so only to give political support to the leadership of
Republika Srpska in situations when they were exposed to pressure and
bombing.
A.   Yes.
Q.   Witness B1445 said on page 27608:  "In January or February
1992" -- please bear the dates in mind, January, February 1992, "Arkan's
and Seselj's units arrived in Doboj."
Is this a fact?  Is it founded on facts at all?
A.   No.  It is absolutely impossible.  In January or February 1992,
there were no military operations in Doboj and the surrounding area.
Secondly, volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were not sent to
Doboj even through the JNA.  As far as I know, Arkan's Tigers never



operated in Doboj either.  This is a total fabrication.
Q.   Now, could you please give as precise an answer as possible to
this question.  It has to do with witness Sead Omeragic who said on
transcript page 27738, quite explicitly, "Mirko Blagojevic," that is to
say, that official of yours that you mentioned a while ago, he
says:  "Mirko Blagojevic was the organiser of the conflict in Bijeljina,
and he was a member of the Serb Radical Party and had contacts with
Seselj."
I am not asking you whether he was a member of the Serb Radical
Party or whether he had contacts with you, but this assertion made that
Mirko Blagojevic was the organiser of the conflict in Bijeljina.  So
please deal with that assertion of this witness which is contained in the
transcript.  Is it correct or not?
A.   First and foremost a conflict is not organised.  An attack is
organised, defence is organised, but a conflict is not organised.  A
conflict occurs when two armed formations clash.
Mirko Blagojevic took part in the conflict that occurred in
Bijeljina but only in the military armed conflict.  When the Muslim
formations were defeated, Mirko Blagojevic no longer participated in any
conflicts.  And I guarantee with my own life that he took part in no
looting, no persecutions, no maltreatment of the civilian population and
so on and so forth.  I'm absolutely certain of that.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   I can fully identify with everything that Mirko Blagojevic did.
It is to that degree that I'm certain that he never did anything against































the law.
Q.   Witness B1780, on transcript pages 28220 and 221 says:  "Seselj's
men tortured prisoners at the Ekonomija farm."
A.   Where is this Ekonomija farm?
Q.   My understanding is it's somewhere near Zvornik.
A.   That's quite impossible too.  The volunteers of the Serb Radical
Party took part in the Zvornik operation while the JNA was operating there
in brief fighting in town itself and somewhat longer fighting that went on
for a few days on the fortress above the town where the resistance of the
Muslim paramilitaries was quite strong.  Once the conflict was brought to
an end, the JNA withdrew, and the volunteers of the Serb Radical Party
withdrew.
I preclude any possibility of having the volunteers engaged on
guarding prisoners of war or detaining civilians.  Had that kind of thing
happened, I would have had to know about it.
Q.   All right.  Mirsad Kucanin, another witness, claims that you
personally killed a Serb named Vasiljevic under the following
circumstances:  On transcript page 28966, he says the following:  "Seselj,
on Serb television, indicated a 7.9 calibre weapon and he personally fired
it at Muslims in Sarajevo."  This was shown on television, and he said
that you permanently killed a Serb called Vasiljevic there.
A.   First of all, I remember what happened very well.  I was at
Grbavica.  At that time, under the protection of the so-called
international observers, the Muslims tried by digging trenches to go
around the Serb positions on the outskirts of Sarajevo and to attack the



Serb forces from the back.  From Grbavica 1, from the building which was
an apartment building but due to Muslim fire it was totally destroyed, I
used a Browning machine-gun from there.  It's a heavy machine-gun.  I
couldn't carry it anywhere.  It is a heavy machine-gun.  You cannot carry
it around.
Q.   But he says on page 28967 that you carried a Browning.
A.   You cannot carry it.  It's too long.  It was installed in that
building, and I used that Browning to target the Muslims in the trenches
below the UN observation posts.  I was firing from the Browning.  Some of
the volunteers from the Serb Radical Party from the Jewish cemetery was
firing from a recoilless gun, and the trenches were still being dug, and
the top of the trenches was hit.  Whether somebody got killed there is
something I don't know.  It could have only been the Muslim soldiers who
could have been killed, because -- and that would please me, because this
small participation of mine in the war had thereby yielded some effects.
A Serb in the Muslim army could have been killed there.  In that
case, he was the enemy.  Also, it could have been a Serb who had been
forced by the Muslims to dig trenches.  Then his killing is the fault of
those who in violation of international law of war brought him out there
to dig trenches, not those who --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   What Witness Miroslav Deronjic said, is that true, on page 29626,
that at the beginning of April Seselj's men arrived in the area of
Bratunac and Zvornik.



A.   That is an intentional fabrication on Deronjic's part.  He knows
full well who he brought to the Bratunac area.  However, you see, knowing
who he brought to Bratunac, he is linking up Zvornik and Bratunac and
making this sweeping statement Seselj's men arrived in Bratunac and
Zvornik.  If they arrived in Zvornik, it's as if they were in Bratunac
too.  The volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were not in Bratunac, so
Deronjic invented that.
In Bratunac there were the locals organised by Deronjic into the
Bratunac Brigade.  At the beginning of the war it was Deronjic who was
commander of the Bratunac Brigade and then he had to withdraw because he
was not a trained officer in any way.  When the army was consolidated,
then a professional officer came to be commander of the Bratunac Brigade.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Slow down.  I think the interpreter is having
some difficulty.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I will.
You could have noticed, Mr. Robinson, that I have been trying as
of late to speak slowly, but sometimes, every now and then, I may forget
what you cautioned me about.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, I had noticed, and the -- we are
appreciative of the effort you are making.  You have answered the
question.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] In the meantime --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I think you have answered that question.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   So they were not in Bratunac at all?



A.   No.  The volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were not in
Bratunac.
Q.   All right.  So you are saying that he's not telling the truth.
The same witness, Deronjic, on page 29737, said that he does not
agree that Seselj was a true opposition.
A.   The Hague OTP and Judge Schomburg on several occasions caught
Deronjic lying.  And even in Deronjic's judgement you can find about seven
different points as ascertained by Judge Schomburg, namely that Deronjic
was lying.
Secondly, in the case of people who are inclined to a pro-Western
policy or are mercenaries of Western intelligence agencies, or in order to
save their own skin they go into plea bargaining with the OTP and
therefore appear as witnesses in the trials of other people, it can often
be heard that those who are really opposition but are not prepared to
serve the West --
MR. NICE:  I'm not sure this is responsive to any question --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Are you interrupting me?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Nice is on his feet, Mr. Seselj, and he's
entitled to make an objection if he wishes.
MR. NICE:  He was simply asked if the man was telling the truth.
We have his answer and he's now gone on to a long comment basically.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, you have moved into the area of comment.
It's now time for the break.
Mr. Nice, I should say the question that I asked earlier related
to the Bosnia indictment.



We will break for 20 minutes.
--- Recess taken at 3.41 p.m.
--- On resuming at 4.08 p.m.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, you told me to check
the pages that Mr. Nice mentioned, 35 -- 20352 and 20351, that is.  This
was Witness 1070.
On page 20351 he says that Seselj's men were in Bratunac and that
there was no difference between them and Seselj's men, the White Eagles,
that is.
And on page 20352, he says that between the 20-something of April
Seselj's and Arkan's men were in Bratunac together when some people were
deported.  And Mr. Seselj answered questions about this.  In the meantime,
the liaison officer had the transcript, and I have received a note saying
that both references are correct, both as regards page 20351 and 20352,
and these refer to Witness 1070.  There was no error.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  All right, Mr. Milosevic.  We'll do our own
check.  Thank you for checking anyhow.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, this is the testimony of Miroslav Deronjic, who said
that you were not truly an opposition politician or, rather, that you
cooperated with the government and that therefore this idea of a joint
criminal enterprise is thereby confirmed.  Were you in the opposition or
not?
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone for Mr. Seselj.



THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.  I personally -- I switched it
on.
Both the Serb Radical Party and I personally throughout this time
were distinctly in the opposition.  We were as far in the opposition as
it's possible to be.  From the ideological perspective now adopted by
Deronjic, only foreign mercenaries were considered to be in the
opposition.  Western mercenaries, Western agents, this was a standpoint
often expressed in the media that were financed by the West, by various
government and non-government organisations.  In their view, a true person
of the opposition was only someone who took instructions from Zimmerman or
Miles, the US ambassadors, in Belgrade.  Who was the next one, Montgomery
and so on.  Those who always spoke from patriotic positions while
criticising the government were not deemed to be proper opposition
politicians, and this logic is completely upside down.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Witness Ahmet Zulic says, and that's on page 30000 of the
transcript, he says that Seselj's men were stationed in the partisan
cemetery in Pobrezje, that doesn't matter so much but what matters is the
following, that they had come there to kill the Muslims.
A.   Where is this place?  Pobrezje?  Where is it?
Q.   I have a note here in Pobrezje.  I can't be more specific than
that.
But let me put a question to you:  Did your volunteers go anywhere
to kill all Muslims?
A.   No.  Nowhere did the volunteers of the Serb Radical Party go to



kill Muslims or Croats or any kind of civilians.  Wherever they went, they
were part of the JNA, and they went there to fight against the
paramilitary units that wanted to break up Yugoslavia.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, it's important to know the
location.  I'm not sure whether Mr. Nice or Mr. Kay can help.  Your note
doesn't identify clearly the name of this place?
MR. NICE:  I tried to make an electronic search but for various
reasons it doesn't work at the moment or doesn't work for this witness on
this particular part of his evidence.  I'll try again.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
JUDGE KWON:  You said Pobrezje.
Proceed, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   The same witness, Ahmet Zulic, on page 30047, says in Sanski Most
there was no fighting, but the civilians fled because Seselj's men were
there.
Your men caused fear among civilians, although there was no
fighting there, as he says, in Sanski Most.
A.   That is pure fabrication, because throughout the Bosnian Krajina,
throughout the Bosnian Krajina volunteers of the Serb Radical Party did
not fight in any location.
This reminds me of a well-known anecdote which says that in a
certain place inhabited by Muslims there was a notice on a shop saying
that sugar was arriving.  This was when there was a shortage of sugar.
Somebody read this wrong and started yelling Seselj is arriving, Seselj is



arriving, and he spread panic.
THE INTERPRETER:  Interpreter's note that the Serbian word for
sugar resembles Mr. Seselj's name.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] So there were no volunteers anywhere
in that area.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Look at paragraph 32 and what it says.  In says here:  "From the
1st of March or thereabouts until the 31st of December, 1995, Slobodan
Milosevic, acting alone or in concert with other members of the joint
criminal," and so on,"planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise
aided and abetted," and so on and so forth, all these phrases, "the
planning, preparation of the Bosnian Muslims as such living in territories
of Bijeljina, Bosanski Novo, Brcko, Kljuc, Kotor Varos, Prijedor,
Sanski Most, and Srebrenica."
Tell me now, Mr. Seselj, as you mentioned here as a participant in
this joint criminal enterprise and you are being charged with alleged
crimes in these places, is there any basis for these allegations made
here?
A.   No, there is absolutely no basis whatsoever, because no one from
Serbia caused conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  Conflicts in Bosnia
and Herzegovina were caused by those who one-sidedly, unilaterally, wanted
to proclaim the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina contrary to the
will of the Serb people who were a constituent nation and by those in the
West who supported them.  There was no planning, no preparation or
execution or extermination.  There was no plan.



When the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina was recognised, in
many places there was simply an assault on the local government, not only
where the Serbs were in majority but also where the Muslims or the Croats
were in the majority, although the Croats took a lot in 1991.  In 1991,
not a single municipality in Western Herzegovina where the Croats were the
majority population recognised the central government in Sarajevo.  They
had already seceded from Bosnia and Herzegovina.  That was in 1991.
Q.   In paragraph 32, which I quoted, apart from Bijeljina where we
have already established who was there, Mauzer and Arkan, that is, the
other places mentioned are Bosanski Novi, Kljuc, Kotor Varos, Prijedor,
Sanski Most, and Srebrenica.  Was anyone from Serbia there participated in
any kind of military activities?
A.   As far as I know, no.  You see, as regards Srebrenica, sometime in
January, in early 1993, Srebrenica was already a UN protected area, but
the UN troops did nothing to disarm the Muslim units in Srebrenica,
although they were duty-bound to do so.  The protection zone was
established, provided that all Muslim armed units in Srebrenica be

disarmed.  That was the only way a protected area could function.
The Muslim forces from Srebrenica made incursions into Serbian
villages and killed many Serb civilians.  In the beginning of 1993, there
were two groups of volunteers from the Serb Radical Party who were active
in the Skelani area, and they hurried to help the surrounded Serb forces
in the area of Jezero.  This was in 1993 in Srebrenica.  And that is the
only activity of volunteers of the Serb Radical Party in the Srebrenica
area.  It was in the beginning of 1993.



As for Bosanski Novi, Brcko, Kljuc, Kotor Varos, and Sanski Most,
I don't know anyone from Serbia who went to fight there.  Arkan turned up
only in 1995, when because of the NATO bombing, which was systematic all
over Serbia, a Muslim-Croat offensive was launched where the regular army
of the Republic of Croatia participated and led the offensive.  Bosanska
Krajina was about to fall, and that was when Arkan turned up with his
volunteer guard, and I think that was his last involvement in the wars
there, in Sanski Most and Prijedor.
Q.   Mr. Seselj, you know very well what kind of policy we proclaimed
and what kind of policy we implemented at the time.  How does this policy
that we implemented correspond to what is alleged here, the destruction in
whole or in part, and then they list all these towns in Bosnia and
Herzegovina?
A.   This is absolutely impossible.  There was no such policy, and
there was no destruction that was planned.  Everything that did happen
happened because of incidents caused by individuals and groups acting on
their own initiative, renegade groups, but there was no plan to commit
murders or anything of the kind.
Q.   As in this Bosnia indictment, everything that happened in the war
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is mentioned and charged against me and the
other participants of the joint criminal enterprise as formulated by
Mr. Nice.
Look at paragraph 33.  We've just been discussing paragraph 32.  I
won't read the beginning of paragraph 33 because it's the same:  "From on
or about the 1st of March, 1992," and so on and so forth, and then it



says:  "On the territory of Banja Luka, Bihac, Bijeljina, Bosanska Krupa,
Bosanski Novi, Cajnice, Doboj, Foca, Gacko, Sarajevo (Ilijas), Kljuc,
Kalinovik, Kotor Varos, Nevesinje, Sarajevo, Novi Grad, Sarajevo, Novo
Sarajevo, Prijedor, Prnjavor, Rogatica, Rudo, Sanski Most, Srebrenica
again, Teslic, Visegrad, Vlasenica and Zvornik."  Please --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You are finished reading that list.  Let me
remind you, Mr. Milosevic, that the Rule 98 bis decision found that there
was not enough evidence to support the allegation in paragraph 32 in
relation to some of the villages or municipalities mentioned.  In fact, as
far as paragraph 32 is concerned, you need only concern yourself with
Brcko, Prijedor, Sanski Most, Srebrenica, Bijeljina, Kotor Varos, Kljuc,
Bosanski Novi.  And I am checking to see whether the decision affected
paragraph 33.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, could you please let
me know what evidence, as you say there was no evidence for these places,
but what was the evidence that Mr. Nice presented here about the other
places linking me --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic.  Mr. Milosevic, the Rule 98 bis
decision was published and was available to you.  But I bring that to your
attention so we don't waste time.  And I'll ask the legal officer to give
me the information in relation to paragraph 33.
Go ahead, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   As I was saying, Mr. Seselj, I read out a list here.  It's a long
paragraph with all the names of the towns where I, together with others,































am charged with working for the extermination of Muslims and Croats.  You
know the policy of Serbia from that day as you are of all the actions that
referred to the course of the war in Croatia and Bosnia.  Is this grounded
in any fact at all, any fact that you could quote?
A.   Absolutely not.  Because nobody from Serbia, even had they wanted
to, would have been able to cause a civil war in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  A
civil war in Bosnia-Herzegovina was caused by those who unilaterally
wanted the Serb people over there to relinquish their status of a
constituent people.
And the question arises from there where are the Serbs from
Mostar, from Capljina, from Livno, the Serbs from Zenica, the Serbs from
Travnik?  Where are the Serbs from Maglaj, for instance, or the Serbs from
many other places which were taken control of by the Muslims or Croats
during that civil war?
After the civil war broke out there was a great movement in the
population, both spontaneous, sometimes forceful.  Sometimes crimes did
take place, but there was this general aspiration for everybody to join,
in figurative terms, their own birds of a feather flocking together, if I
can put it that way.  So in that war crimes were committed.  Sometimes
crimes were in response to crimes that had been committed previously,
sometimes it was criminals committing crimes through base motives,
criminal motives.  Sometimes there was the urge for retaliation and
revenge.  But on the Serb side, planned organised and systematic crimes
did not exist.  That did not happen.
Q.   Now, as this refers to me myself and the other members of the



joint criminal enterprise as it is alleged, including yourself, I'd like
to draw your attention to the time from the 1st of March to the 31st of
December, 1995, from 1992 to 1995, and in paragraph 32 and paragraph 33
and indeed paragraph 36 which I cannot understand because the same towns
are repeated there.  The same qualifications are given for those towns
too.  And then later on in paragraph 37 again.
So what was it that we dealt in?  What was it that we did during
that period of time, that is to say, between March 1992 and the end of
December 1995, which was linked to the civil war in our neighbouring
Bosnia and Herzegovina?
A.   After the withdrawal of the JNA, on the 19th of May, 1992, Serbia
or, rather, the authorities in Serbia and in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in no way whatsoever took part in the war and war actions.  It
did not send any armed units or formations, but it was its duty to help
materially, in material terms, to help Republika Srpska and the Serbs
living over there.  So that was a period of time which showed different
political relationships between Serbia and Yugoslavia and the leadership
of Republika Srpska on the other side.  Sometimes there was a period in
which those relationships were good, and sometimes there were deep
conflicts, and they didn't see eye-to-eye on many issues.
So throughout that time, throughout this period covered by the
indictment and that you -- they are trying to attempt to charge you with,
the leadership of Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia persevered
in looking for solutions to the problem and sometimes went too far
accepting the conditions of the peace plan which we Serb nationalists



attacked ourselves for our part.
So I cannot congratulate you on those aspects of your policy
dating back from that time, but based on the facts I insist upon the fact
that that policy was waged in order to find a peaceful solution at all
costs.  That is to say, the slogans of your party was there is no
alternative to peace.  You wanted peace at all cost, at any price, even at
the price of making concessions which the Serbs were not able to accept
because they were not able to take such great concessions.
Q.   Very well.  Now, bearing in mind that practice and the activities
of that period, how can you explain that somebody can enumerate all these
towns here in Bosnia in which allegedly the leadership of Serbia and I
personally committed these crimes, ordered, aided and abetted, organised,
et cetera, the wording of the indictment.  Do you have any reason
explanation?
A.   Yes, I do, and that's explanation is the following and the fact
that through you they are trying to try Serbia and the entire Serb people,
and --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  That is not an answer.  In any event, it is not
an explanation that it is appropriate for you to give.
So please ask another question, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, paragraph 36 goes on to mention Banja Luka, Bihac,
Bijeljina, Bileca, Bosanska Krupa, Bosanski Novi, Bosanski Samac, Bratunac
again, Brcko again, Cajnice, Doboj, Foca again, Gacko, different places in
Sarajevo, Prijedor, Prnjavor, Rogatica, Sanski Most, Sokolac, Srebrenica,



Teslic, Visegrad, Vlasenica and Zvornik.  Do you have anything to say with
regard to that point of the indictment?
A.   I claim that in these places there was no systematic organised
crime.  However, crimes did happen.  I don't know whether in all the
places enumerated here but in many of them.  There were crimes that took
place in many of these places but it is not at all difficult for each
individual crime to establish exactly who the perpetrator was and what the
motives were.  Because not too much time has gone by.  Many people are
still living both among the victims and the criminals, and everything can
be established.  Everything can be established both on the Bosnian side
and the Croatian side as well.  There is no goodwill to do so, to
investigate all the crimes.  And attempts are being made artificially to
strike a balance, including The Hague Tribunal and its indictment with the
number of Serbs, Croats, or Muslims brought to trial and charged.
Q.   Let us now dwell for a moment on what you've said when you said
that some crimes were committed in some of these towns.  Let's look at
that for a moment.  What is the link between Serbia, the FRY, the army of
Yugoslavia or the police for that matter or any kind, armed forces or
formations or units of the Republic of Serbia with any of those crimes
that you know of?  Are there any links?
A.   There could not have been any links at all.  All the organs of
power and authority in Serbia and in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as
well, all serious political organisations and political parties of Serbia,
the Serbian Orthodox Church, the cultural institutions stemming from the
Academy of Science to the Association of Writers, et cetera, et cetera,



everybody was against and came out against crimes.  They all spoke out
against them, and they all supported the just fight of the Serb people for
freedom.  But all of them at the same time condemned the crimes that were
being perpetrated on the Serb side, too, and appealed that no crimes
should be committed.  And the media were full of statements of that kind
via the state organs, the church, the cultural institutions and political
parties.  There is not a single fact or organisation in Serbia which
strove in favour of crimes, and all political, cultural, and other factors
spoke out against crimes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Now, we -- let's look at paragraph 37, which talks about unlawful
confinement or imprisonment under inhumane conditions of Bosnian Muslims,
Bosnian Croats, and then the following places are enumerated on the
territories of Banja Luka, Bihac, Bijeljina, Bileca, Bosanska Krupa, Novi,
Samac, Bratunac, Brcko, Cajnice, Doboj, Foca, Gacko, Kljuc, Kalinovik,
Kotor Varos and Nevesinje, Prijedor, Rogatica.  Sanski Most, Teslic,
Visegrad, Vlasenica and Zvornik.
Tell us, please, Mr. Seselj, what unlawful confinement of these
people in these towns did we take part in?
A.   The power and authorities in Serbia and Yugoslavia could not have
had anything to do with any such thing.
First of all, we should differentiate between the following:  What
the confinement of prisoners of war means and what the confinement of
civilians means.  It is unlawful to confine civilians.  That is what is



unlawful, and there were such cases.
Now, how can I explain them to the best of my knowledge?  First of
all, there were individual instances in some of these places through the
self-will of people from the local authorities.  I mentioned the instance
of Simo Drljaca, for example, who was killed when he was being arrested.
And then many people bear responsibility through -- without any fault of
their own because they couldn't influence him.  He appeared as a factor,
and there was no control over him.  Nobody could control him, and his
motives were of a criminal nature.
There were other such cases in some of these places whereby
somebody confined people unlawfully, members of non-Serb ethnic groups in
order to put them up for bribes, I mentioned Mauzer, in order to receive
money and then release them once they received money for that.  There were
also instances of revenge and retaliation where somebody had suffered,
somebody's family members had suffered at the hands of the Muslims or
Croats, and they wanted to seek revenge.  And the authorities very often
were not able to prevent revenge of that kind.
Q.   Which authorities?
A.   The authorities in Republika Srpska.
Q.   But what about the authority in Serbia?  Could the Serbian
authorities intervene?
A.   No.  The authorities in Serbia couldn't influence or involve
themselves in any such matters.
So as I say, there were cases and instances of that kind, but one
should take a look at each of these cases and see what the background to



those cases are, hot perpetrators were, how the crime was committed and
what the motives were and then the situation will become clearer.
Now, what happens here?  Here we have an enumeration of places
where possibly some crimes had taken place and they are extracted out of
context and then an a priori general phrases are used to accuse
top-ranking politicians, not only of Republika Srpska but those of Serbian
Yugoslavia as well.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Seselj, by this time it is becoming -- it has
become a feature of your evidence that in response to the allegations you
say that there may have been individual acts of criminality but nothing
like the systematic, organised, group acts of criminality that are alleged
by the indictment, alleged by the Prosecution.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You didn't understand me correctly,
Mr. Robinson.  There was -- there were group crimes, group criminality,
but there was no systematic, organised criminality on the part of the top
echelons of power, to be more precise.  So first of all, it is absolutely
impossible for the authorities in Serbia to have organised anything like
that, and in Yugoslavia either.  To the best of my knowledge, it is
impossible that the authorities of Republika Srpska had organised any such
thing, but there were individuals from those echelons of power who did
commit crimes.  And it wasn't only individuals who committed crimes.
There was group -- there was group criminality, too, group crimes too.
And I mentioned several examples that I know about on the basis of my
information, but I can't be well-versed in everything, but I can in
basics, and therefore I can claim what I just did, what I just said.  It



wasn't the policy of the authorities of Serbia and Yugoslavia to commit
crimes, to persecute Muslims or Croats.  It wasn't the policy of the
leadership of Republika Srpska either, for that matter.
Now, --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  And it wasn't the policy of this accused in
concert with other --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That certainly was not the policy of
Mr. Milosevic.  Quite the contrary.  Mr. Milosevic constantly,
continuously and openly and resolutely came out publicly against such
crimes being committed, against any criminality appearing, especially the
most serious form of war crimes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Paragraph 40 is too long for me to quote.  There's an enormous
list of towns there from Bosnia-Herzegovina, lots of towns in that list,
and the subject here is deportation.
Now, Mr. Seselj, help me how here.  Let's clarify that.  Albeit in
Serbia, according to official date, about 70.000 Muslims fled to Serbia,
Muslim refugees fled to Serbia during the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina,
70.000 of them when they were treated in Serbia awarding to the principle
of non-discrimination like anybody else.
Now, I can't clear up this point here.  Perhaps our leadership is
being accused for taking in those refugees who fled from the war, or is it
stated here -- it says:  "Milosevic, acting alone or together with other
members of the joint criminal enterprise, planned, instigated, ordered,



committed, or otherwise aided and abetted the planning, preparation, or
execution of the unlawful forcible transfer..."
Now, Mr. Seselj, did Milosevic or any other organ of the Republic
of Serbia did -- do anything to force anybody to move lawfully or
unlawfully?  If you have lawful forcible movement, then you have unlawful
movement too.  So did the -- an organ of Serbia even try to move one
individual?
A.   These organs of Serbia could not have had anything to do with
anything like that.  Second, the state organs of Serbia condemned these
phenomena and similar phenomena if they knew about them.  Thirdly, what
did happen was that there was the desire on the part of one ethnic group
to leave the area they had inhabited by another ethnic group, and that
desire was expressed much before the armed conflict broke out.  There were
instances of that kind throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.  That is to say,
that people wanted to move out because they felt something in the air,
something afoot.  They felt that war might be imminent, bearing in mind
what had happened in Croatia, the Croatian federal unit.  They wanted to
move out.  Anybody who had relatives in other parts of Yugoslavia or
perhaps abroad, and if they had enough money to do so, they left -- they
were the first to leave.  So that was something that could be proved, and
in some trials before The Hague Tribunal this was proved and established
in some of the judgements.  And I know of a specific example, a concrete
example, a case in point.  This is what happened:  A group of Muslims from
Prijedor wished to move onto the territory under Muslim control, and a
convoy was organised to transport them to Travnik, I think it was --



JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Seselj, I'm stopping you because you have
answered the question.  You are becoming a little too expansive.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I think that this would be very
important.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, what example do you know of personally?
A.   I'm talking about one example when Muslims were transported
because they wanted to go to territory that was under Muslim control.  And
then the policeman who was leading the convoy for security reasons, whose
name is Darko Mrdja, he stopped the convoy at a particular site which is
called Koricanske Stijene, if I remember correctly.  He took out a large
group of Muslims and executed them arbitrarily.  When he returned, the
authorities tried to arrest him.  He fled to a completely different part
of Republika Srpska, and under a different name he signed up with the army
of Republika Srpska in order to avoid arrest.
Then he tried to explain this in a completely different way:
Somebody ordered him to do so, but he cannot say who it was, so he's
trying to shift blame elsewhere and things like that.
Such people, when they were prosecuted before The Hague Tribunal,
entered plea bargains with the OTP, then they get a mild sentence, and
then they appear in other trials, and their statements are believed
although they are invariably false because --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm stopping you.  Mr. Seselj, no doubt you're a
man of many virtues.  Is omniscience one of them?  How do you happen to
know all these things?  I have to ask myself that question, Mr. Milosevic.



THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Where is your knowledge coming from?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, all my life I have
been learning, learning, learning, and constantly learning.  Even now in
prison I read eight to ten hours a day, although the conditions under
which I live are very poor because they want to prevent me from preparing
my defence case properly.  But I'm a constant learner, and I wish others
were too.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  It would help my appreciation of your evidence if
only occasionally we were told of the basis for the information that you
have about specific matters.
Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, a short while ago you said that the leadership of
Serbia and I personally could not have participated in any such thing and
that as a matter of fact we acted in a completely opposite manner.  Upon
what do you base this statement?
A.   I have a series of sources of information and grounds on which I
base my information and statements.  First of all, the consistent
statements made by the authorities of Serbia and Yugoslavia in that area.
Secondly, the concrete behaviour of the authorities of Serbia.
They never discriminated in terms of taking in refugees.  They never
discriminated against any ethnic group.  It is impossible for the
authorities from Serbia to take part in the persecution of Muslims in
Bosnia whereas at the same time they were readily admitting them to Serbia































and treating them the same way they treat Orthodox Serbs and others.
So there is not a shred of common sense in this, no logic
whatsoever.  Why would the authorities of Serbia take part in persecution
of Muslims against Bosnia while taking in thousands of Muslim refugees in
Serbia and spending a lot of money on them?  Refugees require a great deal
of money.  Perhaps not all of them were happy with what they got, but this
involved major expenditure on the part of the state.
Q.   All right, Mr. Seselj.  But did the authorities of Serbia allow
discrimination over any Muslim Croat or the member of any other ethnic
group in Serbia during the civil war in Croatia and Bosnia?
A.   No.  Even if there were any incidents on ethnic grounds, the
authorities acted in accordance with the law and brought such matters to
trial.  They simply did not allow things like that to happen.
Q.   Please look at paragraph 42 now.  Again it says here:  "Slobodan
Milosevic," and so on and so forth, on or about the 1st of March, 1992,
until 391st of December, 1995, acting alone or in concert with members of
the joint criminal enterprise, planned, instigated, ordered, committed or
otherwise aided and abetted the planning preparation or execution of
wanton destruction and plunder of the public and private property of the
Bosnian Muslim, Bosnian Croat, and other non-Serb populations and then" --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, too fast.  Too fast.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   So I, Mr. Seselj, according to this paragraph 42, aided and
abetted the planning, preparation or execution, I executed this.  It
wasn't that I only aided and abetted others, but I committed wanton



destruction and plunder of the public and private property of the Bosnian
Muslim, Bosnian Croat, and other non-Serb populations, and again all these
municipalities are listed here where I committed wanton looting of
property belonging to Muslims and Croats.
Please tell us not only what you know about this but also on the
basis of what you know what you know.
A.   This is sheer nonsense that you took part in any part of this in
any way.  However, such things did happen, looting and destruction of
private and public property.  Such things happened equally on all three
sides, because in a civil war it is far more difficult to keep everything
under control as compared to a war waged against an external enemy.
What happened here was that a group of Serbs, Croats, or Muslims
would loot houses, destroy property, et cetera -- or, rather, would have
their own property looted, and then they would seek property in a similar
way in other places.  This is something that was part of this war, and no
official authorities from Serbia could have done anything about that.  No
one personally took part in this or aided, abetted, planned, executed,
et cetera.
There were paramilitary formations that had looting as their
primary motive.  The Yellow Wasps did not only steal from Muslims but also
from Serbs.  They would stop an entire Serb family on a road.  People
travelling from Republika Srpska to Serbia, for instance, they would seize
their car, they would seize what was in the car, et cetera.  There were
such cases as documented by the police of Republika Srpska, and this Trial
Chamber can obtain information to that effect.  So there were cases of



looting, but spontaneously in a civil war which was waged in conditions
that were rather chaotic.
There was no organised looting and destruction by any authorities.
Not only the authorities of Serbia but also the authorities of Republika
Srpska or, rather, the top authorities of Republika Srpska.
Q.   In paragraph 43 it says that I, in concert with others, engaged in
a military campaign of artillery and mortar shelling and sniping onto
civilian areas of Sarajevo and upon its civilian population, killing and
wounding thousands of civilians of all ages and both sexes.
You were in Sarajevo, as opposed to myself, so could you please
explain whether the authorities of Republika Srpska and, in particular,
tell us what the authorities of Yugoslavia or Serbia or any organs of
Yugoslavia and Serbia had to do with this.
A.   In the trial of General Galic, in the judgement there was a
dissenting opinion by Judge Navia.  In view of the length of the conflict
in Sarajevo, it was -- there were far less civilian casualties in terms of
the duration of the war around Sarajevo than would have been the case
elsewhere in the world.  Civilians were being killed in Sarajevo, but on
both sides when all this shelling was done.  But there were far less
casualties than would be expected elsewhere in the world, and that is what
Judge Navia said in his dissenting opinion in the Galic judgement that I
read.
I was in Sarajevo several times during the war.  I witnessed the
killing of Serb civilians, Serb children.  Sometimes they were targeted
intentionally and sometimes these killings were accidental.  But often the



Muslims from their side killed their own civilians in order to present
this in the media as Serb barbarism.  That was the Markale Marketplace,
Vasa Miskin Street and a few other instances.  Nobody in Serbia did not
take part in the war operations around Sarajevo in any way.  No official
factors from Serbia, that is.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Did take part.  On the transcript it's a double
negative.
Yes, Mr. --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] There is a double negative in the
Serbian language and it does not change the meaning of the statement.  In
English it might mean something different.  I'm sorry I don't know English
and I cannot really adjust to this.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, Witness B024 says, and would you please confirm or
deny this -- well, he says that he has no information that the JNA took
part in the attacks on Zvornik.  He said that on page 21201.  Can you
confirm that?
A.   Well, the JNA did not attack Zvornik.
Q.   All right.  Thank you.
A.   In Zvornik the JNA clashed with Muslim paramilitary forces.  The
Muslim paramilitary forces attacked Zvornik while the JNA took part in the
liberation of Zvornik from Muslim paramilitary units.
Q.   Do you know anything about what (redacted) said in his
witness statement?  That is on transcript page 20414.  That many Serbs,
including women and children, left Zvornik in April 1992.



A.   Well, when there is a war in an urban area, in a town, it is only
logical that civilians, primarily women, children, and the elderly flee
from war.  They're fleeing from gunfire that comes from both sides.
Very often in this war and in any other war civilians would get
killed by stray bullets.  So indeed Serb families were fleeing, too, from
the conflict.
Q.   All right.  Well, as opposed to the Muslims who were expelled, the
Serbs were leaving of their own free will.  Is that the way it's supposed
to seem?
A.   Regrettably that is the way the Western forces always portray
this, that Serbs are genetic criminals and everybody else are their
victims.  Even those who cause the war are victims of Serb violence.  We
are faced with an unscrupulous campaign of the Western powers that is
based and anti-Serb grounds.
Q.   How can you explain this that for all these towns where killings
happened, lootings, torchings, movement of the population, et cetera, all
of that can be found here in this indictment that I've been quoting to
you, the entire civil war in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in Croatia.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  That is not an explanation for the witness to
give.  Ask another question.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, I am putting a
question to you precisely because -- to him, rather, because I think that
he can give an answer.  He's a politician, an intellectual, a university
professor, quite aware of the situation, very familiar with the situation,
and he is in a position to give an answer to this question.



JUDGE ROBINSON:  And I've already ruled that he is not to answer
it.  So proceed.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] All right.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   This same witness, (redacted), said that members of the
JNA in Zvornik guarded the bridges between the two sides.  Do you know
about that?  This is on transcript page 20408.
A.   First of all, between the two sides there were no bridges.  The
two sides clashed within Zvornik itself.  The army tried to keep the
bridges under its own control and even more importantly the hydroelectric
power plant, so that Muslim paramilitary formation would not try to
destroy the hydroelectric power plant.  In Zvornik there is an old
hydroelectric power plant and also an artificial lake.  The JNA fought the
paramilitaries from the Muslim side within the town of Zvornik.  The
conflict ended quickly, within a day or two.  I can't say exactly, I
wasn't there, but the Serb Radical Party had its volunteers there.  And
then also the conflict was moved to the old Zvornik fort.
Q.   The same witness said that members of the paramilitary units
committed crimes in Zvornik.
A.   I cannot confirm or deny this.  There were some operations there
that can be ascribed to paramilitary formations.  Crimes did occur, but
who it was that committed them and where I cannot say.  Just like they are
ascribing these crimes to you, they are ascribing them to me and to
Karadzic, but all of this unfounded, without a shred of evidence.
In Belgrade there is a trial that is under way against a group of



people for crimes committed in the area of Zvornik.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  Next question.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Do you know anything about taking non-Serbs prisoner and torturing
them, that is to say, people from Zvornik, from April to July 1992?  They
are mentioned in different statements and in different documents provided
by Mr. Nice.  The factory of standard, the bricklaying factory, Ekonomija,
Drinjaca, Celopek.  These are localities that are mentioned. Have you
heard anything about this and what do you know about it?
A.   To my knowledge there were crimes in Zvornik.  However, to my
knowledge the crimes were not committed while the JNA was operating but
once the fighting was over.  Everyone of these crimes can be solved very
simply, who the victims were and who the executors were.
Q.   Do you have any particular knowledge, for example about the
cultural centre in Drinjaca where, according to Witness B1455, many
persons were taken prisoner and there were different parapolice force
there is?  Do you have any information about this?  If not, I'll just go
on.
A.   I cannot give you the names of the exact places where crimes were
committed.  There were crimes, to my knowledge, but it wasn't the JNA that
took part in it and the volunteers of the Serb Radical Party did not take
part in these crimes.  Who participated in this should be fully
investigated.  The protagonists are still alive and many immediate victims
are still alive, and they can testify about this.  The question is whether
there was enough will to investigate this matter, and I've already



referred to the trial that is underway in Belgrade and I personally expect
a great deal from that.
Q.   What about the cultural centre in Drinjaca?
A.   No, I don't know anything about it.  I wasn't there.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Seselj and Mr. Milosevic, you are not
observing the pause between question and answer, and you are thereby
creating difficulties for the interpreter.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, this is the first time
you have warned us about this today.  As you see, Mr. Seselj and I are
bearing this in mind.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] We're practising.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Witness B1780 mentioned on page 28220 that during his imprisonment
in this Ekonomija farm, among the people there there were members of your
units.  To be sure, he also mentions the White Eagles and Arkan's men.  Do
you have any knowledge of this and is it possible that members of your
units were there?  You've already explained you didn't have any units of
yours, but is it possible that members of the JNA who were your volunteers
were there?
A.   I'm not aware that the White Eagles were active in the Zvornik
area.  I know that Arkan's Tigers were active there but to what extent and
in what locations I couldn't say because I wasn't there.
All the volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were in the JNA.  I
do not doubt that this witness experienced all the sufferings and
misfortunes he talked about, but evidently he's very confused when



identifying the people who caused his sufferings.  He's mixing up Seselj's
men, the White Eagles, Arkan's men, and this shows that he's very confused
and unable to identify the perpetrators.  I had said that the volunteers
of the Serb Radical Party did not participate in this, according to
everything I know, and my knowledge is very good.  I might even say very
often it's beyond any doubt, impeccable, and it shouldn't be easy to
establish who actually perpetrated this.
Q.   He says that some of your men first tortured and then killed a
certain Bego Bukvic in his presence, and this is on page 28221 of the
transcript.  Do you know anything about this?
A.   I know of no instance where volunteers of the Serb Radical Party
committed any crimes in that place.
Q.   Well, do you have to know if they were volunteers of the Serb
Radical Party?
A.   Yes.  Because the people who on behalf of the Serb Radical Party
sent volunteers to the JNA would have forwarded this information to me ,
and as the competent command of the JNA would certainly have informed me
had any of my volunteers done anything illegal.  I'm sure of it.
Q.   Would other volunteers have reported this?
A.   Yes.  They would have felt personally offended by such acts, and
they would have asked for measures to be taken against such a volunteer,
because this would have inflicted huge moral damage to them.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Did you receive on a regular basis reports about
the conducts of the volunteers?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I wouldn't say the reports were



regular, but they were exhaustive.  I personally took steps to find out
how the fighting was proceeding and how the volunteers were behaving.  All
the problems that I received reports about concerned less severe acts of
indiscipline, usually drunkenness.  And we would ask for such volunteers
to be removed from the units so that they would not upset the discipline
of the other men.
I was not informed of any serious crimes, and therefore I draw the
conclusion that none occurred.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Were these reports in writing?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  They were usually just oral
conversations.
I'm convinced that had serious crimes been committed, written
reports would have been sent to me.  I'm sure that the competent command
would have told me had something like this happened.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, if you can't recall it doesn't matter, but is it true
that in the indictment against you it says that around the 12th of May,
1992, Serbian forces, as it says there, including the leader of a group of
Seselj's men beat up and killed a man called Dautovic?  Is this correct?
A.   Well, when they say a leader of a group of Seselj's men, then
should be easy to establish his first and last name and then I could tell
you whether such a man existed or not.  It says here the leader of a group
of Seselj's men but no mention is made of the name.  How do they know he's
the leader if they don't know his name?  What does the term "leader" mean?



Was he a squad leader, a company leader?  I have stressed several times
that volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were never grouped together in
units larger than a company.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Mr. Milosevic, where is that reference?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I asked Mr. Seselj this because I
have a note that this is mentioned in the indictment against him.  So I
wanted to ask him whether he recalls such an event as mentioned in the
indictment against him, because previously he answered that he knew of no
such instances, no crimes committed by volunteers of the Serb Radical
Party.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, proceed, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   As you have answered with precision that there were no such
instances, I will not put any more questions to you about the various
allegations referring to the Zvornik area.  It would simply be a waste of
time.
Please tell us very briefly whether you have any knowledge about
the events in Bosanski Samac in 1992, because it says that your men
participated in taking Bosanski Samac in April 1992.
A.   First of all --
JUDGE BONOMY:  Where is that reference?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I quoted about half an hour ago, but
it wasn't sufficiently clear.  I will try to find it again.  I'm simply
trying to establish whether the witness knows anything about
Bosanski Samac.































THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I have some knowledge but --
JUDGE BONOMY:  The answer -- the question I have is --  what do
you mean by "because it says," it says, "that your men participated in
taking Bosanski Samac in April 1992."  What is "it"?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I asked Mr. Seselj something about
Samac before, but right now I can't find it.
JUDGE BONOMY:  I take it it's not another reference to the
indictment against Mr. Seselj.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I don't think it is.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You have Bosanski Samac mentioned in
several places on your indictment, if I can be of assistance, and I can
tell you what I know about the events in Bosanski Samac.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Well, that's the only reason I asked you whether you knew
anything.
A.   In paragraph 42 Bosanski Samac is ascribed to you.
Q.   Well, all the municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
ascribed to me.  There aren't any which are not ascribed to me.  But what
do you know about the events there?
JUDGE BONOMY:  I'm sorry, I don't understand this question.  You
can't just ask a question, take a municipality and say, "What do you know
about events there?"  There's got to be some point to the question.
Now, what is this dealing with?
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Very well.  I won't ask you anything about that, then, because I



can't find the reference now.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well, Mr. Milosevic.  If you find the
reference, you can come back to it, but bear in mind that you undertook to
complete the evidence in chief today.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I'm doing my best, Mr. Robinson, but
there are many, many witnesses who mentioned Mr. Seselj, and I want to see
whether there's any truth in anything they said.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, you may -- Mr. Milosevic, you may have
other witnesses who may be in a better position to contradict the
assertions in the Prosecution case than Mr. Seselj himself.  Don't assume
that because a Prosecution says something about Mr. Seselj that he's the
best person to contradict it.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] So do many witnesses.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   On page 23520 of the transcript.  I'll skip over the witness's
name because I can't recall at present whether or not he was protected,
Mr. Robinson.  I don't think he was, because I don't have any note to that
effect, but he says:  "In actions in Bosanski Samac, the Red Berets, the
White Wolves, and the JNA participated."
Do you know anything about this?
A.   I have rather reliable information about that.  First of all,
there was a man whom I know as a volunteer of the Serb Radical Party from
Eastern Slavonia and who is mentioned in several places, both in the
indictment against me and the judgement against the Samac group and so on.
His name is Srecko Radovanovic.  He probably arrived there in a JNA



helicopter, which would mean he was part of the JNA.  However, he was
accompanied by a group of men who were not volunteers of the Serb Radical
Party, a certain man called Crni who was later a commander.  I know for
sure he was not a member of the Serb Radical Party.  There was also
Slobodan Miljkovic, also known as Lugar, who had a fighting group known as
the Grey Wolves, not the White Wolves, as far as I know.  This Lugar was
charged with several crimes, and he was tried before the court in
Banja Luka.  At that time he was not a volunteer of the Serb Radical
Party.  In 1993 or 1994, he join the Serb Radical Party in Kragujevac and
the party still has the original copy of his enrollment document.
Q.   Was that in Serbia?  Because the Judges don't know that Kragujevac
is not in Bosnia.
A.   That's correct.  And he joined in 1993 or 1994.  I'm getting ready
to obtain the original copy of his application to join, but he was
expelled in 1995 for slapping the president of the Municipal Board, Jovan
Savic.  And he was in the Grey Wolves unit.  He had nothing to do with the
Serb Radical Party.  He was tried before a court in Banja Luka, and I gave
my legal advisors instructions to get the entire transcript of this trial
and all the accompanying materials.
As for Srecko Radovanovic, The Hague Prosecution has disclosed to
me certain documents which are public, and you can see that this man
Radovanovic entered into various private arrangements concerning his
participation in the war.  He was promised remuneration or received it.
Those are the facts I know about.  There was the JNA.  The members
of the JNA arrived in JNA helicopters.  Among them was a man who I know



had previously been a volunteer of the Serb Radical Party, and they even
called him Chetnik duke, conferred upon him this title.  His name was
Srecko Radovanovic.
There was Crni who was holding a command position, and he was
certainly not a volunteer.  And Miljkovic, also known as Lugar, was
certainly not a volunteer of the Serb Radical Party, because had he been
he would not have about in the Grey Wolves.  As far as I can recall, that
unit was called the Grey Wolves.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Now let me try and tell you what I've understood
from that answer, if anything, that the JNA did participation in actions
in Bosanski Samac.  Is that a fair understanding of what you've said?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] As far as I know, the JNA was there,
yes.
JUDGE BONOMY:  And that there was also a paramilitary group called
the Grey Wolves active there?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, it's very problematic to say
paramilitary unit, because when one says paramilitary unit one means
outside the regular army.  This group was part of the Samac Territorial
Defence in some way, or part of the army of Republika Srpska.  I'm not
sure how, in what way.  But this Slobodan Miljkovic, also known as Lugar,
I think for a way was deputy battalion commander, and he was a very good
fighter.  He distinguished himself in the fighting.  However, what
happened happened outside the battle.  I think the village was called
Crkvina or something like that.  I can't recall it all off the top of my
head, especially place names.  But he was tried before the court in



Banja Luka, he and this group called the Grey Wolves.
JUDGE BONOMY:  And the Red Berets you haven't dealt with.  Did
they participate?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] How can I respond to that?  What
Red Berets?  Were they soldiers wearing Red Berets on their heads?
JUDGE BONOMY:  That's a perfectly legitimate answer for you to
give, you see, because the question was in actions in Bosanski Samac the
Red Berets, the White Wolves and the JNA participated.  That was the
quotation.  And you gave us a long answer about Serb Radical volunteers,
which on the face of it, and as far as I can still tell, they've got
nothing to do with the question.  So all I'm doing now is trying to find
out what the real answer to that question is.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  We will adjourn for 20 minutes.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, it has nothing to do with the
Red Berets.
--- Recess taken at 5.25 p.m.
--- On resuming at 5.57 p.m.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  The reason for the late start is that the
technical person needed more time to make the redaction that was necessary
resulting from the inadvertent reference to the name of a protected
witness.
Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, please.  Microphone.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   You commented on the White Wolves or as you called them the Grey



Wolves and the Red Berets that were mentioned, that Mr. Bonomy also
mentioned.  Now, the witness, I don't know whether he was protected or
not, I don't want to say his name, but anyway, on page 23520 of the
transcript says that he saw 20 locals, and it's about Samac, wearing
uniforms with Red Berets for which -- for whom he assumed -- he assumed
they were locals who were trained in the Red Beret camp so they returned
to Samac.  Do you know anything about that?
A.   Well, I don't have any information to that effect, and that is
quite impossible.  I'd like to point out once again that in different
places they called people Red Berets for the simple fact that they had
found some Red Berets and put them on their heads.  So they could have
been various units, especially as we're talking about locals in this
particular case.  Where were they going?  Where were they trained?  What
does it all mean?  They might have received some Red Berets from some
warehouse and would display them in Samac and then people thought they
were some sort of Red Beret formation and wanted to link them up with the
Red Berets that were established in Serbia as a Special Purpose Unit of
the State Security in 1996.
So quite obviously there is the intent to mislead and this term
applies to different concepts.
Q.   Thank you, Mr. Seselj.  Now, is it correct that in March, and I
think that is in the indictment against you but you'll put me right if I'm
wrong, in March 1992 that you held a speech in Mali Zvornik, is that true,
that is to say, on the territory of Serbia, the other side of Drina River,
wherein amongst others you said:  "Dear brother Chetniks, especially you



across the Drina, you're the bravest, and we're going to clear up Bosnia
from the pagans and show them the road to the east where they belong."  Is
it true that you said that?
A.   This is partially a falsification of my actual statement and
partially it is a mistake made on the part of the Croatian translator,
because -- or interpreter, because Croatian translators don't always know
the Serbian language well enough, because they endeavour to speak an
artificial form of the distorted form of the Serbian language which the
Croats have been using for the last hundred years.  So in that Croatian
variation "pogan" means "pagan," where as in the Serb language "pogan"
means "waste" or "faeces."  And I attacked the Islamic fundamentalists and
pan-Islamists who wish to have Bosnia secede from Yugoslavia, and I called
them "pogani," which means faeces or waste.  But I did not refer to the
Muslims as pagans.  I am not -- I am an educated man.  I'm not a stupid
man.  For me to call a monotheistic religion a pagan religion, now, I have
nothing against the pagan traditions, and I look up to ancient Greece more
than I do to all the Christians afterwards, let's make that point clear,
but I know that it is a monotheistic religion and one of the largest --
greatest Serbian theologists Nikolaj Velimirevic, considered the Muslims
to be a Protestant variant of a Christianism, Christianity.
So here because of inadequate translations, a monstrous assertion
is being made, far from any thoughts of mine.  What I did was to attack,
and I've been doing so for more than 20 years or 30 years, pan-Islamists,
Islamic fundamentalists, and I started attacking them first when they
first appeared in Bosnia-Herzegovina for that matter.



JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Where is a copy of this speech available?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Where you can find it.  Well, if you
haven't got if it in my books then the Prosecution probably has a copy
because most of my speeches were published in my books, in my works so, if
a speech does not happen to be there, if --
JUDGE BONOMY:  Was this one published in your books?  I apologise.
I haven't read them all.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson [sic], two years ago I
handed over to The Hague Tribunal 80 of my printed works.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Is this speech in any of them?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Most probably, but it would be up to
the Prosecution to find it, not me.  I can't look through that whole
matter myself, because I didn't make the statement only in one place.  I
made the statement in several places, on several occasions.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Well, normally the party presenting the evidence is
responsible for getting it to court in some -- as official as is possible,
but you're not aware of a copy of it being available for us as part of the
papers in connection with your evidence.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Mr. Bonomy, the side that has
referred to my alleged speech is the Prosecution's side.  So I'm just
telling you where they made a mistake.  So they can find the original of
the speech and present it here.  I can't do the work of the Prosecution.
I can't be expected to do that.  I am testifying to the facts and
circumstances about which I have knowledge.  I'm not here to help the



Prosecution out in its work.  And for my part, I have contributed
sufficiently by handing over all my books.  They have far greater
resources than I do.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Mr. Nice, can you help?  Where do I locate the
evidence, readily locate the evidence in relation to this?
MR. NICE:  I'm not sure you can locate it readily at the moment
from our own database.  It may be possible.
JUDGE BONOMY:  It appears Mr. Seselj is suggesting that there is
evidence of this speech led by the Prosecution in this case.
MR. NICE:  It may be in this case or it may be in the pre-trial
brief of his own case.  I'll deal with it as soon as I can.
JUDGE BONOMY:  All right.  Thank you.
MR. NICE:  We can't of course be guided in the way we are going to
present our questions through his observations.  We'll make our own
decisions.
JUDGE BONOMY:  No, no, no.  That's nothing to the point.  I'm just
trying to clarify where I can read this speech, but if no one's going to
help me, that's okay.
MR. NICE:  We certainly will help you when we can.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Witness B1643 who testified pursuant to 92 bis, I assume you know
the written part, mentioned torture and capture of civilians in the SUP
building of the Territorial Defence in the primary school and secondary
school in Crkvina, the warehouse there.  Do you know anything about that?



A.   Well, I already mentioned something about this.  I said that the
Crkvina case was probably processed in Banja Luka, which is where the Grey
Wolves were investigated.  Slobodan Miljkovic, nicknamed Lugar, was
arrested, but I don't have any details about how the trial proceeded and
the upshot.  I asked my legal advisors to find the complete dossier of
that trial, but I do know for certain that he was arrested and taken to
trial in Banja Luka, prosecuted in Banja Luka.
Q.   The indictment against you, in the indictment you are accused of
an act on the 7th of May, 1992, which allegedly happened there which says
that two leaders of your group under your command killed 18 males at the
agricultural farm in Crkvina.  Is that the event you are referring to?
A.   Well, I assume so, although I was not in command.  I wasn't there
nor did the Grey Wolves have anything to do with the Serbian Radical
Party.
Q.   That's all I want to the hear from you, Mr. Seselj.  I think your
answer suffices.
You are also charged of an event on the 5th of July, 1992, when
allegedly members of units under your control, once again it is stated
killed 22 civilians in Jesovo [phoen].  Do you know anything about that?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, you now seem to be concentrating
on the indictment against Mr. Seselj.  To what end?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Well, Mr. Seselj, Mr. Robinson, was
quoted as being one of the participants of the joint criminal enterprise.
So it is up to us to assess how far there are grounds for posing this
question of a joint criminal enterprise and for attempting to prove that



concept here, and Mr. Seselj has an opportunity of telling us why he
stands accused, because he's testifying here.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  The indictment against him is not necessarily
relevant for that purpose.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Whatever you like.  I'm not going to
insist upon that, although I do consider it to be relevant.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   You are also being accused of the fact that during the summer 1993
some members of your alleged --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  [Previous translation continues] ... you have
continued.  I want you to stop that line of questioning, because I do not
see at the moment its relevance.  It is not Mr. Seselj who is on trial
here.  I know that he's alleged to be a member of the joint criminal
enterprise.  I'm well aware of that.  But that doesn't let in any and all
kind of allegations from the indictment relating to his trial.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Well, Mr. Robinson, if we can see
here that the allegations against Mr. Seselj are not correct and not true,
then that, once again, is proof and evidence that other things aren't true
either, and he has refuted a number of witnesses' statements here that I
quoted.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  That's a non sequitur, Mr. Milosevic, and I know
you know that.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Very well.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, witness William Thomas Francis Roy on page 28882 of































the transcript stated here that the Muslim snipers killed three pregnant
women and only then did the Serb snipers respond by opening fire.  Do you
know anything about that event or generally speaking about events linked
to killings by snipers in the Sarajevo area?
A.   As far as I remember, that was the first instance of sniper fire
in Sarajevo, and we must bear in mind the fact that in Sarajevo the front
line stretched across the city itself.  The city was divided into a part
under Muslim control and another part under Serb control.
Now, as far as sniper fire is concerned, one should bear in mind
the following:  When you say sniper fire, you implied any fire coming from
rifles which wasn't a sniper fire in the true sense of the word because
sniper fire is firing at a long distance, long range, with weapons with
optic sights.  However, that -- those kinds of weapons were rare on the
Serb side.  The Muslims, with the help of foreign powers, were able to
come by much more sophisticated weapons, modern weapons, on the black
market.  I don't exclude the possibility of individual cases there being
the need for revenge and retaliation, but fire from Serb positions was
opened at army targets in Sarajevo because a war was being fought to gain
control of the city, and the balance of forces was fairly equal.  The two
sides were fairly equal.  The front in Sarajevo, the distance, didn't
change for many years, and one or the other side would take control of
certain sections, but there was death on both sides of the front line.
On the Serb side of the front line there was no intentional
killing of Muslim civilians under their control, whereas the Muslims
killed about 4.000 Serb civilians near the cemetery and in other places,



in Kazani and so on.
Q.   Thank you.  That same witness on the same page says that in the
Sarajevo area both sides used snipers and that criminal acts were present
on both sides.  Is that true?
A.   As far as crimes are concerned, criminal acts, I think that in
Sarajevo there were the least number of criminal acts of this kind.  The
real snipers were -- real snipers were mostly used on the Muslim side, far
more than on the Serb side, because as I said, the Muslims had more
sophisticated and modern sniper weapons, whereas the Serbs had a more
favourable geographic position for the deployment of their forces.
JUDGE BONOMY:  I'm sorry, I've forgotten the evidence which I
think there was earlier about your personal contact with Sarajevo.  How
much personal experience did you have of Sarajevo?  By that I mean the
conflict there.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I went to Sarajevo several times, to
the Serb part of Sarajevo, the part of Sarajevo under Serb control that
is.  Most frequently I would go to Grbavica and tour the front line there.
At Grbavica there were a considerable number of Muslims living there, and
I met some of them as well.  On one occasion I was there when a fresh
shipment of bread arrived, for example.  And I also met some of my
colleagues from university and also people whom I'd been to school with,
Muslims.  And nobody complained about the conduct of the Serb forces.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Were you there when there were exchanges of fire
going on?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, while I was there, during my



stay there, there was individual sporadic gunfire.  There was some
dangerous spots where you had to pass by quickly in your car and where you
had to rush past because of sniper fire, the danger of sniper fire, but
there were no more serious conflicts at that time.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Thank you.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Did you hear about the event of the 19th of October, 1993,
referred to by this same witness, Thomas Francis Roy, in his testimony on
page 28884 of the transcript when the Bosnian Muslims dressed as Serbs
fired at the command of the United Nations for Bosnia-Herzegovina in
Sarajevo?
A.   Yes.  That was a generally known event, and the Muslims would open
fire frequently and fire at international forces so that that could be
ascribed to the Serbs, saying the Serbs had fired.  And then they abused
protected facilities in order to open fire, and this would bring reaction
from the Serb side.  And very often from the main hospital in Sarajevo
they would bring in mortars and other weapons.  They would open fire at
Serb positions, and then they would collect up the weapons, drive them off
in the boots of cars, and if the Serbs were to retaliate and open fire,
then they would show the Serbs intention naturally aiming at
hospitals.  And there are a number of foreigners who testified to this,
who were eyewitnesses, who saw the Muslims bringing in mortars to the
hospital compound and open fire on the Serb positions then withdraw
quickly, take away the mortars, and once the foreign controllers arrived
they didn't come across any Muslim weapons but they saw the Serbs opening



fire in retaliation.
Q.   Witness Alija Gusalic in his testimony states that you visited
Bijeljina before the conflict broke out, and that is to be found on 8 --
page 8258 of Alija Gusalic's -- 18258, and I link this up with your
indictment and Alija Gusalic's testimony saying that you visited Bijeljina
and members of the Serbian Radical Party to plan the attack and to
takeover the Bijeljina.  May we have your comments to those assertions?
A.   That I visited Bijeljina several times before the war is quite
correct.  However, that I planned any kind of attack, that is just
nonsense.
Q.   Witness Alija Gusalic says that in the area of Bijeljina there
were Arkan's men and Seselj's men based in Amajlije.  Do you know anything
about that?
A.   I categorically assert that not a single volunteer of the Serb
Radical Party from Serbia was sent to Bijeljina.  I'm absolutely certain
of that.
Q.   The same witness says on page 18260, "Seselj's men had beards and
cockades.  Seselj was the boss and he instructed Mirko Blagojevic to
distribute weapons to people from the Serb Radical Party."
A.   First of all, I was no boss.  Secondly, the volunteers of the Serb
Radical Party from time to time did have beards, but they were mostly
clean-shaven like me.  I never wore a beard in my life.  And that does not
bring into question my affiliation with the Chetniks, and a beard cannot
be synonymous with Chetniks.  It was so in communist movies that for
ideological reasons portrayed Chetniks that way, but quite simply that was



not a customary thing.  There were such examples.  Why not?   A soldier
having a beard is no exception in the world.  Secondly, I did not
distribute any weapons, or did I hand them out, or did I have any role
in these struggles in Bijeljina at the beginning of the war.
Members of the Serb Radical Party did participate in Bijeljina but
exclusively people who lived in Bijeljina anyway.
Q.   Thank you, Mr. Seselj.  On page 18277, Alija Gusalic says, and now
I'm asking you whether you know anything about this, that persons who were
not Serbs were detained between April and September 1993, and they were
held at the MUP building and at the Batkovic camp near Bijeljina.  Do you
know anything about that?
A.   I don't know about those particular localities, but I've already
talked about Mauzer's and Arkan's conduct in Bijeljina, and it was for
that reason that the local members of the Serb Radical Party often
attacked Mauzer in public and opposed him.
Q.   I'm sorry that I didn't draw your attention to this on time,
Mr. Seselj, but I put this question to you because in the indictment you
are being charged with the death of about 100 detainees at this camp in
Batkovic.
A.   I've already said that there were no volunteers of the Serb
Radical Party there.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  The question is not relevant.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, Alija Gusalic
testified here, and he made those assertions here, and I'm linking that up
with --



JUDGE ROBINSON:  Put it on the basis that a Prosecution witness
made the allegations here.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I already have.  The Batkovic camp
near Bijeljina.  And I've linked that up to what the indictment against
Mr. Seselj says.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, but that's not relevant.  Move on.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] All right.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Are you saying that Alija Gusalic accused
Mr. Seselj in this case, the present case, of causing the death of a
hundred detainees in the camp at Batkovic?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] No.
JUDGE BONOMY:  Unless he did it in this case, it's not relevant to
this case.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Yes.  But Mr. Nice did that on the
basis of that same assertion, because Gusalic here in this case talks
about Batkovic and about people being detained there, whereas in
Mr. Seselj's indictment it says that 100 persons died due to inhumane
treatment.  If that is not linked up well and fine, but why is it in
Seselj's indictment?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Proceed to another question, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, Alija Gusalic on page 18278 confirmed that the
International Red Cross visited the Batkovic camp.  Do you know anything
about this?  Was this camp supervised by the International Red Cross?
A.   I don't know anything about the visit of the International Red



Cross.  At any rate, volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were not there.
Also, local Serb radicals never took part in arrests or the detention of
prisoners of war or civilians or anyone else.  They absolutely did not
take part in any such thing.
As for the International Red Cross, if they did visit Batkovic and
if there was any such thing like the camp of Batkovic, then there would
have to be a report, a report in writing compiled by them.
Q.   All right.  I'm not going to ask you about this anymore.  You
mentioned that some of your volunteers were within the JNA in Mostar.  Is
that right?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Witness K2, in his testimony, mentioned some things about the
activity of the Red Berets in Mostar.  Since you are familiar with the
situation in Mostar and the presence of your volunteers in the JNA there,
do you know anything about any activity of the Red Berets there?
A.   To my knowledge, in Mostar on the Serb side there were no
paramilitary formations.  Volunteers of the Serb Radical Party were in
Mostar.  The JNA brought them there in their own vehicles from Belgrade,
from the barracks in Bubanj Potok.  All the members of the Serb Radical
Party were under the control of Momcilo Perisic, who publicly praised them
as highly disciplined on Belgrade television.
If there were some soldiers wearing Red Berets, they could have
been members of some platoon of the military police, an intervention
platoon, a reconnaissance platoon, something like that.  So I do not
preclude the possibility of some JNA soldiers wearing Red Berets, but this



was not a formation, a unit called the Red Berets.
Q.   Witness C17 says in his witness statement that at the Buna camp
there were Seselj's Chetniks, the White Eagles and the Red Berets;
transcript page 22016.  Do you have any knowledge about that?
A.   That is absolutely impossible.  I've never heard of the White
Eagles being in the territory of Mostar.  I haven't heard of this Buna
camp either.  It is not impossible that volunteers of the Serb Radical
Party, in accordance with orders issued by the command in charge, appeared
in Buna.  I don't know anything about this, but there should be proper
records to that effect in JNA archives, but I never heard of the White
Eagles appearing in the territory of Mostar or have I heard of any
Red Berets.
Q.   Witness K2 says on page 14578 that there were activities in
Nevesinje.  Do you know anything about that?
A.   I was in Nevesinje but there was actually no fighting there.  I
was in Nevesinje in 1991.  The fighting was in the territory of Mostar and
in the Neretva valley.
Q.   Was there any fighting in Nevesinje at any time during the war?
A.   As far as I know, there was no fighting during the war in
Nevesinje.
Q.   That will do.
A.   When I was there in 1992, in Nevesinje, there was a considerable
number of Muslims as part of the local population.  There were no
conflicts.  Everything was peaceful.  Truth to tell, there was a large
number of refugees, Serb refugees, from the Neretva River valley, and they



were put up at various facilities there.
Q.   Do you know anything about a lake, Boracko Jezero, and a rest
house there where about 19 persons were killed, according to the
allegations made?
A.   I never knew anything about this.  And to my knowledge, volunteers
of the Serb Radical Party were not to Boracko Jezero.  That's close to
Konjic.  I've already said that there were members of the Serb guard
there.  Also, a Major Boro Antelj, a close associate of Vuk Draskovic was
there, and we kept our distance from those areas where the Serb guard was
operating.
Q.   Did that Serb guard have anything to do with Arkan's Serb
volunteer guard?
A.   No.  These are two different paramilitary formations.
Q.   So what formation is this, the Serb guard?
A.   Of Vuk Draskovic and the Serbian Renewal Movement.  It appeared
elsewhere in Herzegovina, too, like Trebinje.  So the civilian authorities
had a great deal of trouble with them driving them out of Trebinje because
they stayed at the hotel and went out of Trebinje, went looting.  Then
they appeared in Foca, caused problems there, and the authorities had a
lot of trouble getting rid of these guardsmen of Draskovic's.  As far as I
know, the Serb guard operated in those three places in Herzegovina.
Q.   Mr. Seselj --
A.   In Trebinje and in Foca when they appeared there, Branislav
Lajnovic, Dugi, was their commander.
Q.   You mean the commander of this paramilitary formation?



A.   The Serb guard.
Q.   Of Vuk Draskovic?
A.   Yes.  Otherwise a notorious criminal, a top-notch criminal from
Novi Sad, almost equal to Arkan.
Q.   Mr. Seselj, last week we had here some submissions that you made
to the other side that have to do with Witness Dulovic.  I've forgotten
his first name.
A.   Jovan.
Q.   Jovan Dulovic who testified here.  Mr. Robinson instructed me to
find the original documents that can be linked up to your submissions
since they refused to admit your submissions.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I am sorry, Mr. Robinson.  If you're
telling me to have copies made I will do that, but I've just received
these copies.  This is a series of photocopies of articles written by
Jovan Dulovic and published in Ekspres Politika from the 16th of November,
the 26th of November, all of that in 1991.  Then the 18th of November, the
2nd of November.  So from November 1991.
In these articles, he speaks very favourably of the JNA and
commends their behaviour in the fighting around Vukovar.  For example, he
says that 118 inhabitants of Vukovar, Serbs and Croats, saw the light of
the day after having stayed in cellars for many --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, what is the question?
MR. NICE:  And, Your Honour, if I may interrupt, if there's going
to be a reference to and quotation from a newspaper article, it has to be
on the overhead projector.  It then has to be available to us to read it



in full should we wish to.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  That's -- that's the practice, Mr. Milosevic.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Very well.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, since I have only one copy of these articles and I've
just received that, could the usher please place them on the ELMO, and
then you can have a look at least at some of the parts that have been
marked.  Reference is made to Major Sljivancanin here, too, in a very
favourable light.  Gratitude for assistance to civilians, Croats, at that,
and so on and so forth.  Please look at this series of articles.
In order to answer my question, are these at least partly articles
that you relied on when you wrote those submissions to the other side
about the untruthful testimony of Jovan Dulovic or, rather, the difference
in -- between his reporting then and his testimony here about Vukovar?
MR. NICE:  Your Honour, that was a leading but nevertheless it's
interesting to see what the articles actually say.  And if it becomes
relevant to consider their admissibility as evidence, I know the Chamber
will have in mind its open recent ruling in respect of the documents of
Jasovic and the potential evidential value or not as evidence of these
documents, but I'm most interested frankly in seeing what they actually
say.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let's get it on the overhead projector.
There appears to be a technical problem.  We're not seeing
anything.
Mr. Milosevic, the technician is being called.  He's coming in.































So move on to another question.  We'll come back to this.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Robinson, I am sorry, but my
next question also has to do with something that Mr. Seselj already
testified about and the document that I obtained in the meantime and that
would also have to be placed on the ELMO.  That is --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, then move to the question after that,
because the overhead projector is not working.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] After that I have no further
questions except -- since I wanted to finish today by all means, except
for this other thing that I want to have placed on the ELMO, and that is a
decision related to members of the group Spider.  Many statements were
presented here about them or, rather, what the spokesmen of the federal
government said in February 2000 about the crime in Srebrenica.  So it was
known who had committed it then, members of the 10th Sabotage Detachment.
The 13th of November, 2000, is the date of this decision.  So it is about
40 days after the coup d'etat of the 5th of October, 2000.  It was then
that they were all released, set free.
So wanted to show you this document, and I wanted to hand out
copies to you.  I've just received this.  They are all in the Serbian
language but they can be placed on the ELMO to show what the government
spokesman had said was completely disregarded, and these persons mentioned
in the criminal report against Erdemovic were set free.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  The ELMO is working now, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, please take a look at this.  This is a series of



articles from Ekspres Politika.  Can you see the date of the newspaper?
A.   It seems that this is the 16th of November or the 13th of
November.
Q.   1991; right?
A.   1991.
Q.   Unless this is a leading question.
A.   It's illegible the date but I think it says November.  This is one
of the texts from Ekspres Politika that my legal advisors used when
preparing that submission of mine which is a special part of my defence.
That is what I submitted to the OTP in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence and Procedure.
Q.   What does it say in the heading and what does it say in the
subheading?
A.   It says above the title that 118 inhabitants of Vukovar, both
Serbs and Croats, saw the light of the day after having been in cellars
for a long time.  "Light finally," is the heading.  And then in the
subheading:  "Sniper shooters were silenced by Zoljas."  And then there's
another bit saying, "In the darkness of cellars from the 25th of August,"
and then Nada Juhas, obviously a Croat lady, stating, "I cannot believe
that we are alive," and obviously they appreciate that the JNA liberated
the town of Vukovar from the Croat paramilitaries.
THE INTERPRETER:  The speaker is overlapping so the beginning of
the question was not heard by the interpreters.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute, please.  The interpreters have
indicated that you're overlapping and so she did not hear the beginning of



the last question.  Repeat the question, Mr. Milosevic.
And please observe the pause, Mr. Seselj.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, please look at a few characteristic points here.
Perhaps it's easier for you to see on the left-hand side where the text
is.
A.   For example, a characteristic point as Jovan Dulovic writes is as
follows:  "A river of people is flowing out of the huge cellars.  A total
of 118, both Serbs and Croats.  No one is asking about their ethnicity."
That's what Jovan Dulovic says, showing how the JNA treated Serbs and
Croats equally.  Civilians, that is.
I can't read the first paragraph because it's quite illegible, but
it seems to be describing medical assistance which was given immediately,
that several ambulances were waiting to help.  "It would not be a good
thing if the Ustasha attacked us with mortars just now."
So Jovan Dulovic is writing about the liberation of one part of
Vukovar before the fighting had stopped.
Q.   Can you see the subtitle which says "The cruel major"?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Will you look at the bottom of the column and tell us who this
refers to and what it says about this cruel major.
A.   This is Major Sljivancanin, who treated these Croatian civilians
very nicely.  And then Jovan Dulovic comments on his nice behaviour that
surprised this Croat woman, and he says:  "No knows what she as a Croat
heard about the cruelty of JNA soldiers."  So he's describing the



behaviour of Major Sljivancanin as something quite the opposite of what
Croatian propaganda depicted, which characterised JNA soldiers in a very
bad way.
And then Major Sljivancanin says:  "Whenever you need anything,
look for me and I'll help you.  Just ask for Sljivancanin.  I now have to
go, the Major said and left.  He was followed by the gaze of mothers full
of gratitude."  This is somewhere near the end of the article.  "He had
followed by the gaze of mothers and daughters full of gratitude."
All this was written by Jovan Dulovic about the then Major now
Colonel Veselin Sljivancanin.
Q.   Before that in this column where there is no photograph, Dulovic
describes how Sljivancanin sent a child to hospital.  He said, "Take this
child to hospital immediately."
A.   Yes, I see it.  Sljivancanin says, "Take this child to the
hospital in Negoslavci right away," Major Sljivancanin ordered, showing
the ambulance driver the wounded girl of Vlatka.  "Let her be given
assistance and medicine."
A little later Vlatka's mother, Verica, is anxiously looking for
her daughter in the crowd.  "Where is my child?  What have they done to
her?  Where have they taken her," Verica was crying out.
"Don't be afraid.  She is in hospital," Sljivancanin said.  The
frightened woman didn't believe it."  This is followed by Dulovic's
comment:  "Who knows what she as a Croat heard about the cruelty of JNA
soldiers."
Q.   And what does it say then?



A.   "Get into my car.  I'll take you to the hospital so you can see
your child and reassure yourself that everything is all right.  They both
entered the vehicle.  In the meantime, the doctors have cleaned and
dressed Vlatka's wound which was not life-threatening.  The mother and the
daughter embraced while Sljivancanin stood next to them."
Q.   So this is Dulovic's report from the Vukovar war theatre.
A.   Yes.
Q.   Look at the next page.  This is a newspaper article published on
the following day.  So look at the titles and tell us what the main points
are.  This large title, this heading, that is.
A.   Yes.  Now it's been adjusted.  Milka Vidovic is making a
statement, "I believed in the army."  And what's in the subtitle.  "A
little less than 90 days in a shelter deep below the Catholic cemetery in
Vukovar."  And then there's a quotation.
A.   "We hoped our army would liberate us.  The expectations of the
guards members were not met, and a mass grave, a common grave near the
hospital.  This refers to the grave where the Croats buried Serb victims."
Q.   And look what it says in the article.
A.   In the article Dulovic describes what happened and says the
following:  "In the beginning of August, shooting started in Vukovar and
barricades were set up.  Milka Vidovic from Borovo, Gacesina Street, house
number 26, with her husband Djuro, took shelter with their neighbours,
Milos Grudic, in a cellar together with the Grudic family.  A few days
later, the members of the guards burst into the cellar.  These were
members of the Croatian National Guard Corps.  Get out or we'll throw a



bomb in.  The Chetniks are coming.  They're cutting everyone's throats.
We're taking you to a shelter."
Q.   It's quite illegible.  Could you put some light on it?
Look at the passages marked in yellow.  You don't have to read it
all out, just a few passages.
A.    "Several of us -- or, rather, above us on the cemetery the guards
members were stationed.  Milka Vidovic said, 'When they visited us in the
cellar, they said that the Chetniks were cutting everyone's throats.  We
Serbs kept quiet.  We sensed that our people were getting close, and the
only thing on our minds was whether we would ever get out of here.  I
believed in our army and I believed they would arrive.'"
JUDGE ROBINSON:  What's the question in relation to this,
Mr. Milosevic?
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Seselj, what is the signature marked in yellow here?
A.   Jovan Dulovic.  The same Jovan Dulovic who four or five years
later changed his version by -- he turned around by 180 degrees because he
has become a mercenary of the Western intelligence services, and he writes
for the magazine Vreme which is the Belgrade branch of Western
intelligence agencies.
Q.   Mr. Seselj, when you glanced through this article and you dealt
with it in your submission, is there a single word here which does not
speak favourably of the JNA and the people who fought in Vukovar?
A.   No.  The texts are all exceptionally favourable, full of praise
for the soldiers and officers of the JNA during the fighting for Vukovar.



Q.   Would you look at the next page, please.  Let's just see what the
date is.
A.   The 18th, I suppose.  The 18th of November.
Q.   Well, move on.  Move on.
A.   Mr. Milosevic, Dulovic says here one day with volunteers and tank
crews in the street fighting for the liberation of Vukovar.  He praises
the volunteers who participated in the fighting for Vukovar as part of the
JNA.  So this should be noted.
Next page, please.  I think that it's very important to point this
out.
Q.   And the signature is Jovan Dulovic.  What's the title of this
article?
A.   The title of this article is "The Knights of Vukovar."
Q.   And who does it refer to?
A.   The units of Major Borivoje Tesic on the front line in Vukovar.
Major Borivoje Tesic I think -- says: "I think this is the last stage of
the fighting.  Crews carrying out their tasks successfully and the help of
brave people is indispensable."  It speaks of Croatian Ustasha and so on.
Q.   Was this also written by Jovan Dulovic?
A.   Yes.
JUDGE KWON:  Just a second.  In previous page you said Mr. Dulovic
said volunteers as part of JNA.  Could you show us the passage where
Mr. Dulovic said so?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] He says here:  "One day with
volunteers and tank crews in the street fighting for the liberation of



Vukovar."  This is above the headline.
Then he goes on to say:  "Speaking favourably of Stanko Vujanovic,
he says the commander of the 1st Company of the Territorial Defence of
Vukovar who is said to be a man who knows no fear." It's quite difficult
to read this.  My eyesight is not so good and this is not very legible.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Can it be enlarged?
A.   "With his group of cleaners is making great progress, making
openings in the walls just large enough for the fighters to squeeze
through and attack strongholds of the MUP and ZNG members.  The house in
which they stopped in Prugomijska [phoen] Street near the Brdo cafe is
under constant fire by snipers whose positionings are very difficult to
discern."
JUDGE KWON:  Now, Mr. Seselj, I would like see to see the passage
which shows that they were part of JNA as you indicated.  Or was it your
comment?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  Please.  In the entire text the
volunteers are spoken of as members of the JNA.  We have passage here in
the third column where it says it's in the late afternoon and the fighting
is dying down.  The volunteers --
JUDGE KWON:  Could you use the pointer.  And you indicate on the
newspaper on the ELMO, not your monitor.  Yes.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] "It's late in the afternoon and the
fighting is dying down.  The volunteers have pierced deep, and they have
conquered territory between the enemy forces.  The fighters will stay here



until the morning.  There were no casualties today except for one soldier
who was killed, and his name was Vignjevic."
He then says:  "We are going back while shells are flying over our
heads and Howitzer shells and so on."
This whole text implies that the volunteers why part of the JNA.
Mr. Kwon, you have here an order showing that these volunteers joined the
1st Guards Brigade.  The order was delivered to the OTP from Belgrade and
it's beyond dispute.
In the Vukovar, there were no troops outside the JNA.  There were
no paramilitary units.
JUDGE KWON:  It is your comment.  I really didn't see any
concrete -- the description these volunteers as part of JNA by
Mr. Dulovic.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You have to read the whole text and
everything will become clear to you.
JUDGE KWON:  Proceed, Mr. Milosevic.
MR. MILOSEVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Look at the next page, please.  The following text or this one
again says the Knights of Vukovar, Major Borivoje Tesic's units on the
front line, and this is a large article which seems not to be by Dulovic,
but on the left-hand side there is a small one:  "Brave commander falls,
Borovo Selo."  Would you look at the signature?  I believe it's by
Dulovic.  Could you scroll up?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What does it say in the passage marked by yellow?



A.   The initials "JD" mean Jovan Dulovic.
Q.   And what does it say in this last passage?
A.   To the inhabitants of the Crepulje -- "The inhabitants of the
Crepulje village have been mourning since yesterday.  Slavisa Milojevic,
who with his volunteers, was the mainstay of the defence of this village
and one of the bravest and most popular people in this area enjoyed the
highest respect among the defenders of the Serbian villages."
Q.   And he was killed?
A.   Yes.  Of course he deserves all this praise that Dulovic gives
him.  Next page.
Q.   Is there anything else here by Dulovic?  Would you please have a
look?  I haven't had time to look at it all carefully.
A.   Yes.  There's a big text.  I think the date is the 8th of
November.  "Fierce artillery fighting in the operation to liberate
Vukovar."
In these texts he always talks of the fighting to liberate
Vukovar, and five years later he's saying something completely different.
"Gunfire, hurricane, successful advance of the infantry in
Vukovar, alarming messages by the guards members to Zagreb."  And then it
says:  "The army in the centre of Vukovar ready to fight back," and so on
and so forth.
So this is yet another text that speaks very favourably of the
JNA.
Q.   And the signature is again Jovan Dulovic?  It's been circled.
A.   Yes.



Q.   Very well.
A.   The 4th of November, 1991.  "For two days fierce fighting has not
stopped on all approaches to Vukovar and in the town itself.  Streets in
flames.  The Vukovar-Borovo Naselje road has been cut off.  The village of
Njusta [phoen] under the control of the artillery of the JNA and the
Territorial Defence.  Advances by Territorial Defence units and volunteers
from the direction of Trpinja stopped on the edge of Borovo Naselje."
He then speaks of a Croatian mortar attack on Bobota [phoen] and
so on.
Q.   Is this another report by Dulovic?
A.   Yes, it's signed by Jovan Dulovic.
Q.   Is there anything else, any other report?
A.   I'm looking at another text here but I can't see whether it's by
Dulovic or not because it's not signed.  It speaks of the Serbian
volunteer guard but again a very favourable text.  I couldn't see -- I
can't see the name of the author here.  I can't see it on this page.
Q.   Is there anything else underneath, another report?
A.   "Who are the volunteers," is the next title.
Q.   Well, I can't see anything anymore.
A.   Yes.  How the volunteers, the territorials, the soldiers advanced
through the streets of Vukovar.  And then the title is "Through the holes
to the Ustasha.  How come so many snipers, Croatian snipers, in Vukovar?
Unknown ammunition with inhumane bullets."
What happened in Vukovar was that the Croatian snipers used
weapons with subcalibre filling which would cause very serious wounds



because the bullet would pass through the body and destroy the internal
organs.
Q.   Mr. Seselj, I can't see what it says here in yellow, highlighted
in yellow.
A.   He speaks favourably about Captain Radic.  It's Major Radic now
who also stands accused in The Hague.  "Throughout the month of October,
the fighting went on in that street, says Captain Radic, who took part in
the clashes on the front lines.  Every day the snipers would kill at least
one person.  And so prominent volunteers were killed such as Luganja
[phoen], Rambo, Captain Trnovace and many others.  They were killed in
that way.  Luganja for a moment appeared at window of a house they had
taken control of but he was shot in the head straight away and he fell.
The snipers often succeeded in keeping many streets under their own
control and then a solution was found to move through the houses."
Q.   All right.  Now, who signed that?  Is that Jovan Dulovic's article
again?
A.   Well, it's not legible but it is a series of articles by him.  We
can't find a signature here but quite obviously it is a series of articles
by him.
Q.   All right, Mr. Seselj.  Is that a series of articles to which you
referred when you made the submissions to the opposite side with respect
to Dulovic's testimony?
A.   Yes.  But this isn't the complete material.  My legal advisors
found many more texts of this kind and they quote them in extenso, and in
my submission I state my intention to disclose them in keeping with



Rule 67 of the rules of evidence.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. Seselj, I have one more question
[as interpreted] -- Robinson, I have a question for you.  As my associates
have managed to come by a set of these or at least photocopies of the
papers from 1991 which Mr. Seselj refers to in his submission to the other
side, the presentation of these photocopies, is that sufficient grounds
for my request that they be accepted as exhibits, that Mr. Seselj's
submission be accepted as an exhibit?
MR. NICE:  Rather interesting issues, I think, arise on the
validity of these documents as exhibits, and it may be necessary to go
back and remind ourselves of what Mr. Dulovic himself said about these
matters.  So I would respectfully invite the Chamber to put that matter
back.  But may we see the -- may we have access to this material tonight
in copy form in any event?  It may be we have them elsewhere, but it will
be a difficult task to find them and it may in any event not be an
identical collection.  I simply don't know.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Milosevic, we'll have to consider the
application that you're making.  In the meantime, make -- have copies
available to the Prosecution and to the assigned counsel and to the
Chamber.
We'll have to adjourn now.  It's 7.00.  We will resume tomorrow at
9.00 a.m.
--- Whereupon the hearing adjourned at 7.04 p.m.,
to be reconvened on Tuesday, the 6th day
of September, 2005, at 9.00 a.m. 


