Wednesday,  5 September 2012
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
.33 a.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Good morning to everyone.
Madam Registrar, would you please call the case.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good morning, Your Honours.
This is the case IT-09-92-T, The Prosecutor versus Ratko Mladic.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
I've heard of no preliminaries.  The Chamber was informed that
there's a slight change in the sequence of witnesses.
MR. GROOME:  That's correct, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Next witness to be RM003.
Then could the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
MR. IVETIC:  Perhaps if we could make use of time while we're
waiting for the witness.  I, at least, was not informed of a change in
sequence of the witnesses, so perhaps if -- if the other side can advise
us what that change is so we can make sure that the appropriate personnel
are here for those witnesses as Mr. Lukic is not in the courtroom at
present.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, Mr. Lukic was sent an e-mail last
evening, which I believe the Chamber was also sent, so it's a reversal of
the next two witnesses.  There are two witnesses remaining after this
witness for the week.  If I can just have a moment, I'll just refresh my
memory as to the --
JUDGE MOLOTO:  [Microphone not activated]
MR. GROOME:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honour.  Those are the two
witnesses that we will be reversing.
[The witness takes the stand]
JUDGE ORIE:  Good morning, Mr. Hurko.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Good morning.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Hurko, I'd like to remind you that you're still
bound by the solemn declaration you've given yesterday at the beginning
of your testimony.  That is, that you'll speak the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.
Mr. Ivetic will now continue his cross-examination on behalf of
the Mladic Defence.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours.
WITNESS:  SEFIK HURKO [Resumed]
[Witness answered through interpreter]
Cross-examination by Mr. Ivetic: [Continued]
Q.   Good day, sir.
A.   Good day.
Q.   Since we will be dealing with your signed witness statement, sir,
I wanted to see if you have a copy of it in front of you.  If not, I do
have a clean copy in the B/C/S language that I can provide for you.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please provide it to the witness.
Any need it to be shown to the Prosecution or ...
MR. GROOME:  We accept Mr. Ivetic's representation that it's a
clean copy, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Sir, if we could start off at paragraph 1 of your statement.  You
mention that on the 2nd of April, 1992, when you took the bus home to
that Serb soldiers stopped you at Stjenice.  They
searched and checked the identities of people.
A.   Yes.
Q.   Okay.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Excuse me.  If it would be possible to also put
it up in -- up on the screen in e-court so that everybody else can
follow.
MR. IVETIC:  Absolutely.  That's P164.
Q.   And, sir, am I correct that these Serb soldiers searched and
checked the identities of people but otherwise that you had no problems
with them?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And am I also correct that these soldiers checked the
identities -- I apologise.  I'm told that there was no translation for
Mr. Mladic, so I'm going to have to repeat that question, sir, and please
bear with me.
Am I correct that these Serb soldiers searched and checked the
identities of people but otherwise that you had no problems with them?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Am I correct that these soldiers checked the identification
papers of all the people on the bus?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And do you know, were the people on the bus, did they include
persons of all ethnicities or nationalities?
A.   I don't know.  I think it was different, but -- I don't know.
Everybody showed their own documents.
Q.   And then the soldiers just let you go; is that correct?
A.   Yes, they did let us go.
Q.   And for a point of clarification, were these JNA soldiers?
A.   Camouflage military uniforms.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Now I'd like to go back to a document that you
mention in your statement, P166.  That is an item that you discuss in
paragraph 4 of your witness statement.  And it has been introduced into
evidence.
In your statement, you state that you knew of no enemy
strongholds in this area, that is to say May 22nd, 1992.  Isn't it true,
sir --
JUDGE ORIE:  Could we also have P166 on the screens so we're able
to follow.
MR. IVETIC:  I apologise.  It's a one-page document in both the
English and the B/C/S, so everything is going to be on the first page.
.  Would you
agree with me that at that time in the area of Rogatica municipality and,
in fact, in some of these settlements that are listed in this document,
these villages had armed guards or watches in place --
A.   Yes.
Q.   Could you wait for me to finish the question, sir.
Would you agree with me that these villages had armed guards or
watches in place similar to the one that you were part of?
A.   I don't know about these guards.  When I came to the village of
Madjar, we'd gathered around the houses.  That's where we stood guard
duty.  That's what we called it at any rate.  I had a pistol.  Somebody
had a hunting gun.  Nothing.  Those were these village guards.  And now
you're talking as if these were some special guards.  It was nothing
special.
Q.   Thank you.  Thank you for the answer, sir.
Now if we look at this document briefly, the middle of the page
in both languages --
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, there may be some confusion.  It's not
entirely clear whether the answer to your last question relates to the
other villages or to the witness's own village.
Witness, could you tell us were you told that -- that you stood
guard duty in your own village, do you know whether the same was done in
the other villages of the municipality?  Do you know or do you not know?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, in these nearby villages,
yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  You mean you know that they stood guard in a similar
way in those nearby villages.  Is that ...
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours, and thank you for your
assistance.
Q.   Sir, if I can direct you to this -- to the middle of this
document in both languages, there's talk about the body of a Serb soldier
that had been in possession of the enemy forces being recovered.  Do you
see that, sir?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And I would also focus your attention to the end of that
paragraph where it says:
"In the rear, enemy forces killed two old men."
Do you see that, sir?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Would you agree with me, sir, that this text would seem to
suggest that someone was armed and was fighting against the Serb forces
in Rogatica at the time?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honours, I'm sorry --
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, please.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  May I explain this.
JUDGE ORIE:  One second, please.
Ms. Hochhauser.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I'm going to object to that question.  I think
the document speaks for itself in terms of what it suggests and the
witness isn't being asked for his own knowledge on the matter.
MR. IVETIC:  If I may respond, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  You may respond, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  This document was presented by the Office of the
Prosecution through this witness.  This document was admitted into
evidence by the Office of the Prosecution with respect to this witness.
Counsel asked this witness about the comment that there were about --
there being no enemy forces in the village and that these villages were
attacked.  Therefore, it is quite relevant to address this witness, the
credibility of his testimony on that record, and again this is a matter
that was opened up in direct examination by counsel.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, I think Ms. Hochhauser did not object on
the basis of relevance.  She was objecting on the basis of that we
shouldn't ask a witness to interpret a document, what it suggests, does
not, because that is to be derived from the text itself.
At the same time, I noticed that apparently the witness was
starting an answer in which he explains what his observations were.  So
therefore, if you would have phrased your question in a different way.
And that's, of course, what the Prosecution did.  They elicited from the
witness factual comment on what is described here.  If he says there were
no enemy strongholds, that is his own observation and is not interpreting
the text.
Therefore, please rephrase your question in such a way that the
issue is dealt with but not by asking the witness to tell what the text
suggests, because that is what the Chamber can identify itself as well.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours.
Q.   Sir, having viewed this text, would you care to -- and having
refreshed your recollection with this text, would you care to revise your
prior answer that there were no enemy strongholds in this area?
A.   There were no enemy strongholds in that area.  But may I explain
this document that you've come up?
Q.   Unfortunately, sir, the Judges and the Prosecution do not want
you to explain the document.  I will ask the questions.
JUDGE ORIE:  Don't explain the document, but tell us what you
knew about matters described in this document.
Please do.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] The village of Zlatni Do, where
this soldier got killed, as they were saying -- I don't know that he got
killed.  But anyway, if he got killed, this is a place on the outskirts
of Rogatica.  All the refugees fleeing from Rogatica before the war and
during the war had to go through this Zlatni Do.  That is where they came
across land-mines.  Some got killed, some got injured, lost their legs,
Muslims, women, children.  Now, whether this soldier was supposed to be
there, whether he was on patrol duty, I don't know.  But I don't know why
he would be there in the first place and what he was doing there.  I
don't know.  Possibly somebody killed him too, I don't know.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, so you have no knowledge of the event, but you
told us that mines were there --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I don't know.
JUDGE ORIE:  -- which caused several people to be injured
including children --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  -- and women.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Let's avoid a battle about what seems to be
semantic, what is a military stronghold and what is the presence of armed
persons.  That, of course, not exactly the same, and therefore to invite
the witness to revise his answer on the basis of what seems to be at
least some -- some victims and some shooting and to have armed military
strongholds.  That's, of course, to some extent a semantic issue.
MR. IVETIC:  It is, Your Honour.  And I hope that within a few
moments we'll have a much clearer picture as I get into matters that the
Office of the Prosecutor excluded from the statement.
JUDGE ORIE:  We're looking forward to it.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, is it your testimony that you have no knowledge of any
existing armed Bosnian Muslim forces operating in Rogatica municipality
in the Muslim villages in May of 1992?
JUDGE MOLOTO:  I'm sorry -- I'm sorry, Mr. Ivetic.  That's not
what the witness said.  The witness said there are no enemy strongholds
in this area.
MR. IVETIC:  And that's why I'm asking this question,
Your Honour.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  But you're asking him about -- that's not your
question.  Your question is does -- is it your testimony that you have no
knowledge of any existing armed Bosnian Muslim forces.  That's something
different from strong enemy holds.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, I think that if you have phrased the
question like:  Do you have any knowledge of, and leaving out whether
that's the testimony of the witness, then we also avoid any discussion or
whether it is the testimony to be given by the witness or the testimony
already given by the witness --
MR. IVETIC:  Fair enough.
JUDGE ORIE:  -- would avoid that problem.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Fair enough, Your Honour.  Thank you.
Q.   Sir, do you have any knowledge of existing armed Bosnian Muslim
forces operating in Rogatica municipality in the Muslim villages in
May of 1992?
A.   In May 1992, I've already said there were armed Muslims without
uniforms.  The police that fled from Rogatica had automatic weapons.  I
also saw hunting weapons, I saw some M48 rifles in the hands of
civilians.  And as for strongholds, I saw trenches.  I did not see that.
Q.   Fair enough, sir.
JUDGE ORIE:  I'm a bit confused by the last two lines:
"And as for strongholds," you say, "I saw trenches."
And then you said:
"I did not see that."
Is that -- did you see the trenches or did you not see them?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I did not see trenches.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, I don't think you understood the Judge's question.  Isn't it
true that you dug trenches in the villages above Radici in May of 1992?
and when I came to
.  I was there around the 20th of July.  That's when
it was.  I got this written on an ordinary piece of paper with a pencil
to report to Novakovici.  When I arrived there I saw about 400
milled-aged men.  There was a commander there.  They called him
Commander Husein Hadzibulic and Ljubomir Muhamed was his deputy.  They
said that those who had weapons should go to one side and those who did
not have weapons should go to the other side.  I went to this other side
because I did not have a weapon so half of the people there were armed.
When I say "armed," I mean people who had hunting rifles;
automatic rifles, that's what the police had who had fled.  This
Hadzibulic talked to them and said that Chetniks were attacking us, that
we left our homes.  We have no homes.  We have 10 kilometres more to the
.  As for the rest, those who do
not have weapons, they would be in the work platoon.  I left -- I went
away from there.  I went to my children and nobody said anything.  We
were there in the woods, about ten or 12 of us, and we went to dig some
trench, just like that.  Just so as not to be totally idle.  It was just
like that.
And also one day we made a road.  We got together with shovels,
whatever, and that's what we did.  Nobody called me up and said you're in
a work platoon and now you have to report every day so on and so forth.
So within 20 odd-days I already fell prisoner.  Later on, I heard that it
was called work obligation.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Now, this that you've just told us -- first of
all, for the record, am I correct that at this time when you went to the
village of Radici, you joined the so-called Republic of
Bosnia-Herzegovina Territorial Defence force under Mr. Husein Hadzibulic?
A.   Well, that's it.  Do you understand that?  That's when I was
called to come there.  I mean, you know, I came there for that lineup and
I didn't go anywhere else except for those two days when I did that work.
Q.   Fair enough and was Mr. Hadzibulic's unit operating on the
territory of the Muslim villages in Rogatica community in the period of
May 1992 through August 1992 when you were captured?
A.   Oh, no.  That's the first time I saw Husein Hadzibulic.  I mean,
I don't know what they were doing there.  I went back into the forest
where my children were.  Do you understand that?
Q.   I do, sir, and I will get to all of that, trust me.  This
portion, all this portion is not in your statement.  Did -- did you omit
this from your statement?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Objection.
JUDGE ORIE:  Based on?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I don't understand what he means by did he omit
this from the written statement.  The written statement was prepared as
an amalgamation of his prior statements which contain the information and
have been disclosed to counsel and --
JUDGE ORIE:  You're more --
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Sorry.
JUDGE ORIE:  Ms. Hochhauser, now are you answering the question
more or less and that's not what you're supposed to do.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I'm sorry.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, could you rephrase your question in such
a way that we know how this statement was taken, who took initiative to
do what.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, we are now talking about P164.  That is the statement of
which you have a hard copy in front of you, just so that there's no
confusion.
In the process of preparing that statement, did you tell the
personnel from the Office of the Prosecutor this -- this information
about Mr. Husein Hadzibulic, about the 400 members of this Territorial
armed with the armaments that you
mentioned.  Did you provide that information to the Office of the
Prosecutor?
A.   I read this statement, and -- I mean ...
Q.   Yesterday we went through a rather significant amount of
corrections that you made to this statement --
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, this is not about corrections.  It is
about selection of topics in a statement, and that's a different matter
from a correction.
May I inquire with the parties first.  Mr. Ivetic, your knowledge
of what apparently is not in the statement, is that based on any previous
statement or any previous testimony of the witness which was disclosed to
the Defence?
MR. IVETIC:  Absolutely, Your Honour, yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Okay.  Then therefore there's no way of not
disclosing matters, but, rather, a matter of selecting what the
Prosecution considers to be the most relevant; whereas, the Defence is
aware of other periods, other places, about which the witness testified.
If you consider that to be relevant, then you may elicit evidence
on that rather than to start exploring on who left it out on purpose
because that's clearly the suggestion you are making.  Please elicit from
the witness whatever evidence you consider to be relevant.  And if it
would not have been in one of the previous statements, then that might
have been different.  But apparently the Prosecution has been transparent
by providing you with previous statements, which includes those portions
which it now apparently considers to be less relevant as evidence in the
present case.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Sir, can you tell me what day and what month it was that you
first went to Radici and were -- first joined the Territorial Defence of
?
A.   At the beginning of June, the 8th of June, when the attack on
Madjari commenced.  We couldn't go into our house, so I went to Radici
with my children.  It was about the 8th of June that I left the village
of Madjar.  And the lining up I mentioned took place on, roughly
speaking, the 20th of July.  I spoke about that just a while ago.
Q.   You have mentioned a lineup.  I would like to show you a document
that's been marked 65 ter number 1D111.
MR. IVETIC:  And this will be the first page in e-court for both
the B/C/S and the English.
, sir, and it's a telex
sent from the Staff of the Territorial Defence of the Republic of
Bosnia-Herzegovina by Mr. Hasan Efendic.  It describes calls for
co-ordinated action with the Ministry of Interior to blockade roads and
the prevention of movements by the JNA, as well as co-ordinating and
planning military action across the entire territory of
Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Sir, did the lineup where Commander Husein Hadzibulic lined you
and other members -- other individuals up, did it include instruction on
any of these matters contained in this order from Mr. Hasan Efendic?
A.   No, I don't know anything about this document.  I wasn't there.
, I was part of that
unit.  I joined the unit.  And for 20 days, I was free.  As of that day
later, I was taken captive.  I was arrested.
Q.   Okay.  Now, am I correct that in Rogatica the MUP or the police
forces split into two; that is, that there was a Serb element and a
Muslim element that co-existed at the same time in --
A.   I don't know anything about that.  I left Rogatica on the 6th of
.
MR. IVETIC:  I'd like to call up -- this document I do not intend
to tender, Your Honours, as the witness has said he had no knowledge of
it so we can move along.  I'd like to call up 65 ter number 1D176.
Q.   And, sir, while we wait for this document, I think you will see
, and it's from the MUP of
, and we can see from the original that
Mr. Alija Delimustafic signed it.  And it talks about the same situation
as in the prior document but this time on the side of the so-called
Bosnian Muslim MUP.
I want to ask you:  You mentioned police officers being present
at the lineup.  Am I to understand you correctly that we are talking
about Bosnian Muslim MUP members that were present in the lineup of 400
persons by Commander Hadzibulic?
A.   Yes, there were some policemen from the Rogatica MUP.
Q.   And these policemen were armed with automatic infantry weapons;
isn't that correct?
A.   Yes.  I did see automatic infantry weapons.  I only saw such
weapons on them.
Q.   Thank you.  Now I'd like to ask you about Ramiz Alajbegovic.  Am
I correct that this person was the former deputy chief of the police
station in Rogatica and after the split became chief of the Bosnian
Muslim component of the police in Rogatica?
A.   Before the war, I think that Ramiz was the commander of the
police, not the chief, or perhaps the deputy.  But later he became the
commander of the police.
Q.   And would you agree with me that this police, commanded by
Mr. Alajbegovic, was in existence and was operating armed in the Muslim
villages of Rogatica municipality during the time-period of May through
August 1992?
A.   Yes, they were in those Muslim villages in the municipality of
Rogatica.  But they weren't all in the area where I was present.  It was
in the other area in the direction of Sokolac.  So they weren't all in
the area where I was present.  Nothing was known at the time and everyone
went where they could.
Q.   I'd like to ask you about something that I believe you do know
about.  Am I correct that your father assisted Mr. Alajbegovic to recruit
villages in the Rogatica municipality to join the so-called Territorial
and planned to engage in combat with the
VRS?
A.   No.  No, this is how it was.  My father on several occasions went
.  He went there to fetch food and so
on.  On one occasion when he was passing by he met Ramiz Alajbegovic, and
Ramiz Alajbegovic asked him whether he could meet up with the Lelek
family who lived by our village.  He said, I'll see.  If you can do so,
try and meet them.  And when he was passing by, he saw one of the Lelek
family members.  And there was an agreement that Ramiz Alajbegovic and my
father and several members of the Lelek family should meet.  And then a
day or two later, as agreed, they had a meeting.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could I urge both counsel and the witness to slow
down when they speak.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours.
Q.   And am I correct that the Lelek village turned down the request
of Ramiz Alajbegovic to join the so-called Territorial Defence of the
?
A.   Yes.  When they met Ramiz Alajbegovic asked them whether they
would be willing to join the TO to defend an integral Bosnia-Herzegovina.
They said that this was a war between the Muslims and the Serbs but
everyone was going over to their own side and they didn't accept that
offer.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  I want to clear up something.  And, again, this
will be the last -- well, strike that.  Let me see, I'll try to move on.
You've answered some of the questions I'd already thought of asking you
now.
If I can ask you, sir:  You testified in the Karadzic
proceedings; is that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   I want to ask you about one aspect of that testimony which took
.  It's at transcript page 18223,
lines 14 to line 25.  And, sir, in so far as there are no transcripts in
the -- in the language that you understand, I'm going to have to ask you
to please listen carefully to what I read to you from that, and then I'll
ask you about one particular aspect of that testimony.  If I may then
begin, sir, if you're ready?
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, you are aware that when reading usually
the speed of speech goes up, so please keep that in mind.
MR. IVETIC:  I will, Your Honour.
Q.   All right.  Sir, now I'm beginning the quotation:
where my
father lived.  On that day, around 1300 hours, fire was opened on all
; that is to say,
literally all of them.  And that is when that happened for the first
time.
"Q.  How do you know that fire was opened on all the Muslim
?
is up on a hill, and you can see all
of Rogatica and the other villages like Kovalj, Vragolovi, Kopljevici,
Orahovo, Sljedovici, Tubrici.  All of these villages could be seen, and
you could see the shells falling on all of these villages.  You could see
all of that from this village of mine where I was, Madjar, and all these
shells were falling in Madjar," end quote, sir.
And the question I have for you is:  In this statement in this
case, you very clearly state that it was small arms fire that occurred on
the 22nd of May, and that is at paragraph 3 of the statement.  Would you
therefore have to correct the testimony that you gave in the Karadzic
case regarding shells falling on Madjar?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I would just ask, if I may, that the witness's
statement at paragraph 3 be on the screen, made available to him, since
that's where the portion is that counsel is referring him to.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
MR. IVETIC:  That's right.
JUDGE ORIE:  I think he was provided with a hard copy.
MR. IVETIC:  I believe he still has a hard copy.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could you have a look at paragraph 3, Witness.
Especially the first few lines.
Could you comment on what Mr. Ivetic just read as your testimony
in the other case and what you stated in paragraph 3 as to the weaponry
?  Small arms fire, or shelling.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] They were from Serbian places,
where Serbs lived.  And they fired from those places on Muslim villages.
All the surrounding Muslim villages that I have enumerated.  And they
fired from small weapons and from -- they fired shells on all these
villages that I have enumerated.
The Muslims didn't open fire here.  And it wasn't until the 10th
of August, 1992 -- or prior to that date I didn't see a single mortar or
artillery in possession of the Muslims.  The largest weapons that I saw
were automatic rifles.
JUDGE ORIE:  Let me stop you there.
The one issue raised at this moment is that the fire that was
opened on your village, in your statement it reads that it was small-arms
fire - that should be fire from the opposite armed forces; whereas, in
your testimony in the Karadzic case, you said it was shelling.
Could you explain the difference between your testimony in
Karadzic and what we find in your statement at this moment?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] There were these small weapons and
then there were shells that were fired, and then there were these
infantry weapons, as I have said.  But shells fell on the villages.  I
don't know how I put it previously, but shells did fall on various
places, that's quite certain.
JUDGE ORIE:  So your statement is, in that respect, incomplete?
Where it only refers to heavy small-arms fire.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Perhaps I didn't put it clearly.  I
saying now that I do remember that there was shelling.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you.
Q.   Do you believe perhaps that you did mention it and it was a
translation error, the shelling, and that's why it's not in the statement
that the Office of the Prosecutor introduced into evidence?
A.   Well, I don't know what happened, but things were the way I have
just described them.
Q.   I'd like to show you a document that we've marked -- that is
marked 65 ter number 08359.
MR. IVETIC:  This is a document on the Prosecution's list.  And
for now, if we can have the top of the first page in both languages.
Q.   First of all, sir, looking at the top of this document, could you
verify if, in fact, you are the citizen listed there, Sefik Hurko, son of
, in Rogatica, who is giving
this statement?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And do you recall giving a statement in November of 1994 at the
premises of the security --
A.   [No interpretation]
Q.   Sorry, I would ask you to wait for my question to be asked in its
entirety and then to please answer, otherwise we'll just have more
confusion and it will take more time to get through this.
Do you recall giving a statement in November 1994 at the premises
?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And just so that we can be sure, at the time that you gave this
statement, would it be accurate to state that the Security Service Centre
was subordinated under the government of
Mr. Alija Izetbegovic?
A.   Well, believe me, I don't know who they were subordinated to.  I
don't know anything about politics.  I believe that that was the case,
but I don't know who was subordinated to whom.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, if we could turn to the middle of the first
paragraph in the English and it's also the middle of the first
paragraph in the B/C/S, and I will read the English, and, sir, hopefully
you can locate this on the B/C/S, although it is a rather poor copy.
The part I'm interested in starts:
"As soon as we arrived in the village, we organised night watches
together with the other inhabitants.  We were poorly armed, and I had a
,
when heavy small-arms fire was opened on our village from the surrounding
hills."
Sir, would you agree with me that there is a distinct difference
between heavy small-arms fire and shelling that you have described today?
A.   Well, yes, I would agree that there is a distinction to be made.
But I didn't express myself very well.  I didn't know much about the
infantry or about the artillery and so on and so forth at the time.
Q.   Sir, this statement was made two years - and we're talking now
about the statement on the screen from 1994 - was made two years after
the incident in question.  Would you agree with me that your memory of
events was better in 1994, when you gave this statement, as opposed to
2011 in the Karadzic case or today, when you testified about there being
shelling?
A.   Well, perhaps I was in a worse state then.  I had come out of a
camp and for about 26 months I suffered a lot.  If you read about this in
the statements, you will know.  So I was in a camp for 26 months and I
went out, and I had to go to a psychiatric hospital for treatment there.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, the point, apparently, you want to make
is clear to the Chamber.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.  If I can have just one
second to consult with my client, and then I will have more questions.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please do so.
[Defence counsel confer]
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  Could we keep consultations within limits and
otherwise to be done during breaks.
Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  I will endeavour, Your Honours.
Q.   Sir, this statement from 1994 goes into great detail, describing
what you've already mentioned to us when your father was asked by
Ramiz Alajbegovic to get villages to join the TO.
The question I want to ask you is:  Did you or your father ever
help Mr. Alajbegovic to recruit other villages, apart from the Leleci
village, to join the TO?
A.   No, never.
Q.   Fair enough.  And to --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  May I interrupt you for a moment.
MR. IVETIC:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think to understand the answer, it is necessary
to look at your question as it is recorded.
I understood you to ask if you or -- and I quote:
"... you or your father ever helped Mr. Alajbegovic to recruit
other villages ... to join the TO?"
The word "other" is missing and therefore the answer could be
misunderstood.  Please clarify that.
MR. IVETIC:  I will.  And I thank you, Your Honour, for the
detail to attention that I missed.
Q.   Sir, there -- apparently I either misspoke, but to avoid
confusion I'd like to ask you again:  Did you or your father ever help
Ramiz Alajbegovic to recruit over villages, other than Lelek, to join the
?
A.   As I have said, we never did that.  That was in 1992.
Q.   Thank you.  And now you mentioned earlier, I believe, the 500
in Radici.
Am I correct that approximately half of this number were armed with
automatic rifles, M48s, shorter military rifles; that is to say, military
weapons rather than civilian hunting rifles?
A.   There were various weapons, hunting rifles, the M48 military
rifles.  I had such a rifle.  That's why I'm familiar with it.  There
were also automatic weapons that the police had.  That was in Novakovici,
not in Radici.  Because the lineup I was in was in Novakovici.
Q.   Thank you.  Since Mr. Alajbegovic was the one that asked your
father to ask the villagers of Lelek to join the TO, am I correct in
assuming that Mr. Alajbegovic also had either a role in this TO or his
own armed unit operating in the region?  If you could clarify that.
A.   Well, it is possible that the police that went out was under his
command.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. IVETIC:  Your Honours, I think we're at the one-hour point.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, we are.  Could you give us an indication as to
how much time you would need after the break.
MR. IVETIC:  Your Honour, I believe I used about approximately 10
minutes yesterday, one hour today, and I believe I should be able to
finish within half an hour or 40 minutes in the next session.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Then you stay within the time-limits you
indicated before.
Could the witness already be escorted out of the courtroom.  We'd
like to see you back after the break.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  I see Mr. Lukic has arrived in the courtroom.  The
Prosecution indicated that it would swap the two next witnesses.  I
think, as a matter of fact, that it would have been appropriate to
suggest and seek permission to do that after we've heard from the
Defence.
Mr. Lukic, you are now here.  The next witness the Prosecution
would wish to call is Mr. Atlija.  Any problems with this swap?
MR. LUKIC:  Since we are not going to finish his cross today, I
can start, and probably they will have some time with Mr. Atlija.  So we
are ready to continue.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  That is appreciated.  Your flexibility.
And, Mr. Groome, you would agree with me that it would have been
better not to indicate that you would, rather you are seeking permission
to change the order at the very last moment.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, I wouldn't ordinarily do it, but a very
unusual circumstances arose which I think the Chamber will learn about
when the witness does testify.  I think the Chamber will understand.
JUDGE ORIE:  There may be good reasons why you want to swap.
Nevertheless, the proper procedure is that you seek leave to do it and
that's not the way in which it was announced.
MR. GROOME:  I apologise, Your Honour, but again I would have
been unable to produce the witness because of this very unusual
circumstance.
JUDGE ORIE:  That would then all could have been discussed at the
moment you would have asked permission to do so.  If it would have caused
the Defence any problems, but apparently the flexibility of the Defence
allows to proceed, as you suggested.
MR. GROOME:  And just so the record is complete, Mr. Lukic and
myself had three conversations last night about this witness and about
the problem, so none of this is a surprise to the Defence.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  But the Chamber was unaware --
MR. LUKIC:  I just would like to correct my colleague.  This was
never mentioned to us, that there could be some kind of swap.
JUDGE ORIE:  Okay.  Let's keep it as it is at this very moment.
I wanted to emphasise that a swap at the last moment requires, first of
all - and that apparently has been done - a conversation with the
Defence, although the report on what the content of the conversation was
is not clear, and then to address the Chamber and give all the
information available at that time in order to receive permission to
swap.
We take a break, and we resume at five minutes to 11.00.
.34 a.m.
.57 a.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, you may proceed once the witness is in
the courtroom.
Could he be escorted into the courtroom.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  The transcript not yet states that we resumed.  So
we're still in recess, although apparently speaking.
Madam Transcriber has corrected it, and the Chamber appreciates
that she has done so.
[The witness takes the stand]
JUDGE ORIE:  We'll continue, Mr. Hurko.
Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  For now I'd like to ask you some questions about
this group whether it was one or two under Mr. Alajbegovic and
Mr. Hadzibulic.
First of all, sir, did you ever become aware, in 1992, of an
organised attack that was carried out upon a military installation at
Trovrh wherein --
A.   No.
Q.   Okay.  Did you ever have occasion to become familiar with an
when there was an organised attack by
armed Bosnian Muslims upon a military installation at Veliki Zep?
A.   No.
Q.   Am I correct that both of these locations - that is to say,
Trovrh and Veliki Zep - are part of Rogatica municipality?
A.   I don't know about Trovrh.  But Zepa is in Rogatica -- part of
Zepa is in Rogatica municipality, whereas another part belongs to
Han Pijesak.  But as for Trovrh, I'm not sure whether it is in Rogatica
or Gorazde.  I really don't know.
Q.   In any event, those are all places near to the area --
MR. IVETIC:  One moment.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
[Defence counsel confer]
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you.
Q.   Do you have any knowledge, sir, of an incident that occurred the
, wherein there was an attack on Boran
village when Serb civilians were killed by armed Bosnian Muslim forces?
A.   Sir, you keep putting questions to me about places where I had
never been.  I was in the area between Rogatica, Gorazde, and Visegrad.
That's where I was during the war, in that part of the country.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Now there are sometimes other ways of gaining
knowledge.  If you have no knowledge, just say, No, I have no knowledge.
That sufficiently explains.  Mr. Ivetic may not always be aware of what
you know, what you observed, or what you heard from other persons.
Please proceed.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Very well.
MR. IVETIC:
, and the
killings of Serbs in Drobnjaci and Duljevac.  Did you hear about these?
A.   I know of Drobnjaci and Duljevac.  I've heard about that.
Q.   To clarify, since the transcript indicates that you heard about
"that," are you referring to knowing about the two villages of Drobnjaci
and Duljevac, or are you referring to knowing about the killing of Serbs
in those villages?
A.   No, no.  I know of the villages.  I've heard of villages called
Drobnjaci and Duljevac, but I don't know what happened there.
Q.   Would you agree with me, sir, that from May to August 1992 there
was fighting going on between armed Bosnian Muslims and armed Serb forces
throughout Rogatica municipality?
A.   Well, in the area where I was, there was only shelling of the
villages at the time, and there was shooting from those villages
towards -- from some villages towards Visegrad.  As for the other side, I
don't know about that.  Whether there was any fighting or not, I didn't
hear of that.
Q.   Okay.  Allow me to move on, then, back to a point where you --
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, just for my understanding and perhaps
for my colleagues as well.  This is all about background, is it?
MR. IVETIC:  Correct.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Only background.
MR. IVETIC:  Only background.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Perhaps sometimes I would start with the
foreground and then to the background.  I mean, the statement of the
witness is about detention, beatings during detention, persons being
killed when they were detained, a witness being forced to beat his
father.  That is what is the core of his testimony.
Now, the background, and you might even seek to agree with that,
what we often see now is that witnesses are asked about whether they were
aware that a Serb was killed, and that may even amount to a crime.  I
would not deny that.  But it's all background, if I understand you well,
and that there's no, at least from what we've heard now, on the most
important elements of the testimony of this witness, there's no challenge
to, if I could call it, the foreground, the matters I just mentioned.
MR. IVETIC:  Well, Your Honour, I think that also these matters
are important to challenge the credibility of the witness and to see if
there's any issue of partiality of the witness, and I believe that the
areas I'm going into now will show that, in fact, we cannot rely upon
this witness for everything.
JUDGE ORIE:  There were a few questions about the reliability of
the witness.  That's clear to the Chamber.  But, again, background takes
now approximately 80 per cent of the time in cross-examination rather
than the core of what seems to be the testimony of the witness.
You may proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you.
Q.   Sir, I'm going to ask about some -- the names of some Bosnian
Muslim persons from the Rogatica area, and I'm going to ask you if you
know them.  Jamakovic, Lutvo?
A.   I know him.
Q.   Hasecic, Alem.
A.   I don't.
Q.   Perkusic, Saudin.
A.   Unknown.
Q.   Two individuals:  Bahulovic, Hapa and Bahulovic, Nane.
A.   I heard the names, but I don't know them.
Q.   Sabanic Samir.
A.   I don't know him.
Q.   Zagorica Muaz.
A.   I know him.  Just by sight.
Q.   With respect to those individuals that you indicated you either
knew or had heard of, do you recall if they were members of either the
Hadzibulic TO unit or Mr. Alajbegovic's MUP unit?
A.   Lutvo Jamakovic was a member of the MUP of Mr. Alajbegovic's.
And the other one, probably Hadzibulic.  Hadzibulic's men.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. IVETIC:  I would like to call up number 1D00212, which is a
document -- and it's page, I believe, 4 of the English and page 3 of the
B/C/S.  And I apologise, this is a partial translation so it's not a --
it's a draft translation, it's not a full translation.  I will only deal
with the parts that have been translated.  And I apologise, it's page 3
in the B/C/S for this particular question.
The item at the end the page, sir, in the B/C/S talks about
various incidents, and it talks about these individuals whose names I
have just read to you lighting up or I guess -- I guess razing the park
hotel in Rogatica.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  You told us that it is a document.  That doesn't
come as a surprise to the Chamber.
MR. IVETIC:  I apologise.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then you told us that there is only a partial
translation and not a full translation, and yet you will deal only with a
few pages.  What is it?  That's the relevant information the Chamber
needs.
MR. IVETIC:  This is an intelligence report.  It was disclosed by
the Prosecution.  It was also used in the Karadzic proceedings.  And I
apologise, this is how it was disclosed to us.  I'm not going to be
seeking to introduce the document, I just want to ask the witness if he
can verify information relating to these individuals who he has just
named and whether he was knowledge of any of these incidents contained
herein.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I take it individuals he knows.
MR. IVETIC:  Correct.  That's why I asked --
JUDGE ORIE:  Or he has heard about.
MR. IVETIC:  That's why I asked before I presented the document,
that he identified four individuals that he either knew or had heard
about and what units they were parts of.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  If I could ask if we could see the first page of
the document, just to see in e-court whether -- in the B/C/S, whether it
contains any kind of a stamp or seal.  And if it could be scrolled down
to the bottom.  Okay.  Thank you.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, do you have any information about this incident wherein
these individuals that you named that were part of the both the same TO
unit as yourself and Mr. Alajbegovic's MUP unit and the attack that they
performed on the Park Hotel in Rogatica?
A.   The Park Hotel, I don't know anything about.  Of all of this, I
only know the Vodice village.  There was a large nest there from which
they fired on the Muslims.  The Jamakovic that you mentioned, Lutvo
Jamakovic, that's the person that I know.  He gathered a group of men and
they attacked that village and liberated it, and the machine-gun nest was
no longer there.  I don't know who was killed.  This is all I know.
JUDGE ORIE:  And do you know it by personal observation or did
you hear about that?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I heard about it.  I was nearby and
I heard about it.
JUDGE ORIE:  From whom did you hear about it?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, I can't recall anymore.  But
I heard it from several people, the civilians who were there.  I can't
remember exactly who it was I heard it from.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you very much.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you.  I have finished with this document since
the witness has gone and given us the extent of his knowledge of Vodice.
Q.   Sir, I would like to ask you:  Are you familiar with an organised
attack, or ambush I guess it was, that occurred at Jabucko Sedlo in
Kopaci wherein an armoured Praga, artillery piece, was actually taken
over by armed Bosnian Muslim forces in Rogatica municipality?
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter did not understand the witness.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could you --
THE WITNESS:  [Overlapping speakers]
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   I apologise, I misspoke.  When I said Rogatica, I meant Gorazde.
But I believe, sir, that your answer did not come in -- did not enter the
transcript.  Could I ask you to please repeat your answer?
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  But would now you also please repeat your
question?
MR. IVETIC:  Absolutely.
Q.   Sir, I would ask -- I would like to ask you if you are familiar
with an organised attack or ambush, I guess it was, that occurred at
Jabucko Sedlo wherein an armoured Praga, an artillery piece, and a tank
were taken over by Bosnian Muslim forces?  And I said Rogatica
municipality but you corrected me that that is Gorazde municipality.  Do
you know of this event, sir?
A.   No, I don't.
MR. IVETIC:  One moment, Your Honours.
[Defence counsel confer]
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours.
Q.   Sir, I'd like to now turn to a topic that is related to some
to the State
Court of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the trial of Stojan Perkovic, 15th
October 2009.  First of all, sir, do you recall giving testimony in that
case?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And maybe so that we can -- well, I apologise.  The transcripts
are only in English so I don't think they will be of assistance to the
witness.  But, sir, if you need to be refreshed about these items I'm
going to ask you about, I will put up the transcript and I will read it
to you.  But I think it's a very simple issue.
Do you remember in that case that you identified that you gave
additional statements to the SIPA metro special police and also the
Association of Women Victims of War?  In B/C/S that would be
"Zene Zrtava Rata."
A.   Yes.
Q.   And can you tell us when it was that you have given these
statements and if you have copies in your possession?
A.   I don't have those copies and I can't really remember.  It was
five or six years ago that I made the statement to the Association of
Women Victims of War.  And as for SIPA, that was perhaps -- the statement
that I made was perhaps half a year or a year before Perkovic was
arrested.
MR. IVETIC:  Your Honours, for the record the Defence was not
provided those statements.  We did ask the Office of the Prosecutor and
they did indicate that they do not have them in their possession.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  That's correct, Judge.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Were you approached by these organisations or did they approach
you to make statements?
A.   They approached me to get that statement from me.
Q.   Now I want to focus with you upon the statement given to the
Women Victims of War Association.  Am I correct that is headed by a
Ms. Bakira Hasecic?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Are you or are have you ever been a member of that organisation
headed by Ms. Bakira Hasecic?
A.   Yes.  I am a member.
Q.   Sir, my information is that persons who have given statements to
that organisation and are members receive a monthly stipend of up to 350
euros a month for their statement.  Did you receive or have you ever
received any stipend or money in exchange for giving your statement to
the Women Victims of War Association?
A.   Yes.  And it's not euros but marks.  Yes, I did receive it.
Q.   Thank you for the correction, sir.
Now I'd like --
JUDGE ORIE:  Could I ask one --
Did you receive one stipend or did you receive it on a monthly
basis; and, if so, for how long?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] We received them on a monthly basis
and it has been going on for three years now.  I've been a member of that
organisation for three years, and this organisation includes people who
were sexually abused.  They may be members of the organisation.  Those
who are not victims of sexual abuse may not be members of this
organisation.  So once it was established what had happened to me at the
camp, then I started receiving this stipend.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Now, that means altogether over three years
approximately 12.000, you say deutschemarks, but they do not exist
anymore --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.  But I still receive that.
That is the law.  Everyone who was a victim of sexual abuse would receive
that, and I still receive it to this day.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Is it, therefore, your testimony that all
victims get such a stipend on a monthly basis or only those who have
given statements to the organisation?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No, no, no.  There are quite a few
people who have provided statements and they do not receive anything.
It's only for those people who were sexually abused, who were raped and
whatnot.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.  Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.  Just --
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Groome.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, if I can just clarify.  Perhaps the
Chamber will think it is me that's giving evidence, but the Bosnian
money, despite -- for historical reasons is still referred to as
deutschemarks even though Your Honour is correct.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
MR. IVETIC:  Actually, counsel is not accurate.
JUDGE ORIE:  Well, let's -- let's -- let's leave out this detail.
We have an idea of the approximate amount of money involved and that's
what the witness receives.
MR. IVETIC:  I was going to ask the witness to answer if that
was ...
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  If you think it needs clarification, Mr. Ivetic,
please go ahead.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, when you say marks, are we talking about the convertible
marks which have a fixed rate of exchange with the euro that are
circulated in the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina today, with the
abbreviation KM.
A.   That are in circulation today in Bosnia-Herzegovina, yes, and
they have a fixed rate of exchange with the euro.  And it's about -- it's
the equivalent of around anywhere between 175 and 200 euros.  Yeah, well,
after what we've been through, you know, it's not bad.
JUDGE ORIE:  Two marks to one euro, that's approximately.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  I will.
Q.   Sir, now I'd like to turn to your testimony about the direct
interactions that you claim you had with General Mladic in 1994.
First of all, sir, can you agree with me that you neither
mentioned that in the two statements you gave to the BiH authorities
1994, nor these two statements that you've identified to SIPA and this
association, nor the two statements that you gave to the Office of the
Prosecutor of this Tribunal.  Is that correct?
A.   Well, that was when I was exchanged.  My first statement was
Bosnia
, and I think that's where I gave the statement.
Now, the later statement that I provided in November when I went
to the Security Services Centre, I began giving my statement but then a
shell struck that building and we had to flee to the basement.  So then I
started giving it again, but then we had to flee to the basement three
times.  Now you can imagine what was like for me after I had spent 26
months in the camp.  We were only able to put together some six pages or
so at this time, and I just couldn't think of what it was that I could
tell them.
As for the other statement about Perkovic, to do with the
Perkovic thing, they wanted me to talk about the people who had been
arrested, and that's why I didn't provide the statement.  The same is
true for the Karadzic case.  I didn't provide any statements.
Q.   And you testified in two proceedings in the State Court of
Bosnia-Herzegovina wherein you also never mentioned this encounter with
General Mladic; is that correct?
A.   Well, no, not for those two cases, because it wasn't necessary.
Because it had to do with other crimes committed by those people.
Q.   Let's focus on the encounter itself.  Can you describe for us how
General Mladic was dressed?
A.   He had a military camouflage uniform, as far as I can recall.  I
think he didn't have any cap on his head.  There was a lot -- there were
a lot of troops around him.  They all wore camouflage uniforms.  That's
what the Serbs wore.  He had some insignia, but I didn't really know much
about them.  He was a general or something.
Q.   And just to be clear, when Mr. Mladic asked if those of you
working were loyal or captured, am I correct that Mr. Mladic was told
that you were, in fact, loyal citizens rather than captured prisoners?
And I'm referring to what Mr. Bojic told him.
A.   Mr. Bojic, or, rather, Mladic asked Mr. Bojic who are these men?
And Bojic said, These are prisoners from the Rogatica camp.  And then
Mladic asked, Are they loyal or were they captured?  And Bojic said, They
are loyal.  And then he said, Well, let them come out from the ditch
where we were hiding.  When we got out --
Q.   Let me focus on the aspect of your -- of this testimony.  Isn't
that correct, sir, that there were other people there also performing
tasks from, for instance, Satorovici, this area where they had tents set
up that -- where these people were sleeping with -- were co-habitating
with the Serbian army?
?
Q.   Yes, among other things.
A.   Satorovici village, also Tmorni Do.  These were loyal villages
until 1993.  In November 1993 they were all taken to Rogatica camp and
then we were assigned to provide food to those people.  This was as of
, and onwards, and this is when we had this meeting with
Mladic.  There were people from Satorovici from the camp.  I can't recall
all the names.  I know, for instance, Vatar [phoen] Semso,
Mujo Jasarevic, Trusmo Mufti and so on.  They were there when Mladic was
there.
Q.   How far away were you from General Mladic during this encounter
with him?
A.   When we got out it was more than 4 or 5 metres, when we stood
there as he was saying that to us.
Q.   Did you or any of the other prisoner there correct Bojic or
advise General Mladic of the fact that you were prisoners or captured
combatants rather than loyal citizens?
A.   We didn't say anything.  It was only Bojic who spoke.
[Defence counsel confer]
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Ivetic, there is a great risk of confusion.
Captured was earlier referred to as captured at the front line as
a combatant.  Now, if you're not captured at the front line as a
combatant, apparently you're considered to be loyal, but loyal, in such a
context, does not mean - and I'll ask the witness what it may not mean.
When you had an encounter with Mr. Mladic, were you at that time
free to go wherever you wanted to go, or were you not free to move as you
wished?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] At that moment, we didn't dare go
anywhere where we wanted to go ourselves.  We just went to where they
took us.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Mr. Ivetic, where there seemed to be a kind of
a loyal and being captured at the front line, there may be a category of
persons being loyal, and, at the same time, captured but then in a
different way.  So we should avoid any confusion about that, and there
may be not be the dichotomy which is suggested in the -- in the
conversation that we heard about.
MR. IVETIC:  Well, my question was then did -- so Bojic
misrepresented the situation to General Mladic.
JUDGE ORIE:  Well, I think, as a matter of fact, it's the wording
used.  We have heard from the witness whether he was free to go at that
moment, and certainly it was -- if we under -- if we take that as a
starting point, it certainly, the conversation, did not give the details
and gave a dichotomy which may not be one which existed in reality.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Now, at that time, sir, neither you nor any of the other
individuals there brought to the attention of General Mladic the
conditions under which you were being treated in detention.  Is that
accurate?
A.   No.  We were trembling, we were shaking.  None of us dared speak,
none of us prisoners who were working there.  He only talked to Vinko.
He was the warden of the prison in Rogatica, and he talked to hum.
Q.   And, in fact, sir, do you know the -- the location where this
took place?  Could you describe that for us?  Isn't this, in fact, rather
far away from the detention facility where you were being detained?
A.   I would say maybe 15, 20 kilometres away from the prison that we
were.  But when we were brought in on the 1st of April, that's when the
operation against Gorazde took place, and we took food, ammunition,
everything else towards Trovrh.  The hill of Trovrh.
When we had a break for about two or three days, a group did not
go out to take food there.  Then the military truck came one morning and
said that 10 or 15 of us should go on this truck somewhere else, and we
went elsewhere.  We went to this other place, not the place where we had
taken food before.
Q.   You've already given us all this information during the direct
examination.  My focus was on the place where you had the encounter with
Mr. Mladic.  Am I correct that that is not located near the detention
facility?
JUDGE ORIE:  Has the witness not answered that question, 15 to 20
kilometres?
MR. IVETIC:  Oh, I apologise.  I missed that part.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  May I also observe that you are about at the
time you indicated you would need.
Please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you.  I have approximately six minutes or
seven minutes of questions remaining, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then please proceed.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you.
Q.   Sir, I'd like to move to another topic of your testimony.
At paragraphs 51 through 60 --
JUDGE ORIE:  Could Mr. Mladic lower his voice.  Most likely to be
achieved by taking off his earphones when he consults with members of the
Defence team.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, just one last question about that -- about the encounter
with Mr. Mladic before --
A.   May I just interrupt you for a second.  Very often Mr. Mladic is
showing me something with his finger.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Mladic, if that is the case, and we may verify
that, would you refrain from making any gestures, either approving or
disapproving.  I saw, for example, before the break that when you
apparently happy in the way in which Mr. Ivetic conducted his
cross-examination, it was thumbs up.  You should refrain from that.
I said that yesterday to you.  I repeat it today.  And if it
continues, then please be aware that the Chamber may take measures which
might be similar to the ones we took last week.
Please be aware of that.  This is a clear warning to you.  We'll
review, during the break, or later today, whether you made such gestures.
And you may remain seated when I address you.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   As I was sayings, sir, one final question about the encounter
with Mr. Mladic before I move onto my last topic --
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Mladic can consult with Mr. Lukic during the
break.  So it should stop now at this very moment.
Mr. Lukic.  Mr. Lukic, consultation in the break which will be in
20 minutes from now.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:  Thank you, Your Honours.
Q.   Sir, this encounter with Mr. Mladic:  Am I correct it is near the
Jabucko Sedlo or Tritak [phoen] location?
A.   I don't know what the name of this place is.  It belongs to
Gorazde.
Q.   Thank you.  Now I'd like to move to another topic of your
testimony at paragraphs 51 through 60 of your statement, which is P164.
While we wait for that to come up, sir, can I ask you:  Before
the conflict, did you take much interest in politics?
A.   No.
Q.   Am I correct that during the conflict - that is to say, before
you were captured - you did not have occasion to follow the politics
going on in Rogatica during that time?
A.   I did not.
Q.   And during your detention in the various locations you have
testified to, during that time-period, I suspect you also did not have
occasion to follow politics in Rogatica.  Am I correct?
A.   In which period?
, until the time that you were exchanged,
you did not have occasion to follow politics in Rogatica during that
time, did you?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And, as far as the Crisis Staff in Rogatica is concerned, you
never were present for any of their meetings, were you?
A.   No.
Q.   Therefore, I'm confused, sir, how it is that you are able to give
quite detailed information about the composition of the Crisis Staff of
Rogatica at these paragraphs of your statement.  Am I correct, sir, that
most of this information in paragraphs 51 through 60 of your statement
actually was given to you by others, including either security organs in
or Ms. Bakira Hasecic's organisation or others helping you to
prepare for your testimony before the Tribunal?
A.   No, no one did that.  I heard about that while I was in prison
from Serbs.  These people that you are referring to and that you have in
mind, Rajko Kusic, everybody else.  Tell me their names and I will tell
you.
Q.   Tell us how precisely how you know Jadranko Vukovic was called
Captain on the Crisis Staff?
A.   He was a teacher in Rogatica before the war.  And some dogs were
brought to Rogatica and he trained these dogs, and he was a captain at
the Crisis Staff.  That's what they called him.  He was supposed to train
these dogs.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Now, the question was how do you know that on
the Crisis Staff they used to call him captain?  How do you know that is
what they called him in the Crisis Staff?
[Trial Chamber confers]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] These commanders in prison, they
mentioned that.  And that's what they said, that they were on the Crisis
Staff.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   How is it that you know Radomir Furtula commanded the attacks on
Rogatica, Ustiprace, and Gorazde as is stated in paragraph 56 of your
statement?
I'm told that there is a problem with the translation.  Could you
tell us how it is that you know Radomir Furtula commanded the attacks on
Rogatica, Ustiprace, and Gorazde as is stated in paragraph 56 of your
statement.
A.   Radomir Furtula was born in Rogatica and he was a military man
before the war.  He held the rank of major.  He came several times --
JUDGE ORIE:  I stop you here.  Please carefully listen to the
question.
In your statement you say:
"I know he commanded the attacks on Rogatica, Ustiprace, and
Gorazde."
How do you know this?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I knew him before the war.  He was
born in 1957.  He was a military man.  He was a major.  And he came to
Rogatica --
JUDGE ORIE:  Again, where he was born, how you knew him, that's
not the question.  Why and how do you know that he commanded these
attacks I just mentioned?  Were you present during the attacks, did you
hear it from someone; and, if so, from whom?  That's the question.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] From Vinko Bojic we heard that he
was in command in these places, Rogatica, Gorazde.  We heard about that
from Vinko who was the prison warden.  That's what he said to us when we
came to prison, Vinko.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.
Please proceed, Mr. Ivetic.
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   And looking at paragraph 57 of your statement, what is the basis
of your knowledge that Razdoljac, Djuko, was issuing orders to commanders
of the prisons?
A.   Barracks were right by the prison, and when we were in prison he
came to the prison.  He always asked Vinko for us to go out and to unload
ammunition and other things that came to Rogatica.  As for all of this
information, we heard about all that from Vinko Bojic.  He told us who
was who, and that's what I heard from him.
Q.   And when you say that this individual, Djuko, Razdoljac was
issuing orders to commanders of the prison, would that include the
Rasadnik prison?
A.   Rasadnik was the prison and he came there and he told Vinko to
give him these prisoners to unload things.  He didn't ask.  He just said,
You will give me such and such a number of people to unload ammunition.
And it was mostly ammunition that we unloaded there where he was, at the
barracks.
Q.   How do you reconcile that with your statement at paragraph 44
wherein you state that Rajko Kusic had 100 per cent control over Rasadnik
prison.  Are these the same individuals or different individuals?
A.   I have already described Rajko Kusic, I think, when he came to
the prison.  And to be very accurate, there were four or five inmates who
worked with Rajko Kusic in the same company, that is Huso Krajina,
Vatar Semso, Mujo Jasarevic, Orso [phoen], all of them had worked with
Rajko Kusic and knew him very well.
Further on, when I was arrested, I was brought before Rajko Kusic
and that is how he introduced himself.  He said that he was Rajko Kusic.
Also, when we were supposed to be exchanged, he came and he said that he
would no longer feed us, that he would send us to Alija so that Alija
could feed us, and that's already contained in my statement.
Q.   Two last points, sir.  In your proofing session relating to
Mr. Mladic, you are quoted as saying that you believe Mladic is a butcher
and your opinion is that "everything what happened in the camps was
Mladic's idea."  Sir this accurately reflect your sentiments?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And -- and yet you never saw Mladic at any of the camps or
prisons that you were at, did you?
A.   I did not see him in any one of the prisons.
Q.   Are these your personal sentiments or something that someone else
told you to say at this Tribunal?
A.   No, no, these are my personal feelings.  When he said that we
should all be christened and that we would be transferred to Alija's
state, and there's nothing that I didn't mention in that statement.
MR. IVETIC:  One moment.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please, at low voice.
[Defence counsel confer]
MR. IVETIC:
Q.   Sir, am I correct that apart from the encounter that you have
testified about, you never once encountered Mladic again, and, thus,
never saw him committing any acts -- harming any individual in your
presence?
A.   No.  That time I saw him where I was -- well, I never saw him
again.  Except for that one time that I described.
Q.   Okay.  I want to put it to you - and this is my final question,
sir - or ask you:  Does your personal sentiment towards Mr. Mladic mean
that you are willing to do whatever it takes to get him convicted?
A.   I would do whatever I could to have him convicted as much as
possible.
MR. IVETIC:  No further questions, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.
May I put one additional question in relation to that.
Would you also not tell the truth in order to achieve that
Mr. Mladic would be convicted?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No, no.  Just what I said.  I stand
by that.  And that offended me terribly.  When he said that we either had
to be christened or transferred to Alija's state.  And there was no other
way out for me.  I could only be destroyed.  That's why I'm offended.
And I wouldn't say anything else.  I never saw him again.  That was the
only time that I saw him, and that's what I told you about and that's it.
JUDGE ORIE:  So whatever you would be prepared to do, that would
not include giving false testimony; is that correctly understood?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] False testimony?  No, no.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  Judge Moloto has a question for you.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  What does it mean to be christened or transferred
to Alija's state?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, christened means to have us
converted, to change our religion; that we'd no longer be Muslims, that
we'd be Serbs.  And if we didn't want to do that, then they would
transfer us to that state.  And I didn't say that in my statement.  If he
had a state.  That's what he said.  So if had a state.  So -- I mean, if
he doesn't have a state, and if I don't want to convert to Christianity,
then I'd be destroyed.  And the suffering I experienced in camp.  I
cannot describe that.  You cannot believe that.  Twenty-six months, it's
the command that ordered them to do all of that.  We were stripped naked
in camp and --
JUDGE MOLOTO:  Thank you so much.  You have told us about that.
I just wanted to know what it meant to be taken to Alija's state.  Thank
you so much.
JUDGE ORIE:  Ms. Hochhauser, any need to re-examine the witness?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Yes, Your Honours, I do have a few questions.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Do you think you could finish that in the next
couple of minutes.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Couple meaning about three or four --
JUDGE ORIE:  Five, six minutes.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I may need a little bit more time than that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Approximately how much?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I would say probably closer to ten.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Lukic, unless there is any urgent reason why we
shouldn't do that, I would like Ms. Hochhauser to re-examine the witness
in the next ten minutes.
MR. LUKIC:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Ms. Hochhauser.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Thank you.
Re-examination by Ms. Hochhauser:
Q.   Sir, at page 39 of today's transcript at line 20, Mr. Ivetic
said -- asked -- said to you you testified in two proceedings in state
wherein you never mentioned this
encounter with Mr. Mladic.  Do you recall that question?  My -- my
question to you is:  Did anyone in the state courts or during that
proceeding ever ask you about an interaction with Mr. Mladic?
A.   No, no one asked me.
Q.   Similarly, you first informed the Office of the Prosecutor about
this interaction after testifying in the Karadzic case.  To the best of
your recollection, were you specifically asked by anyone about Mr. Mladic
in -- when doing any of the other -- the previous statements that you
gave to the OTP?
?
Q.   So -- yes, in preparation for the prior statements that you gave
to the OTP, both the amalgamated statement that is in evidence now and
the statement that you gave in 1999, were you ever asked a specific
question about Mr. Mladic?  Were you ever asked whether you had any
interaction with him or had anything to say about him?
A.   When I testified here in the Karadzic case, and when the hearing
was over, then I said to a Prosecutor that I had seen Karadzic -- no, not
him, Mladic.  And I wanted to describe it, and he said that it wasn't
necessary.  So that was last time here.
As for Mladic, I talked about him when I just got out of prison,
and they took me to some military corps.  Now I don't know where that
was.  And I gave an extensive statement there about everything, and I
mentioned Mladic there, I think.
Q.   sir, you've just told us about the circumstance after testifying
in Karadzic when you first raised -- brought to the Prosecutor's
attention the incident with Mr. Mladic.  My question to you is prior --
before that conversation, where -- where you were asked if you had seen
Karadzic and you said, No, I never saw Karadzic, but I did see Mladic,
before that, were you ever asked in preparation for any of the OTP
statements that you gave here to the ICTY, were you asked about
Mr. Mladic -- were you asked a question about Mr. Mladic?
A.   No one asked me.
Q.   Okay.  Now, you've told us -- you were asked a series of
questions about the -- about your statement at paragraphs 51 through 60,
about how you knew about the -- about people that were on the Rogatica
Crisis Staff.
So drawing your attention to that series of questions, if I can
point you --
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  If we could have, please, 164 -- Exhibit 164 up
on the screen.
Q.   And if I could point you to the -- paragraph 55.  I believe it
should be page 11 in the English.
Now, you told us when you were answering that series of questions
in regard to, and please forgive me if I mispronounce the name, but it's
Razdoljac - is it? - aka Djoko, you told us about him, that he had
appeared at Rasadnik and that was some of the basis for your knowledge.
Did you have the opportunity at other times to overhear Serb soldiers
talking about other members of the Crisis Staff and other people who were
involved in the camp?
A.   Well, yes.  All these persons you mentioned here, I heard about
that from several Serb soldiers.  I can't remember now.  And that's why I
said that they were in the top of that command, Razdoljac was there and
he came often to the prison, and he could actually ask for inmates to
come out even without Vinko.  How many were needed to unload the
ammunition.  I've said that.
Q.   And in the 20-plus months that you were at Rasadnik, did you have
other opportunities to see any of these other people that are listed in
those paragraphs 52 through -- through 60, did you have other
opportunities to see them at Rasadnik and also to hear conversations
amongst them?
A.   Yes, I did have the opportunity of seeing some of these people
have I have enumerated, but it was difficult for me to hear the
conversations that they held amongst themselves.
JUDGE ORIE:  Just to clarify, does that mean that the persons you
commented upon being the members of the Crisis Staff, that they were
present in the place where you were detained, that is, in Rasadnik
prison?  Did you see them there?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, I did.
JUDGE ORIE:  All of them or some of them?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I saw all five of them, but they
weren't together on the same day.  Sometimes there would be one of them
who was present.  On other occasions it would be someone else and so on.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  You say five, and I think seven names are
mentioned.  So you did see five out of the seven?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, seven.  I saw all of them
that I said, five.  However ...
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Ms. Hochhauser.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:
Q.   Sir, if I could just ask you to look at those -- those
paragraphs.  So it's beginning -- beginning from 52 to 60.  And just look
at the names, review the names, 52 through 60.  And can you -- can you
tell us, again, whether -- after having reviewed the names, if there were
any of those people that you did not see at the camp?
A.   I saw Rajko Kusic, Rajko Vukovic, I saw Mile Ujic.  We were taken
to a flat of Mile Ujic's and we cleaned it.  He turned up, gave us some
food.  He was an officer and had some sort of insignia on him and they
called him Captain.  I can see one, two, three names here.  Rajko,
Jadranko, And Mile.  Can I have a look at the others?
JUDGE ORIE:  Next page for the witness, please.  I think he has a
hard copy of his statement, doesn't he?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Further, Radomir Furtula.  He would
appear in the prison.  Razdoljac, Djoko, yes.  Carkic, Zoran, they said
he was a security officer, captain for security.  That's what the Serbs
called him.  And Stojan Perkovic, I saw him too.  He was arrested and
sentenced to 12 years in prison.  The sentence was delivered in the court
.  I know about Rajko Kusic for sure, and Radomir Furtula did
appear in the prison.  He conducted all the military operations around
Rogatica and Gorazde.  This was mentioned with Vinko, in a conversation
with Vinko.  I didn't hear this from the Muslims.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:
Q.   Sir, moving onto a different topic.  The -- I'd like to talk
about the stipend that was mentioned from the Women Victims of War
Organisation.  Now, that stipend is from the -- actually from the
and
uses the Women Victims of War Organisation to distribute the
money; is that correct?  Are you aware of that?
A.   I don't know.  I receive that money.  As to where these funds
come from, I have no idea.  It's a non-governmental organisation, and we
receive this sum every month.
Q.   Okay.  I'd like to draw your attention now to the line of
questions that you were asked about -- about your interaction with -- and
again pardon my mispronunciation, with Hadzibulic's unit.  Now --
JUDGE ORIE:  May I also remind you that your ten minutes are
approximately over, so please wind up.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Approximately over.  Okay.
Q.   Sir, you said at page 16, line 14, you were asked about automatic
infantry weapons, and you responded:  "I only saw such weapons on them."
Can you tell us who "them" is?
A.   Well, the 250 men who were to one side, and on the other side
there were men without weapons.  So they were Muslims.  That's where I
was lined up, and I saw those weapons on them.  I didn't know them by
name, but they were Muslims.
Q.   So that was approximately 250 of the 400 people that you
described gathering there; is that correct?
A.   There were between 400 and 500 people.  And that was that one
half of them.  I didn't count them.  I didn't know whether there were 200
or 300 of them, but it was half of all those people whom I could not
count.
Q.   Just two more questions, sir.  Can you tell us those -- when you
were there that day, the people that you saw there, did they appear
otherwise organised?  Did they have uniforms or other provisions that you
saw?
A.   No, they didn't have any kind of uniform.  They were summoned
there on that day in order to organise themselves.  There were no
uniforms.  They were all in civilian clothing.  And there were no
uniforms available of any kind in any case.
Q.   And, sir, do you consider yourself to have been participating in
any kind of organised armed resistance at any point from April of 1992
when you were detained?
A.   No, not at all.  I didn't participate in anything.  We gathered,
one day we dug trenches, and there was this other day when we were doing
road work.  We hadn't been issued any orders, we were bored, and so we
organised ourselves and spent two days working.  And during that 20-day
period I was taken captive, and as for what subsequently happened, I
don't know.
Q.   So it was a sum total of two days that you're -- you're talking
about, interacting with Hadzibulic?
A.   Yes.  I was in contact with Hadzibulic around the 20th of July
and only on that occasion.
Q.   Okay.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honours, that concludes my re-direct.
Thank you for your patience.
JUDGE ORIE:  Have the questions of the Prosecution triggered any
need for further questions?
MR. IVETIC:  No, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.  Then --
MR. IVETIC:  One moment, Your Honour.  I do have to check with
the client.  He is trying to get my attention.  I apologise.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
[Defence counsel confer]
JUDGE ORIE:  Could -- could Mr. Mladic speak at such a level of
speech that others cannot hear him.
MR. IVETIC:  No -- no new questions raised by the re-direct,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Mr. Ivetic.
Mr. Hurko, this concludes your testimony in this Court.  I would
like to thank you very much for coming and for answering all the
questions that were put to you either by the parties or by the Bench.
You're excused.  I wish you a safe return home again.  You may follow the
usher.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you very much, Your Honour.
[The witness withdrew]
JUDGE ORIE:  We take a break.
For the next witness, no protective measures.
MR. GROOME:  That's correct, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then he can be called after we have resumed, and
that will be at 12.30.
.10 p.m.
.32 p.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Is the Prosecution ready to call its next witness?
MR. TRALDI:  Yes, Your Honour.  There are a couple of brief
preliminary matters to address.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Then before we -- yes.  If you would please
address them.  We'll wait for the witness to be brought in, and --
please, Mr. Traldi.
MR. TRALDI:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Your Honours, before the witness is called in, I want to
reiterate from our filing that Mr. Atlija's evidence does overlap in a
limited way with adjudicated facts.  We have reviewed Mr. Atlija's 92 ter
material, and made certain redactions.
We have also redacted certain paragraphs of Mr. Atlija's Croatian
Information Centre statement, attached at Annex A, to his ICTY statement,
now 65 ter 28368, in reliance on his ICTY statement at the Chamber's
direction.  I will suggest those paragraphs be unredacted if the Defence
challenges the credibility of the relevant paragraphs of the ICTY
statement.
Regarding exhibits, I will refrain from tendering 26421 which was
on our list, unless the relevant material in Mr. Atlija's 92 ter evidence
is challenged.  Regarding the other exhibits to be used with this
witness, we have created and uploaded excerpts of two of the exhibits on
our list.
First, rather than showing the entire video bearing 65 ter 22594,
we have created a 20-second clip from the video which has been assigned
65 ter number 22594A.  Second, we have uploaded a version of
65 ter 26499, which includes only the cover page and the list of names
about which the witness will directly testify.  This has been assigned
65 ter 26499A.
Is there any additional information the Chamber wishes me to
provide at this time?
JUDGE ORIE:  Let me just have a look.  I see in the copy I have
before me the 92 ter statement, I see that I have a numbered
paragraph version, referring to adjudicated facts here and there.  As far
as the statement given to the Croatian Information Centre is concerned,
and, of course, we were a bit surprised by it this morning, where are the
redactions found?  Oh, let me have a look at the other version.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honour, if you would give me a minute to just
check the exhibit in e-court.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honour, it was uploaded fairly recently so it
may have been printed out earlier.  If you'd like, it might be useful for
the Court Officer to call that exhibit to the screen.  And that's 28368.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Calling it to the screen now might not be of
great assistance.  I think since we often work both from hard copies and
from the screen, if the Chamber would be provided by the redacted version
of that statement in hard copy, then it's easier for us to follow.
MR. TRALDI:  I apologise, Your Honour, and we'll get on to that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
Any other matter, Mr. Traldi?
MR. TRALDI:  No, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then can the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
And, meanwhile, I'll issue a decision on the -- oh, the witness is there
already.  I'll do it at a later stage.
[The witness entered court]
[Trial Chamber and Legal Officer confer]
JUDGE ORIE:  Good afternoon, Mr. Atlija, I take it --
THE WITNESS: [Overlapping speakers]
JUDGE ORIE:  Before you give evidence, the Rules require that you
make a solemn declaration.  The text is now handed out to you.  May I
invite you to make that solemn declaration.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will
speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
WITNESS:  IVO ATLIJA
[Witness answered through interpreter]
Examination by Mr. Traldi:
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Mr. Atlija.  Please be seated.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Atlija, you'll first be examined by Mr. Traldi.
Mr. Traldi is counsel for the Prosecution.
You may proceed, Mr. Traldi.
MR. TRALDI:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Sir, can I ask you to please state your full name for the record.
A.   My name is Ivo Atlija.
Q.   And good morning, Mr. Atlija.  Can you tell us where you were
born?
,
Prijedor municipality.
Q.   And what is your ethnicity, sir?
A.   I am a Croat by ethnicity.
Q.   Mr. Atlija, do you remember providing a statement to the ICTY on
?
A.   Yes, I do.
MR. TRALDI:  And I'd ask the Court Officer to please display
65 ter 28367 on our screens.
Q.   And, Mr. Atlija, now that the document is on the screen before
you, I'd ask you to view the first page; in particular, the signature in
the bottom right-hand corner of the English version, and indicate whether
you recognise that signature?
A.   Yes, that's my signature.
MR. TRALDI:  And can I ask that we go to page 22.
Q.   And, again, I'll ask you whether you recognise the signature.
MR. TRALDI:  Sorry, page 23, Your Honours.
Q.   And, again, I'll ask you whether you recognise the signature on
that page.
A.   Yes, that's my signature.
Q.   And, Mr. Atlija, in your statement, discussing grave number 1,
including a group of about 20 Muslims in Stara Rijeka, the statement
reflects that you think the grave was exhumed but you are not sure.  Have
you subsequently discovered what happened to the bodies of the people
buried in this grave?
A.   Through the media, I subsequently discovered that no bodies were
found in that grave, but they were subsequently found in a grave called
Jakarina Kosa, as far as I can remember.
Q.   And in this statement discussing grave number 9, your statement
reflects that the map attached at Annex B reflects the wrong location for
grave number 9.  Did you review Annex B to your statement, the map of
grave-sites, in preparation for your testimony?
A.   Yes, I did.  And the grave is at the right location on the map
that I had a look at, and this means that the error has been corrected.
Q.   And on page 17 of your statement where you discuss grave number
13, your statement reflects that you are not sure if Mirsad Svraka's, I
apologise for my mispronunciation, if that person's body has been
exhumed.  Have you since learned if the body has been exhumed?
A.   Later I discovered through the press that the body had been
exhumed.
Q.   And now in annex A to your statement, 65 ter 28368, I just want
to clear up two inconsistencies between the English and B/C/S versions.
MR. TRALDI:  First, if the Court Officer could pull up
paragraph 20 of 65 ter 28368 on the third page each of the English and
the B/C/S.
Q.   Sir, is the right number 200 Muslims or 2.000 Muslims that were
killed in Redak?
A.   The right number is about 200 Muslims.  That's what I said, and
that's what it says in the Croatian version.
MR. TRALDI:  And, second, if the Court Officer could pull up
paragraph 24 on the fourth page of both the B/C/S and the English.
Q.   In the B/C/S of this paragraph, it says that, and again I'll
apologise for my pronunciation, Ivica Mlinar, Luka Mlinar, and Jerko
Ivandic, were killed by pickaxes, shovels, and fence posts.  In the
English it say, Ivica Mlinar and Luka and Jerko Ivandic.  Can you clarify
for us whether Luka's last name was Mlinar or Ivandic?
A.   Luka's last name is Mlinar.  Ivandic is a mistake.  There was
only a Jerko Ivandic.  So the last name was Mlinar.  Ivica and Luka are
Mlinars.
Q.   And, sir, have you had a chance to review your ICTY statement and
its associated annexes in preparation for your testimony?
A.   Yes, I have had such a chance.
Q.   And subject to the corrections we have just discussed, sir, if
the Chamber takes your statement together with the annexes, will it have
a correct picture of your evidence?
A.   Yes, there's nothing I would change.
Q.   And if I were today to ask you questions about the material
addressed therein, would you provide the same information, in substance?
A.   Yes, I would provide the same information for the simple reason
that this information is truth and there is, therefore, no need to change
anything.
MR. TRALDI:  And, Your Honours, the Prosecution tenders
65 ter 28367, pursuant to Rule 92 ter, as a public exhibit.
JUDGE ORIE:  No objections.
Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28367 becomes Exhibit P168,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P168 is admitted into evidence.
Please proceed.
MR. TRALDI:  And, Your Honours I would also, at this time tender
the annexes to the statement as associated exhibits.
JUDGE ORIE:  I hear of no objections.
Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28368 becomes Exhibit P169,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28369 becomes Exhibit P170,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted.
THE REGISTRAR:  And document 28370 becomes Exhibit P171,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honour, I believe there are two more annexes
with 65 ter numbers 18458 and 18459.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 18458 becomes Exhibit P172,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted into evidence.
THE REGISTRAR:  And document 18459 becomes Exhibit P173,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Also admitted into evidence.
MR. TRALDI:  And, Your Honours, we now have those hard copies of
the redacted version of what is now Exhibit P169.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I meanwhile was informed that the only
redaction is found on the second page.  Is that true?
MR. TRALDI:  There are substantial redactions on the second page,
Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Not on the other pages?
MR. TRALDI:  As I recall, no, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  If the usher could assist.
You may proceed.
MR. TRALDI:  Now that the requirements of Rule 92 ter have been
satisfied, I will briefly summarise Mr. Atlija's written evidence for the
record.
Ivo Atlija was born and raised in Prijedor municipality.  In
April 1992, he left Prijedor town after being sent home from his job on
the orders of the SDS and returned to Brisevo, where his parents lived.
From Brisevo, Mr. Atlija saw Serb forces attack Muslim villages
in May of 1992.  Hundreds of women and children came to Brisevo seeking
refuge.  They told him that the Serb army was burning their houses,
killing men, and raping women.  Mr. Atlija heard an ultimatum given to
on behalf of the Prijedor Crisis Staff to
surrender certain people or see the whole village burnt down.  Then he
saw soldiers and tanks enter the village.  During the attack on Kozarac,
he could see smoke rising and destroyed houses.
, Brisevo was shelled.  The next day, the villagers
surrendered all their weapons.  Check-points were set up around the
village and men were taken away to detention camps.
In the early morning of 24 July, Brisevo was attacked about
large-calibre weapons.  There was non-stop shelling.  Regular soldiers
and Chetniks burned down houses and looted them.  All in all, 68 people
were killed.
Mr. Atlija was told that the 6th Krajina Brigade and the
5th Kozara Brigade were involved in the attack.  The majority of the
soldiers left during the course of 25 July.  Mr. Atlija and other young
men saw burned down houses and several buildings which had been damaged,
including the Catholic church, and they helped bury the dead, starting
with Mr. Atlija's own father.
Q.   Mr. Atlija, now that I have summarised your written evidence, I'm
going to ask several questions to clarify or expand upon that evidence.
MR. TRALDI:  And I'd ask that the Court Officer call up 65 ter
13331 at this time.
Q.   Sir, do you recognise the area on this map?
in the map, and you can
see the fish pound to the right in blue.  And then there's a road towards
to -- to the right.  And that would be south-east, or to the
east.  And to the left, there is the read to Bosanski Novi.  On the other
side, to the south, there is the road for Ljubija.  And above, if you
follow this road from Prijedor to Ljubija, you pass through the village
of Hambarine that has already been mentioned, and then you go a little
further down in the direction of -- okay.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  And did you have the chance to review this map
in preparation for your testimony?
A.   Yes, I have seen this map.
Q.   And to the best of your knowledge, does it fairly and accurately
depict the Prijedor municipality?
A.   Yes.  I'm quite convinced that the map is a correct one.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Traldi, is that a matter there's any dispute
about it, or have you agreed with the -- is it challenged by the Defence?
MR. TRALDI:  I'm sorry, which matter exactly, Your Honour?
JUDGE ORIE:  Whether this map accurately reflects the
geographical situation.  I mean --
MR. TRALDI:  We have not spoken to the Defence in that regard,
Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  But it seems that unless there's any reason to
believe that these kind of maps are inaccurate, that you could either
agree with the Defence or leave it to cross-examination if there is any
challenge to that, especially since you asked for additional time - which
was not granted, by the way, yet, and we said we would see how
examination-in-chief develops.  And if you then start asking questions
about whether the map is accurate or not, that, of course, might not be
the best use of your time.
Please proceed.
MR. TRALDI:  Yes, Your Honour.  At this point I would request
that 65 ter 13331 be admitted into evidence as a public exhibit.
JUDGE ORIE:  No objections.
Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 13331 becomes Exhibit P174,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And - let me just have a look - is this map also in
the binder you tendered, Mr. Traldi?  I just need to have a look at it.
Because -- let's have a look.
MR. TRALDI:  On a quick review, Your Honour, I don't believe it
is.
JUDGE ORIE:  Well, there's a similar map.  But, Madam Registrar,
the number would be ...
THE REGISTRAR:  It's already assigned P174.
JUDGE ORIE:  I apologise for that.  P174 is admitted into
evidence.
MR. TRALDI:
Q.   And, Mr. Atlija, after you left Prijedor you went to Brisevo.
What was the atmosphere there like when you arrived?
A.   At that time there was calm in Brisevo and the situation was
relatively normal.
Q.   And did that atmosphere change?
A.   Yes, unfortunately, in time it did change.  The shooting was
approaching.  As time went by, Muslims came from the surrounding villages
and told stories, and as I said the shooting approached both from
Prijedor and from Sanski Most so that we were increasingly encircled.
The situation was changing.  The people were withdrawing, becoming
withdrawn and afraid.  And fear could be sensed.  It was almost palpable.
Because people felt helpless.  They saw what was happening around them,
and they were probably fearful that that would happen to us too, but
nobody wanted to say it out loud.
So the situation was becoming more and more hopeless and more and
more bad for us.  In addition, after a couple of weeks, the power supply
was cut off, so we were unable anymore to watch television.  The food in
the refrigerators and freezers had gone bad.  So people were becoming --
realising that it was turning for the worse.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honours, I would request that the Court Officer
call 65 ter 18438 to our screens.
Q.   Sir, do you recognise the building in this picture?
A.   This is the Brisevo Catholic church right before the war.
MR. TRALDI:  And, Your Honours, I'd request that 65 ter 18438 be
admitted into evidence as a public exhibit.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 18438 becomes Exhibit P175,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
MR. TRALDI:  And I'd ask now that the Court Officer call up and
play the video-clip bearing 65 ter number 22594A.  I apologise, we'll be
playing that.
[Video-clip played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You can see now on the screen the
interior of that same church that we had seen earlier.  This is after the
attack in 1992.
[Video-clip played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Again, the same church but from a
different angle.
MR. TRALDI:
Q.   And, sir, at the end we saw the church tower.  Do you know
anything about what happened to the tower?
A.   The church was destroyed and set on fire inside.  And as for the
tower, I believe it was demolished by, or, rather, destroyed by a
hand-held launcher, a Zolja or some kind of anti-tank weapon.  So the top
of the tower was destroyed by this piece of weaponry, and -- as well as
the bell tower.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honour, I'd request that 65 ter 22594A be
admitted into evidence as a public exhibit.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Video 22594A becomes Exhibit P176, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
MR. TRALDI:
Q.   Mr. Atlija, at paragraph 108 of Exhibit P168, your ICTY
statement, in page 21 of the English and the B/C/S, you mention that all
the Catholic churches and the mosque in Ljubija commune were destroyed.
Can you tell us when that happened?
A.   I'd just like to say that officially Ljubija was not a
municipality at the time.  The church and most of the other religious
buildings were destroyed at that time during the attack.  So the Brisevo
church was destroyed in a direct attack on Brisevo.  And as for the other
religious buildings, they were destroyed within the next couple of weeks.
Not all on one day.
Q.   And, sir, in your written evidence, you discuss victims named
Mato Buzuk, Milan Buzuk, and others with the same last name.  Did you
ever learned what happened to someone named Morge Buzuk?
A.   Well, I would also like to point out that Morge is not a name,
it's actually a nickname.  His last name was Buzuk and he worked at the
same company where I worked and he was killed during the attack on
Brisevo.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honours, I will not go into further detail
about the attack in reliance on adjudicated facts 919 through 924.  I
would, however, ask that the document marked 65 ter 26499A be called to
our screens and that the Court Officer turn to page 3 of the English and
4 of the B/C/S original.
And while that's coming up, Your Honours, this is one of the
documents that I mentioned at the beginning.  It's an excerpt from the
bishopric killed during 1992 which
was provided to OTP directly by the bishopric.
Your Honour, as I -- apparently there is an issue with calling
this exhibit up, I suggest that I move to the next area while it's
called.  Ah, now it's on the screen.
Q.   And, sir, do you recognise this document?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   And what is it?
A.   This is a list of people who were killed in the Brisevo area.
But, for instance, the Matanovic family, they officially belonged to
Stara Rijeka village, which was a border-line area between Brisevo and
Stara Rijeka.  Well, what's important to say is that this is a list of
people who were killed at that time.
Q.   And did you have a chance to review this list during preparation
for your testimony?
A.   Yes.  I reviewed it, and I think that I mentioned a number of
names where I wasn't certain about the fate of those people.  I didn't
know them too well.
Q.   And just to go over some of those brief names that you were not
certain of sir.  Looking at page 4 of the B/C/S, I understand you
believed that the people listed at names 4 and 30 may have died elsewhere
and not in Brisevo.
A.   Yes, that's what I said.
Q.   And on page 5 of the B/C/S, I understand you do not know the
people listed at names 55 and 66; is that correct?
A.   55 Ante Tokmacic [phoen], that's correct.  I don't know the man.
I can't recall him.  As well as the name under 66, Tomislav Buleta.  I'm
not sure and I don't know what happened to that man.  I don't know who
that was.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  The right name was not on the screen when you put
the question to the witness.  You should wait for the appearance of the
correct page.
MR. TRALDI:  I apologise, Your Honour.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Especially if you only refer to numbers.  There
are so many numbers, starting from number 1 again.
MR. TRALDI:
Q.   With regard to the remaining names, sir, you lived in Brisevo
during the attack and participated in many of the burials of people who
died during that attack.  To the best of your knowledge, subject to the
clarifications above, when did the remaining people listed here die?
A.   Could you please clarify?  I'm not sure I understood your
question.  Maybe I was a bit distracted.  The people who were killed
whose names appear on this list, they were all killed on the same day
during the attack on Brisevo.
Now, could you please repeat the second part of your question?
Q.   That -- that answers my question, actually, sir.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honours, I would tender 65 ter 26499A as a
public exhibit.  And, for the record, I would note that it's the portion
beginning at the title "Stara Rijeka" an ending just above the title
"Surkovac" that we are suggesting that the witness can authenticate.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I see that you referred to the names under
Stara Rijeka.  But when it was introduced, it was people being killed in
Brisevo?  Is that -- could we ask the witness whether that's the same, or
is it where they were exhumed?
Could you tell us?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, I can clarify this.
The title of the document says "Stara Rijeka," but I've just
bishopric.  Now, the
village Presevo belonged to the bishopric of Stara Rijeka; however, most
of these people were actually from Presevo and not from Stara Rijeka.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, that clarifies the matter.
Mr. Traldi, you will only rely on the names mentioned under
Stara Rijeka.
MR. TRALDI:  That's right, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Any objections?
If not, Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 26499A becomes Exhibit P177,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P177 is admitted into evidence.
MR. TRALDI:
Q.   Mr. Atlija, in your statements, you mention women who were raped.
Could you explain to the Trial Chamber why you didn't want to give their
names in your statement?
A.   Yes, gladly.  I did not want to give their names because those
women were born, grew up, and lived in a very conservative Catholic
environment, and any publication of their names would be additional
suffering to them and they had suffered enough already.  And, to the best
of my abilities, I will never mention any of those names.  If any of
those women want to talk about it themselves, I don't object to that, but
I will not be the one to disclose their names.
Q.   And did you see any of those women who had been raped
subsequently?
A.   I saw them and I talked with them.
Q.   And what condition were they in at the time?
A.   Terrible condition.  Suffice it to say that we had very much
difficulty preventing some of them from committing suicide.
Q.   And, Mr. Atlija, in your statements, for instance P168,
paragraphs 105 to 107, you mention you were -- repeatedly spoke with
Vojo Kupresanin about crimes that you said were committed by Serb forces?
About how many times did you speak with Kupresanin in total?
A.   I met with Vojo Kupresanin on three occasions, but we talked on
the phone on many more occasions.  I can't tell you exactly how many.
Q.   And in all those conversations, sir, did Kupresanin suggest, ever
suggest, the possibility that anyone would be punished for the crimes you
described to him?
A.   No, he never said a word about any of that.  The only thing he
did say was that he would try to intercede with General Talic so such
things would stop.  And he gave me access to the telephone service to
Ljubija.
Q.   And did Kupresanin ever arrange a meeting for you with any other
Serb leader?
A.   Kupresanin organised a meeting with the then-mayor of the Serbian
Prijedor municipality, Mr. Stakic.
Q.   Can you describe that meeting for us?
A.   There were three of us in the delegation.  The meeting was
relatively short.  There was another man in Mr. Stakic's office together
with Mr. Stakic.  We later learned that his name was Sovanovic.  I don't
know exactly what his position was.  I believe he was his deputy.  They
offered that they move us to intact houses that remained in the Muslim
village of Biscani, but after a short conversation we declined that
offer.
Q.   And did Stakic or any other Serb leader you spoke with ever
suggest the possibility that anyone would be punished for the crimes you
were aware of?
A.   No.  To this day, not one.
Q.   When you spoke with Kupresanin and Stakic and other Serb leaders,
what did you ask of them?
A.   The only thing that I asked of them was to allow us to move out
of that region without any impediments, and I will quote what I said then
to Mr. Kupresanin in the presence of Mr. Rasula, who was the police
.  There was also
Bishop Komarica and some other people present.  I said this to him:
"Sir, you have territory, you've gained territory, so just allow
people to move out from there.  If you absolutely need to have Brisevo
and those couple of hills there, you, the Serbian military, and the
Serbian people, you can have them, but just let us go in peace."
However, he did not do that.
Q.   And in your meetings with Serb leaders and on the basis of those
meetings, did you develop an impression why they were reluctant to let
you leave?
A.   Well, I can illustrate this.  One of their excuses was, Listen,
we have been accused of ethnic cleansing, and if we now let you go that
will be an additional argument to accuse us of the same thing.  And what
I replied to that was, Well, what?  And if you kill us all here, that
wouldn't be ethnic cleansing?  So I assumed they wanted to keep us there
for some negotiations as hostages.  Because Brisevo had no strategic
significance in military terms or political or economic terms.  And those
couple of hills there, they were completely irrelevant.  So it's a real
shame that so many people died for nothing.
Q.   And, Mr. Atlija, in Exhibit P168 you talk about how before the
war, Brisevo was an almost completely Croatian village by ethnicity and
it was destroyed.  Not a single Croatian house left.  Have any of the
Croats who lived there subsequently returned?
A.   No one returned to live there permanently.
Q.   And have any of the homes been rebuilt?
A.   Well, it would be more correct to say that three or four houses
were built.
Q.   And if no one has returned, sir, to live there, when are the
houses used?
A.   The only purpose of those houses is for us to meet there once a
year to commemorate those unfortunate events.  That is when a couple of
hundred of people would gather there and we would use those homes so that
we wouldn't have to stay out in the open, so that we would have a roof
above our heads.
MR. TRALDI:  Your Honours, that concludes my examination.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Mr. Traldi.
We had a few longer sessions this morning, therefore I think we
should take a break now and then resume at 20 minutes to 2.00 for the
remaining 25 minutes.
Mr. Atlija, could you follow the usher.  We take a break of 20
minutes.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  We'll resume in 20 minutes from now.
.18 p.m.
.41 p.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
Meanwhile, I read out a decision.
, the Prosecution tendered the map
book known under number 65 ter 28329.  With the same limitations as with
another map binder admitted already under P3, this map binder is now also
admitted.  I remind the parties of what the Chamber said in relation to
P3, namely that, and I quote:
"The Chamber recognises that the markings in P3 are mainly
illustrations of the Prosecution's case which need to be proven by
evidence.  The Chamber aware of this and will not rely on these markings
in making any findings.  As a result, the map binder will be treated
mainly as a reference."
One second, please.  Please be seated.  This was the end of the
quote.
I add to that that P3 also continues photographs with
descriptions.  Although not technically markings, the Chamber will
similarly not rely on such descriptions without other evidence.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  So what I said is just valid both for the
photographs in P3 and in 65 ter 28329, Madam Registrar, which will
receive what exhibit number?
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28329 becomes Exhibit P178,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is therefore admitted under this number with the
same restrictions, as far as the use is concerned, as the Chamber decided
for P3.
Our apologies, Mr. Atlija, for letting you wait for a second.
Mr. Lukic, are you ready to start of the cross-examination of the
witness?
MR. LUKIC:  Yes, Your Honour, I am.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed.
Mr. Atlija, you will be cross-examined by Mr. Lukic.  Mr. Lukic
is counsel for Mr. Mladic.
Please proceed.
MR. LUKIC:  Thank you.
Cross-examination by Mr. Lukic:
Q.   [Interpretation] Good day, Mr. Atlija.
A.   Good day, Mr. Lukic.
Q.   Can we start?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  I'd like to ask you about certain events that took
.
, three Serbian
; Gojic, Milenko, Djuric,
?
A.   I heard that Milan Curguz was killed.  As for whether it's in the
village of Raljas, I don't know.  But it was the wood called Borik where
there was a certain path.  But as to how he was killed and by whom, I do
not know.  I don't know about these other two men.
Q.   Did you know Gojic, Milenko, who was born in Ljubija?
A.   The name is familiar, but I can't remember the face.  But I did
know Mr. Curguz.
Q.   Thank you.  Did you hear anything about who killed him?
A.   As far as Milan Curguz is concerned, there were several stories
that I heard.  One was that there was a quarrel between Serbian soldiers
and that he was killed by a comrade-in-arms of his, a colleagues of his.
The other story was that he was shot in a dispute with certain Muslims in
.  But as for what the truth is and what is no more
than rumour, unfortunately, I'm not in a position to say.  I don't know.
Q.   Thank you.  I'm just waiting for the interpretation to finish.
Did you hear that on the following day, Zoran Radulovic was killed?  And
.  This was on the
24th of July, 1992.
A.   I knew Zoran Radulovic personally.  I heard that he had been
killed, but as to how he was killed and by whom, I couldn't say.  I also
heard that he was killed somewhere in the vicinity of the Kurevo woods.
Q.   Thank you.  Did you know or hear anything about Asim Muhic who
?
A.   Asim Muhic, no, I don't know him, but I know Aziz Aliskovic whose
name appears in my statement, and you have certainly heard about him.
Q.   Yes, Aziz Aliskovic was a policeman?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And Asim Muhic was a lieutenant.  But, very well, if you haven't
heard of him.  We'll return to the other issue of the people from
Hambarine later on.  Very briefly now, do you have your statement in
front of you?
A.   If you mean my written statement, no, I don't have it before me.
Q.   Very well.  Could we see Prosecution Exhibit ...
MR. LUKIC: [Interpretation] It looks like I haven't noted down
the number.  It's a 65 ter number.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could you assist, Mr. --
THE REGISTRAR:  This would be P168, Your Honours.
MR. LUKIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.  Could we see paragraph 3
on the screen, please.
Q.   Paragraph -- in paragraph 3 you say:
"I would also like to say that there is certain information in
the statement that has to do with the military attack, and this was
information provided to me by my friends."
A.   Correct.
Q.   Later you drew a map that showed the units that, according to
; is that
correct?
A.   That's correct.
Q.   So that is an amalgamation of the information you had, the
information you obtained from conversations with other local inhabitants
from your village; isn't that correct?  Or is this information that you'd
directly obtained -- it's not information that you directly obtained --
or not all of it is the information that you directly obtained; is that
correct?
A.   Yes, you're correct.  I didn't directly obtain all the
information.  Some of the information was obtained from others.
Q.   And according to your statement --
THE INTERPRETER:  Could counsel please repeat his last question.
JUDGE ORIE:  For the record, could you please repeat your last
question, Mr. Lukic.  And, as I indicated already, to slow down.
MR. LUKIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Repeat the question for the sake of the transcript, not because
you didn't answer my question:  According to what you stated, you only
; is that correct?
A.   Yes, that's correct, Mr. Lukic.
Q.   Thank you.  According to your statement, you said that on that
; is that correct?
A.   That is also correct.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. LUKIC: [Interpretation] Could we now have a look at
paragraph 9 in Mr. Atlija's statement.
In this paragraph you say:
which is located in the
local commune of Ljubija.  The other villages that form part of the local
commune were Ljubija, Zune, and Raljasi."
A.   Correct.
Q.   In addition to these villages that were part of Ljubija, were
there other villages with a Croatian majority in the vicinity?
A.   Yes.  There were Gornja Ravska, for example, Stara Rijeka.  But
Stara Rijeka was part of the Sanski Most municipality but it bordered on
Brisevo.  Gornja Ravska was also on the border with Brisevo, and these
villages had a Croatian majority.
Q.   Could we agree that these villages didn't suffer the same fate as
Brisevo; that is to say, the Croats remained in those villages?
A.   No.  Not completely.  The majority moved out as Stara Rijeka.  As
far as Gornja Ravska is concerned, I think that the majority remained in
that village.
Q.   Is it also correct, Mr. Atlija, that many Croats in the
municipality of Prijedor joined the VRS, the Army of Republika Srpska?
A.   When you say "many," a large number, I don't know what have you
in mind.  I know that about 100 or 105 people from the village of
Gornja Ravska joined the army.  It wasn't called the Army of
Republika Srpska at the time.  I don't know what the official name was,
but they did join Serbian units.  That is the truth.
Q.   Thank you.  Could we now briefly move into private session?
JUDGE ORIE:  We move into private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
MR. LUKIC: [Interpretation].
Q.   Mr. Atlija, I would now like to take a look at paragraph 12 of
your statement, where you talk about propaganda.  Let us wait for it to
come up on the screens.  You don't have to read it.  Can we agree that at
this time all three sides engaged in propaganda?
A.   I'm referring to propaganda that we had access to in Prijedor,
that we were exposed to in Prijedor.  I believe what you're saying, that
all three sides, or all sides, were engaged in propaganda, but what I'm
referring to here is the propaganda that we were exposed to in Prijedor
municipality, and the propaganda that indoctrinated the citizens of
Prijedor.  And I'm talking about Prijedor because that is an area that I
know things about.
Q.   Thank you.  Isn't it correct that TV Zagreb could be watched, the
programmes broadcast by TV Zagreb could be seen in Prijedor municipality
because there were repeaters posted there?
A.   That's correct.  It is was possible to follow some programmes on
Zagreb TV.
Q.   Was it possible or did you have reception of the broadcasts from
?
A.   Well, in Brisevo, as far as the time when I was there, it was not
possible anymore to receive broadcasts from Sarajevo TV.  Whether someone
or not, I don't know, but we
couldn't watch those programmes.
Q.   Thank you.  Before TV Sarajevo was switched off at Mrakovica, did
Belgrade
television?
A.   Well, I know that the news at 7.30 or 8.00 p.m., the prime-time
news, were broadcasts from different television centres, but that, too,
stopped, but I couldn't tell you exactly at what time.  I couldn't give
you the date.
Q.   Thank you.  It is sufficient to tell us what you know about.
Thank you.  You say then that the media were openly calling for all Serbs
to take revenge and to pay back the old debts from the Second World War,
newspapers started referring to Muslims and Croats as fundamentalists and
Ustashas?
A.   Yes, that's true.
Q.   Did you notice that that had an effect on the local Serbs?
A.   Well, unfortunately, yes, it did have an impact.
Q.   Did you observe that, too, when armed Serbs came to your village
of Brisevo, when they attacked it?
A.   On that day, on the day of the attack itself, I was busy
elsewhere, but immediately following this attack from conversations with
others and when we had occasion to hear things they were talking about, I
could say yes, it did have an impact on them, too.
Q.   You also say that they kept repeating that Serbs, Orthodox Serbs,
were threatened by fundamentalists and Ustashas who wanted to exterminate
Serbs.  Was it your impression that the Serbs believed this, that they
really believed this?
A.   Well, that's the sorry part.  And to this day I really regret
that they were actually certain that what they were thinking was true.
Q.   Thank you.  Now I would like to refer you to paragraph 14 of your
statement.  In paragraph 14 you say the following:
"The following couple of months I remained in Brisevo because it
was impossible to go to Prijedor without a special permit that was issued
by the Serb authorities in Ljubija."
A.   Yes, that's correct.
Q.   Is it also correct that Serb civilians, too, had to obtain these
permits to be allowed to move in Prijedor municipality?  I'm talking
about civilians.
A.   In the entire area of Prijedor municipality, I couldn't say with
certainty.  But I do know that people from Ljubija, people of Serb
ethnicity from Ljubija, didn't have any difficulty travelling to Prijedor
or moving about in Prijedor, or even travelling in their own vehicle,
which, for us, was unthinkable.
Q.   Did you, at the time, have occasion to move around, together with
some Serb civilians at that time?
A.   No, not together with a Serb civilian.
Q.   In other words, you don't know that they, too - in other words,
the Serb civilians - had to have a permit in order to move around freely
in Prijedor municipality?
A.   Now whether they had any permits or any kind of paper in their
pockets, I really don't know anything about that, and I couldn't tell.
Q.   Thank you.  Who issued these permits, these passes, that allowed
free movement; do you know?
A.   As far as I know, these permits were issued at the Serb so-called
command.  I don't know exactly the official name, but I know that it was
run by the Taranjac brothers.
Q.   Could that have been a Crisis Staff in Ljubija?
A.   It is possible that this body was called a Crisis Staff, but in
everyday speech we just referred to it as the command.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, on page 16082 in the Stanisic/Zupljanin case,
when you testified, you said that these permits were issued by the
Serbian Crisis Staff in Ljubija.  Does this help refresh your memory?
A.   Yes, it is possible that that was called a Crisis Staff, but you
will allow that after all these years, I may forget a detail or two -- I
may have forgotten a detail or two.
Q.   Do you know who introduced the curfew in Prijedor municipality or
in Ljubija?
A.   Who and when the curfew was imposed in the entire Prijedor area,
I don't know because I was probably already in Brisevo, and we were not
very familiar with all the details in Prijedor as were the people who
lived there, who lived in Prijedor.
Q.   Now something of lesser importance, but you did mention it your
statement in paragraph 15, and I know this is not of lesser significance
to you, and my apologies, but you say in paragraph 15 that sometime in
May of 1992, a Serb, by the name of Milan Mutic broke into my apartment
and took up residence there and he still lives there.  Of course, you
gave this statement many years ago, so let me ask you whether in the
meantime you were able to recover your property?
A.   It is correct, what you've said is correct.  However, this man no
longer lives in my apartment.  And about four or five years ago - I'm not
absolutely certain - through various international organisations and the
, we managed to recover this
property and to sell it, not to this man, not to Mutic, and not at the
commercial, the ongoing market prices, but we did manage to sell it.
Q.   Thank you.  Now paragraphs 16 and 17 you say:
"In early May 1992, several hundred Muslim women and children
from those villages took shelter in Brisevo.  They stayed in our village
five or six days.  Some of them later returned to their own village and
others tried to get to Sanski Most."
A.   Yes, that's correct.  Most of them were from Hambarine, and some
left for Stari Majdan, Sanski Most, and others decided after a few days
to return to Mataruska hills, as they referred to them.  These are the
hills where Muslim villages were.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Lukic, I'm looking at the clock.  We have to
adjourn for the day.
I first would like to instruct you, Mr. Atlija, that you should
not speak with anyone or communicate in any other way with whomever about
your testimony, whether that is the testimony you gave today or whether
testimony still to be given tomorrow.  Is that clear to you?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, it is clear.  Thank you, I
understand you.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then we'd like to see you back tomorrow morning at
9.30 in the morning in this same courtroom.  And you now may follow the
usher.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you, sir.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  We adjourn for the day and will resume tomorrow,
in this same courtroom, I.
,
to be reconvened on Thursday, the 6th day of
.30 a.m.
