Thursday,  4 October 2012
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
.33 a.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Good morning to everyone.  Madam Registrar, would
you please call the case.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good morning, Your Honours.  This is case
IT-09-92-T, the Prosecutor versus Ratko Mladic.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
Is the Prosecution ready to call its next witness?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes, Mr. President, we are.  Good morning to
you.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  There was one preliminary matter that we wanted
to raise with the Chamber, or at least bring to the Chamber's attention,
and that relates to the interpretation arrangements for the witness.  I'm
not sure what the Chamber's aware of exactly.
JUDGE ORIE:  Let me then try to explain to you.  What we know is
that if we have two-way translation that we are limited to 3.5 hours
today, and one of the options to be discussed with the witness would be
that since we have been informed that he understand English well, that he
would listen to the English questions and then answer them in his own
language, which would then allow us to go on until quarter past 2.00, but
of course only if the witness feels comfortable with that solution we
would decide to take that path.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  That is correct, Mr. President.  I have spoken
to the witness just this morning, and he is willing to proceed in this
fashion.  I also informed him that, of course, if there's any difficulty
understanding or communicating to let us know and we would try to make
the appropriate accommodation and arrangements.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I'll then briefly introduce the matter with
him again in court.
Then we -- could the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE ORIE:  Good morning.  Could you put your earphones on the
at this moment.  And could I invite you, unless there is
any specific reason, to take your cap off if you wouldn't mind.  Yes.
Mr. Abdel-Razek, if you first sit down for a second, I would like
to discuss a few matters with you prior to -- Mr. Abdel-Razek, we have
been informed that you understand the English language well.
THE WITNESS:  Yes, sir.
JUDGE ORIE:  Now, we've also been informed that you would prefer
to answer questions in your own language, which is Arabic.
THE WITNESS:  Yes, sir.
JUDGE ORIE:  We have an Arabic interpreter who will -- who can
translate what I say, what you say, but if you would listen to the
questions in English, and if you would answer the questions in your own
language, then we could have our normal schedule today.  If, however, you
would want my words to be translated in Arabic also before you answer the
question, then we are limited in time because it requires more from the
interpreters.
You're entirely free to choose, but if you say, "I'm comfortable
in hearing the English and answering in my own language," that would
certainly -- would be more efficient for us.  But if you would not feel
comfortable with that, please tell us so that even the questions are also
translated to you in your own language.
Now, it may be necessary anyhow that at least part of the
questions that are -- the questions that may be put to you by Mr. Lukic
will have to be translated anyhow, but for the first part, that is
Prosecution and to -- to the extent the Bench also puts questions to you,
would that be acceptable?  Would you feel comfortable listening to
questions in English and answering in Arabic.
THE WITNESS:  That would be okay, sir.  I'll go with that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.  That's one.  Second, before you give
evidence, the Rules require that you make a solemn declaration.  Now we
found out only this morning that the Arabic text of the solemn
declaration is not exactly the same as the English text.  The Arabic text
adds a religious element.
Now, if you feel more comfortable with adding that religious
element, no problem, as long as the text you also pronounce is in
accordance with our rules.  In English, you could also make the solemn
declaration in English.  In English it is:  "I solemnly declare that I
will speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth."  If
you say without any further religious element I'm happy or I feel
comfortable in making the oath in that way, I would even suggest to you
that you may take -- make the solemn declaration in English.
THE WITNESS:  Okay so I'll -- [indiscernible].
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Well, if you just repeat what I say.
I solemnly declare.
THE WITNESS:  I solemnly declare.
JUDGE ORIE:  That I will speak the truth.
THE WITNESS:  That I will speak the truth.
JUDGE ORIE:  The whole truth.
THE WITNESS:  The whole truth.
JUDGE ORIE:  And nothing but the truth.
THE WITNESS:  And nothing but the truth.
WITNESS:  HUSEIN ALY ABDEL-RAZEK.
[Witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Abdel-Razek.
Mr. Vanderpuye, are you ready to start your examination?
You'll first be examined by Mr. Vanderpuye.  Mr. Vanderpuye is
counsel for the Prosecution.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I am ready, Mr. President.  And may I proceed?
JUDGE ORIE:  You may proceed.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Good morning to you,
Your Honours.  Good morning to counsel.  Good morning to you
General Mladic.
Examination by Mr. Vanderpuye:
Q.   And good morning to you, General Abdel-Razek.  I know you've been
here before and today, as the President has indicated, the circumstances
are a bit different in terms of the interpretation facilities available.
If there's anything that I ask or anything that is put to you during the
course of your testimony that is unclear, please let us know right away
so that we can address that.
Just so the record is clear, could you please state your full
name.
A.   [In English] Major-General Husein Aly Abdel-Razek.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   Retired.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  If I could call up please 65 ter 28433.
Q.   And while that's coming up let me ask you, sir, do you recall
?
A.   Yes, I remember that, yeah.
Q.   Do you recognise the document that's in e-court now?  If we could
go down to the bottom of the page for one moment.  Thank you.
A.   I remember I give this statement.
Q.   Very well.  Do you recognise your signature at the bottom of this
page, this statement?
A.   Yeah, yeah.  It's mine.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Can we go, please, to page 30 in e-court.
Q.   As you can see here, this document is also dated -- appended to
, and it refers to certain
corrections and additions to the statement that we have just looked at.
Do you recall signing this document as well?
A.   Yeah, I made this correction and I signed it.
Q.   Have you had an opportunity to look at the statement and the
corrections before you testifying -- before testifying here today?
A.   Yes, sir.
Q.   And can you confirm that the statement and the corrections at the
time that you made them were accurate and truthful?
A.   Yes.
Q.   General, does your statement as corrected fairly and accurately
reflect what you would say if you were to be examined on those issues
today?
A.   Absolutely.
Q.   Very well.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I would tender the general
statement 28433 into evidence at this time.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28433 becomes Exhibit P293, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
Mr. Abdel-Razek, I noticed that you answered as well in the
English language in a very good English.  Feel free to use your own
language if you're answering the questions, because a translator is
there, but if you feel comfortable in speaking English, and I noticed
that your English is -- is quite good, then of course do as you feel most
comfortable with.
THE WITNESS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Mr. President, I
would also tender the associated exhibits at this time as well.  Shall I
enumerate them?
JUDGE ORIE:  If the list which is before us is still valid, then
if you'd please follow 09387, 65 ter, Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P294, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P294 is admitted into evidence.  09388.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P295, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.  P09389.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P296, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And admitted into evidence.  09390.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P297, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted into evidence.  11208.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P298, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted into evidence.  The next one is grey
Mr. Vanderpuye, which often means that you do not tender it?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  That's correct, Mr. President.  Not at this
time.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  And then we have still have another video-clip
which you --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  It's my intention to show those to the witness
and seek admission.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  So all the associated exhibits, we'll deal
with admission when you show it to the witness.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  That's correct, Mr. President.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then I think we've dealt with all of them.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  We have, Mr. President.  Thank you.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I have a short summary that I'd like to read
into the record followed by a series of questions for the general.
, General Abdel-Razek was
the UNPROFOR Sector Sarajevo commander.  He met with the civilian and
military leadership of the warring factions, including among others
Radovan Karadzic, General Galic, and General Mladic.
UN military observers regularly reported to General Abdel-Razek
by Bosnian Serb forces.  He received reports
concerning the civilian casualties of these bombardments and those from
sniping attacks.  General Abdel-Razek also observed instances of random
shelling and the targeting of civilian areas.
Together with other senior UN officials, General Abdel-Razek
protested sniping and shelling attacks against civilians, civilian
targets, and humanitarian targets to members of the Bosnian Serb military
and civilian leadership.  UN officials sent written protests to
President Karadzic and General Mladic, as well as General Galic, Plavsic,
Krajisnik, and Koljevic, who routinely denied responsibility for the
protested conduct.  They claimed that Bosnian government forces shelled
their own people in order to draw international intervention or that the
VRS was acting in self-defence.  Tellingly, General Galic told
General Abdel-Razek and others that if the civilians continued to cross
the airport, his side would continue shooting at them.
In General Galic and the Sarajevo-Romanija Corps,
General Abdel-Razek observed a functioning chain of command.  VRS
personnel appeared professional, well trained, and equipped.  In his
experience, General Abdel-Razek found Galic himself to be a soldier who
clearly acted on superior orders to carry out the shooting and shelling.
The Bosnian Serb leadership was frank about its policy of ethnic
cleansing.  Krajisnik stated as much, as did Plavsic, who acknowledged
London
Conference, Karadzic told General Abdel-Razek explicitly that Muslims
were to be removed from Serb territories.  He repeated this in January
1993.  When asked candidly, "What do you want" in terms of a bottom of
line, Karadzic told General Abdel-Razek, in the presence of Krajisnik,
Plavsic, and Generals Mladic and Gvero, that "If we miss the chance, we
will not have it again ... the Muslims will be transferred out of Serb
territory because we can't live together."  General Abdel-Razek noted the
assent of the leaders present, including the accused.
Your Honours, that concludes my summary, and I would like to pose
some additional questions to the witness.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please do so, Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   General, this statement is from 2002, and I was wondering if you
could catch us up as briefly as you can on what you've been doing since
you made this statement, professionally.
A.   [Interpretation] Yes, yes.  I was acting as a military advisor in
when I gave this present statement.  I think that
this happened in 2002.  Following that, I was called to give my statement
until
.
, I was asked to work as an advisor at the
Ministry of Defence, and this is my current occupation.
Q.   Thank you, General.  I just wanted to go over, if we could, very
, and if you could just tell us very
briefly what were your day-to-day activities as the commander of Sector
?
A.   We used to start our activities on daily routine activities.  We
used to start with the sector commander briefings, which used to take up
to half an hour of our time.  And during this briefing, we used to
examine all the main events.  Then I used to give my instructions
according to a particular and well-defined agenda, and this agenda is
usually prepared by the operation section under the command of the
Chief of Staff of the sector, and it comprises generally the main
activities that we are required to undertake on a particular day.
Then we used to go each one of us to his own section to follow up
on the observers' reports, to follow up on telephone calls we used to
receive or to make to the various warring factions, or also requests for
interviews or meetings.  And we also used to send reports to the higher
.
So after gathering all these pieces of information, so up to
I used to then hold a meeting with my assistant; with the Chief
of Staff; and with the chief of operations; and the chief of police; as
well as the SMO, the senior military observer.  And then we used to
follow up on the various reports and information that we received.
[In English] Sorry, I would like to add civil affairs should be added to
this group.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   Am I clear?  [Interpretation] Following that we used to draft the
on a 12-hour basis, and it comprises
all the various activities that took place in the sector.  Then it would
be sent and we received instructions from them regarding some main
activities or matters, or we follow up on what's happening until we draft
the report the following morning.  We used to engage in teamwork, and I
would like to say from the outset that all the reports that we sent were
the fruit of the efforts of all these concerned people.
This is on the practical side.  And also we used to engage in
some urgent matters such as, for instance, a complaint or problems
happening in the hospital.  For instance, they are short of fuel or they
don't have electricity.  That's why we used to quickly respond to these
requests, because the maternity department in the hospital used to need
fuel, electricity, and so on.
Q.   Let me ask you a little bit more specifically about the source of
the information that you relied upon in drafting your reports.  I
understand that you've said it's the fruit of many people's work, but in
terms of the information that you actually relied upon either to draft
the reports or subsequently when you went to your meetings to raise with
the Bosnian Serb officials and others that you met, what was the source
of that information?  From where did it primarily come?
A.   International observers were our main source, in addition to the
information that we used to receive through the liaison officers
belonging to the various warring factions.  They used also to bring us
some information stating that some events took place in such area,
et cetera.  And in such cases we used, for instance, sometimes to send
someone in order to double-check this information, because based on our
experience there were too many allegations.  That's why we used to send
someone from the civil affairs or from the operations section or to also
assign some international observers who were located next to the area in
question.
And I hope that my next point will be very clear.  I know that
there were too many discussions about what I said then -- that sometimes
we used to gather information from the media.  We were surrounded by
media, and media people, journalists, were deployed everywhere, and they
used to come and to give us some information.  However, we used to
compare their statements, the information they gave us, with what we used
to receive from international observers, and this was the basis of our
modus operandi.
Q.   Thank you very much.  Let me you ask, did you rely on information
during your assignment in Sarajevo Sector -- first, did you rely on
information to prepare yourself for that assignment, and did you rely on
information from other sources, UN sources and other things, while you
were there as well to -- to know more about what the conflict was about
and what was occurring in the country?
,
.  However, one year
later, I received a request from the Secretary-General asking me --
sorry, notifying me, and this was based on a letter by Mr. Goulding,
whereby he told me that the Secretary-General would like you to be the
commander of the Sarajevo Sector to -- and to replace General MacKenzie,
, the
Egyptian authorities, and they agreed, and the Secretary-General is keen
to know whether you are also interested in this new appointment.  Of
agreed or
accepted, then -- then I started engaging in contacts with Mr. Goulding
and Mr. Annan in order to give me a briefing about the situation in
in particular.
Q.   General, if I could, and I don't mean to cut you off, but did you
receive any documentation to review or either in preparation for your
?
A.   I received reports, detailed reports, about the situation in
in general, starting with the political conflict until the
period of time that we were going through or living.  Mr. Goulding also
told me that there was a suspension of air activities or flying
activities on that particular date and that they were deploying
tremendous efforts in order to resume aircraft or flying activities.
Q.   I'd like to show you a document, if I could.
A.   [In English] Yeah.
Q.   It's 65 ter 3345, and while that's coming up, you might find it
easier if -- if you like, you could remove your headphones since you
are -- you'd be listening to me in English, and you won't need to hear, I
don't think, the Arabic translation if you're responding to the extent
that you can follow it in the transcript.  It might make things easier
for you in that way, but we can proceed however is most comfortable for
you.
A.   I'm okay with this.
Q.   I thought you might be.  Okay.  Do you recognise this document
that we have here in e-court now?  It's a document dated 28th of August,
1992.  It's the Economic and Social Council.  You can see the heading on
it.  What I'd like to do is show you page number 2 of this document.  It
will be 2 in both languages.  And you can see under item 1(A):
"Observations Concerning the Situation of Human Rights in the Areas
Visited."  Under item (A) it refers to "The policy of ethnic cleansing."
Now that -- first, is that something that you referred to in your
statement?  You'll have to answer in the record.
A.   [Interpretation] Regarding this question and before answering, I
would like to clarify one point.  In the various UN programmes or
agencies throughout the world, we received too many reports about what's
happening in the various UN agencies and missions in the framework of
co-operation, co-ordination, and also the reassignment of some stuff from
one mission to another.  So we have been following up since the beginning
.  And let me be very frank
Yugoslavia
because it was a country that was on very good terms with my country,
.  And when I was appointed to head the Sarajevo Sector, I was very
and to
resume my career over there in my home country, but when I received the
orders, then I had to abide.  And there were too many reports about
ethnic cleansing in the media, as -- as well as in the reports that we
used to receive from the United Nations, that ethnic cleansing was
happening -- taking place in too many areas.  It wasn't a new event.  I
was following up news about ethnic cleansing even before coming to
.
, and he was
a friend of mine, we tackled this matter, and he told me that the reality
is different from what you read in the reports, but many other
ambassadors were -- used to tell him, "Come on.  It's already happening."
So this was a matter that was known to all.  I did not came up with this
expression.  It was happening.  It was taking place before I came to
, and it was well known to everybody.
Q.   Let me show you page 4 of this document, paragraph 7, in both
languages.  I think it's on page 4.
You can see here in paragraph 7 it says -- sorry, "The Special
Rapporteur was able to collect credible testimony concerning the policy
of ethnic cleansing and the methods applied to achieve its aim.
According to the testimony received, the policy has been openly pursued
which
are controlled by ethnic Serbs."
Is this consistent with your observations during the time that
?
A.   I heard about this committee because it was -- that was happening
around the same time when I arrived.  The instructions that I had
[In English]
.  [Interpretation]
So he focused a lot and stressed a lot upon that point.  I told him what
were the major challenges from your point of view as a force commander,
and he indicated and talked about the heavy shelling against civilians --
Q.   General, if I could just stop you for one moment.
Sorry, Mr. President.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Abdel-Razek.
THE WITNESS:  Yes, sir.
JUDGE ORIE:  I noticed that you want to tell us about your
experience, but your answers are not always focused on the questions.  We
are limited in our time, so I would urge you to specifically answer to
the question that Mr. Vanderpuye puts to you.  The last question was
whether what you read in this paragraph 7, whether that is --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Consistent.
JUDGE ORIE:  Whether this was consistent with what you
.
Now -- so what we'd like to know is what you read, whether that's
consistent with what you observed.  We were not asking to give all of
your observations to us, because we might still be here at the end of the
day, because you have experienced a lot, I take it, over there.  So the
question is does -- is this approximately what you observed at the time?
Is it consistent with your observations?  A simple yes or no would do, or
perhaps one or two lines.  But Mr. Vanderpuye, if he wants to know more
he will ask you.
THE WITNESS:  Okay, sir.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
THE WITNESS:  Okay, sir.  I apologise.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   Thank you, General.  I take then it is consistent with your
experience?
A.   Yes.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  If we could go to page 10 in the B/C/S, and it
will be page 8 in the English, paragraph 40.  We have to move over in the
English.  I think I said it was page 8.
Q.   At paragraph 40, you will see here that it says:
"The greatest threat to life at present" -- and remember this is
.
"The greatest threat to life at present comes from the shelling
of civilian population centres and the shooting of civilians in besieged
towns.  In addition, there is a risk that massive numbers of civilians
will die from malnutrition, illness, and exposure unless the present
siege of various areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina under government control is
lifted before the arrival of winter."
In terms of the threat to the civilian population as a result of
shellings and shootings, is this paragraph consistent with your
?
A.   Yes, sir.
Q.   Let me show you another paragraph, and this is at page --
paragraph 48, page 10 English, page 12 B/C/S.  In this paragraph - and
I'll just read out the section, it will come up in a minute - it says:
"The greatest difficulties are undoubtedly experienced in
where UNPROFOR and UNHCR offices and vehicles frequently come
under attack from shelling and snipers."
Is that consistent with your experience?
A.   Yes, sir.
Q.   And finally let me show you paragraph 58, page 11 in the English,
page 14 in the B/C/S.  And it comes under the heading of
"Recommendations" in this report.  It says that:
should
immediately be neutralised by grouping them under the supervision of
UNPROFOR if necessary."
And then it says:
"The strict implementation of agreements adopted and the
principles endorsed by the London Conference in this regard is
indispensable."
First, are you familiar with the implementation of this
recommendation just in a general sense?
A.   [Interpretation] In fact, that was encouraged at the beginning,
, the London Conference had just
finished, and I learned from General Nambiar that there was commitment
from the Serbs to collect all the weapons in one area.  That way it would
be possible for the United Nations to monitor them.  But in reality, that
did not happen.
Q.   All right.  We'll come back to that in a moment.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I'd like to tender this document
into evidence.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 03345 becomes Exhibit P299,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.  Please proceed,
Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   You noted in your statement -- several points in your statement
that you did meet rather regularly with the leadership of the warring
parties.  I'd like to focus you, if I could, on your meetings with the
Bosnian Serb leadership, President Karadzic and General Mladic,
Biljana Plavsic, and so on.  You outlined at paragraph 60 of your
statement, and there's no need to bring it up, a number of issues that
you raised, including the shelling of UN headquarters, UN facilities, the
shelling of civilians and civilian targets.  I'd like to ask you how
often was it that you raised the issue of shelling civilians and civilian
targets, snipings, and so on, in your dealings with the membership of the
Bosnian Serb leadership?  How frequently did that occur?
A.   That happened very frequently.  When I first arrived, the
shelling and the sniping, all this was taking place regularly in -- in
the first two months that followed my arrival.  At the beginning of year
1993, this started to decrease a little bit, because many diplomats and
many UN dignitaries, Mr. Owen, for example, and Mr. Vance, they used to
visit quite frequently, and that was an attempt on our behalf to improve
, because when people knew that there were
foreign dignitaries visiting, the situation usually calmed down.  But the
shelling was quite heavy in the first two, three months following my
arrival until the end of the year, and it was almost on a daily basis.
It happened almost on a daily basis, and we had reports about people
being killed and injured.
Q.   Did you in particular raise these issues most frequently with the
civilian leadership or with the military leadership?
A.   With both of them.
Q.   And in respect of raising the issues with either of the civilian
leadership or the military leadership, was the result that you were able
to observe on the ground any different?
A.   What was said in the meetings was encouraging, and we heard a lot
of promises.  The atmosphere used to be very -- very positive in those
meetings.  However, the problem was always in the field in practice.
There were militias, there were people who were not disciplined, who were
not committed to these orders and instructions, and they carried weapons.
So the situation on the ground was totally different from what we agreed
upon or discussed in meetings.
Q.   You mentioned something here about orders and instructions, and
to what are you referring there?  You said there were people on the
ground who were not disciplined, who were not committed to these orders
and instructions, and I wondered what you meant by that.
A.   As I already mentioned, even the leaders of the warring factions,
they used to talk about the presence of people in civilian clothing
carrying weapons and blocking the movements of UN convoys in certain
areas.  And in one of the meetings with General Galic I raised that
issue, and I think that he told me that he has given instructions to all
the factions -- to all the individuals that are not within the military
order, that do not follow the military order, and told them that they
should put an end to that situation.  But the situation remained as is.
He couldn't even achieve that, because there were many of these
individuals, and they were creating chaos.  And this is what civil wars
are all about everywhere.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could I again intervene for a second.  I think the
question was about whether you observed on the ground any difference, and
that question was related to complaints about shelling and sniping.  What
you're telling us about what happened on the ground seems to be more
focused on your freedom of movement as international observers.  I think
Mr. Vanderpuye was primarily interested to know whether after such
meetings on the ground shelling and sniping were any different from what
they were before the meeting.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] We used to agree, sir, during our
meetings on certain things, positive things.  For example, to ensure the
free work and the free movement of the United Nations and in order to
establish an atmosphere of trust between the United Nations and other
parties.  And whenever we moved to the ground, we used to notice that on
the ground the situation was completely different from what we had agreed
upon, for the reasons that I just mentioned.
JUDGE ORIE:  But apart from what you discussed in establishing a
better relationship, you also raised the issue of sniping and shelling --
THE WITNESS:  Yes, sir.
JUDGE ORIE:  -- during the meetings.  Did that change after you
had complained about it during the meetings?  Was the shelling less?  Was
the sniping less?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  The situation never changed,
and it keeped happening over and over despite the agreements.  And
whenever I went back to see them, I used to hear a lot of allegations
that this side did this or that, and we had to retaliate.  So none of the
sides really committed to the agreement, whether the agreements between
the warring factions or -- or the agreement -- other agreements -- and --
and the forces on the ground also did not commit to them.  And the
shelling continued, the bombing as well.
Q.   All right.  I'd just like to focus on those specific issues if we
could, and we -- you talked about a lot of the interruption or
interference with the freedom of movement of UN forces, but I'd like to
focus specifically on matters of shelling and sniping.  With respect to
those issues, did you raise them specifically with General Galic both
personally and in writing?
A.   On many occasions, whenever we had meetings and -- that issue was
on our agenda for the meeting.
Q.   Did you communicate your protests or objections to the sniping
and shelling beyond General Galic, to President Karadzic and to
General Mladic?
A.   That also was discussed and raised in many meetings that I used
to have with Mr. Karadzic in the presence of General Mladic and
Momcilo Krajisnik and Mrs. Plavsic.  We used to raise this issue -- a
number of these issues with these people, including all the actions that
were affecting civilians, the lives of civilians.
Q.   Thank you, General.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, this is a good time for the
break.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  We'll take the break of approximately 20
minutes, Mr. Abdel-Razek.  By the way, I address you as Mr. Abdel-Razek
not to be impolite but that's my usual way of addressing persons, by Mr.
or Mrs., rather than by rank or title.
THE WITNESS:  Your Honour, this is the second time to stand
before you.  I really -- I remember you very well.
JUDGE ORIE:  Well, that's a different matter.  Could you please
follow the usher.
THE WITNESS:  Okay, thank you.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  We'll take a break and resume at 10 minutes to
11.00.
.30 a.m.
.00 a.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
The Chamber has understood that the witness is, for medical
reasons, unable to be with us any longer than until 12.30, and then we
wonder how we would use the time which then remains today because the
witness will only be able to return tomorrow.
Mr. Groome.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, so that we don't spend any of this
limited time today, I would inform the Chamber that we received notice
from VWS this morning that the next witness, RM081, it's their
recommendation that that witness not begin his testimony today.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.
MR. GROOME:  Perhaps we can talk about that in more detail at the
12.00 break about we can do.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  The Chamber received the same information.
We'll consider it during the next break.
[The witness takes the stand]
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Vanderpuye, you may proceed.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.
Q.   General, I'd like to show you a few documents.  Let me start with
65 ter 10632.  First, do you recognise this document?  I see you
squinting.  Are you having trouble seeing it?
A.   [In English] No, it's okay.
Q.   Do you recognise it?
A.   Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Q.   It refers to the heavy weapons in BiH.  It indicates that it's
, on the heels of
Conference.  If we can go to the next page, it refers to the
disposition of heavy weaponry.  In the second sentence it reads that:
"The weaponry, once grouped, would be put under the continuous
supervision of permanent UN observers."
Does this correspond to your understanding or information
concerning what was to happen with respect to Bosnian Serb heavy weaponry
in your sector?
A.   [Interpretation] To my recollection, this was sent from
Mr. Goulding to General Nambiar, and such similar documents were sent in
a copy to our command.  And Nambiar also mentioned it to me and told me
that the matter seems to be encouraging and that is a kind of agreement.
According to what Mr. Goulding told him earlier, that Mr. Karadzic and
Dr. Koljevic were committed to the gathering of heavy weapons and some
particular places and subject to control and supervision by the United
Nations.
Q.   Thank you, General.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I would like to move to admit
this document.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 10632 becomes Exhibit P300, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P300 is admitted into evidence.
MR. VANDERPUYE:
Q.   I'd like to show you 65 ter 10633, please.  This is a document,
as you can see.  It indicates it's an outgoing code cable, and it's from
, and it concerns
a meeting with Dr. Karadzic and Colonel Siber, and its says report from
.  Are you familiar with it?
A.   [In English] The report that I sent to him about this meeting.
Q.   Yes.  If we could please go to the second page.  I'd like to ask
you just a couple of questions about it.  There you can see your name in
the right-hand side of the box at the top of the page indicating
releasing official; is that right?
A.   Yeah.
Q.   Okay.  And then you can see the discussion, the meeting, under
items 1(a), and so on.  First can you confirm that this is a meeting you
did in fact have -- you did in fact have with Dr. Karadzic?
A.   [Interpretation] Yes.
Q.   And did it concern the heavy weapons that were discussed in the
previous document and the agreement or your understanding of agreement
with respect to their disposition?
A.   Heavy weapons were to be gathered in locations under the
supervision of the United Nations, and this was one of the main topics
that we discussed.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I'd like to move this document
into evidence as well.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 10633 becomes Exhibit P301, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P301 is admitted into evidence.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   General, in your statement as concerns what happened to the
agreement or understanding with respect to the heavy weapons, you
indicate that it never actually came under the control, the supervision,
of the UN in accordance with the understanding that had previously been
reached.  Is that fair to say?
A.   Yes.  Yes.  I confirm it.
Q.   And in your statement you indicate that this was the result of --
or in your estimation, was the result of a decision that had been made
contrary to the prior agreement by the Serb -- Bosnian Serb leadership.
Is that fair to say?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Could you explain a little bit about that?  In your statement at
paragraph 28, you say that General Mladic was behind President Karadzic's
decision with respect to the disposition of heavy weapons.
A.   In fact, what Mr. Karadzic mentioned was very clear during the
London Conference, and also what General Nambiar told me was very clear.
Also, the letter sent by Mr. Goulding to General Nambiar was very clear,
and all of them were holding signs of optimisms.  However, we suddenly
found out that the explanation by Dr. Karadzic was totally different from
what he stated during the London Conference and what he committed to
negotiations.  He openly told me that Muslims
are too numerous, and we don't have any means but these weapons.  And he
told me that we should gather all these weapons in some locations and the
UN should control the weapons in these locations.  And when things
reached this level, I think that underneath it lies a military vision
that came up and was added to his own visions, and his position differed
accordingly.  And when we discussed the military matters, we should
all -- always mention the top level in the chain of command.
Q.   To your understanding in the circumstances that you were in, I
take it that you assessed that that would have been General Mladic.
A.   [In English] Yes.
Q.   In terms of your experience as a general yourself and your
extensive experience in the armed forces, here you've assessed that --
well, let me ask you this way:  What is your assessment of the
interaction between the top levels of the military and the political --
during the time that you were
there?  What is your assessment of their inter-relationship between those
two parts of the government?
A.   [Interpretation] I used to see that there was a co-operation,
consent, and harmony in terms of the relationship between the political
command and the military command.  Also, I was notifying them of all the
points that I would be discussing with them.  And, of course, they had
the chance and the opportunity to co-ordinate their statements and
positions and answers regarding the matters that I would be raising.  I
hereby confirm that the relationship was interactive and also very
harmonious.
Q.   You mentioned a little while ago the chain of command, and in
fact you noted at your statement at paragraph 58 that General Mladic was
a strict disciplinarian and his subordinates feared him and that he had
the loyalty of his troops.  I wonder if you could first explain to us
whether or not this is something that you observed personally while you
?
A.   [No interpretation] ... and I always reiterate that this is my
own personal impression.  And I can say --
Q.   Let me just stop you for one second.  Part of your answer,
unfortunately, wasn't translated into the record, and I wondered if --
I'm sorry, Mr. President.
JUDGE ORIE:  I leave it in your hands.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   I wonder if you could perhaps repeat your answer, and I apologise
for that.
A.   [Interpretation] I would like to say that as soldiers, we can say
that a certain leader is a strong leader and -- if he enjoys the respect
and the loyalty of his staff, and I can say that General Mladic was
belonging to this category of military commanders.  He seemed to me to be
a strong commander, and he is a charismatic leader, and he always used to
be mentioned by his officers as a respectful commander.  And when he was
walking around, he was always surrounded by his officers, and we do not
miss -- or misinterpret the personality of military commanders when it
comes to us as soldiers.
Q.   Were you able to make that assessment in your dealings with
General Galic, for example, or with General Gvero?
A.   Yes.  When discussing these matters with them, I used always to
see these characteristics.
Q.   In your dealings with General Galic, first I'd like to ask you
could you comment on the professionality, or lack thereof, of
General Galic as you encountered him during the time that you were in
?
A.   My assessment of General Galic was the following one:  I think
that he used to be a commander that obeyed orders as he used to receive
them.  And if I was to take him to another area or to another assignment,
he wouldn't be able to interact with me.  He seemed to me as he was a
commander that was strictly obeying the orders he was receiving.  At the
end of the day, he was a professional officer.
Q.   I'd like to show you 65 ter -- 65 ter 9648.  This, as you can
see, is an order from the commander of the Sarajevo-Romanija Corps,
General Galic, and he's directing subordinate units of the corps with
respect to the use of weapons, in effect prohibiting the use of certain
up until
.
A.   [In English] Yes.
Q.   First, can you recall -- and it appears to be that no such heavy
weapons were to be used from this moment forward.  Is that your
understanding of this order as well?
A.   Such a document would have been sent following intensive protests
or complaints, but it wasn't respected.  And according to my
recollection, he told me that he issued this order, but it was up to the
other party or side to observe it.  In all cases, this order was never
respected.
Q.   Thank you, General.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I would like to tender this
exhibit as well.
JUDGE ORIE:  Sorry.  Yes.  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 09648 becomes Exhibit P302, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P302 is admitted into evidence.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  If I could show the
witness, please, 65 ter 10738.
Q.   Do you recognise this document, General?  It indicates note for
Thornberry.  Do you know who Thornberry is?
A.   Yeah.
.  And it says:  "This morning upon
office and reported to
him the following."
A.   Usually this kind of document would be sent by the civil affairs,
and he is the subordinate of Mr. Thornberry.  He used to prepare such
reports and submit them to me in order to discuss the humanitarian
problems, whether from a military perspective or with regards to the lack
of materials.
Q.   Who would that be?
A.   At that time in October, I think it was Mr. Abdel-Razek,
Adnan Abdel-Razek.
Q.   With respect to what's discussed here in paragraph 1, this is two
days before you see the order from General Galic, it says:
people has reached the lowest level
that I have seen since last April.  The lack of water and electricity
together with the continuing shelling of civilian targets have pushed
people to the edge of tolerance and caused a high degree of despair and
aggressiveness."
That consistent with your observations during this period of
time?
A.   Yes.  As I already mentioned, the shelling during the three first
, the shelling was very heavy.  There
were many problems, and the civilians were heavily affected, and really
that was the atmosphere that was prevalent at the time.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.  Mr. President.  I would like to
tender this document as well.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 10738 becomes Exhibit P303, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P303 is admitted into evidence.  Please proceed,
Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I'd like to show the
witness 65 ter 9389, please.  Okay.  I understand it's already P296.
Q.   You may recognise this document as well.  It's indicated here as
an outgoing cable from General Nambiar to Mr. Goulding, and it concerns a
letter that was received from General Mladic.  The date of this document
.  And if we can go to the next page, I'll -- I'll
show you what I'm interested in.  Thank you.
General, with respect to this document, can I ask why is it
specifically sent to General Mladic as opposed to General Galic or anyone
else that you might have been dealing with from Sector Sarajevo?
A.   When there are lots of acts of violence in several sectors,
usually a letter is sent signed by the force commander.  If the acts of
violence were limited to one specific sector, the sector commander, upon
his own initiative or upon the directives of the force commander, can
raise the issue that led to these acts of violence with the relevant
parties.  But let's suppose that the acts of shelling and acts of
violence were -- were widespread.  In various sectors, the letter would
be addressed from the force commander to the higher commander.
Q.   And in relation to the substance that's discussed in this letter
at paragraphs 3 and 4, in paragraph 3 specifically, it says:
"Allow me to convey to you my deep dismay at the indiscriminate
and Bihac yesterday."
This is dated 15 September.  I'll read to you that part, and then
in paragraph 4, the second sentence reads that:
"Regrettably, we are yet to see concrete proof of the spirit of
Agreement."
Now, with respect to the substance of these -- of these two
paragraphs, was that your experience also with respect to what you
observed in the Sarajevo Sector?
A.   [In English] Yes, sir.
Q.   Thank you, General.  I would like to move on to a different area.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  May I ask you something, Mr. Vanderpuye.  In your
list of document it is said Nambiar Satish letter to Mladic, Ratko
, dated 15th of September,
1992.  This is a letter from Mr. Nambiar to Mr. Goulding, not to Mladic,
but I would like to ask the witness if he can say something about the
meaning of what is written on the bottom of this page,
"Lieutenant-General Ratko Mladic."  Have you any idea why his name is
mentioned on the bottom of that page?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is what we call a circulation
of documents.  For example, if Mr. Nambiar sends any message to any high
commander, we receive a copy of that document at the sector, at the
relevant sector.  And if the issue is related to agreements, a copy is
sent to the relevant person at the United Nations, and at the time it was
Mr. Goulding.  Also, a copy is sent to Mr. Vance and Mr. Owen.  This is
how a document is circulated in the UN jobs.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Are you saying that this document was only
circulated among UNPROFOR officers and not addressed to people outside
UNPROFOR; is that correct?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Sir, if you look at the person to
whom the letter is addressed, the letter says, "My dear General."  This
letter was addressed by Mr. Nambiar, and it's signed by him.  It's
addressed to Mr. Mladic.  A copy is sent just for info, but it is
personally and directly addressed to General Mladic.  And if you look at
the content, this clarifies it.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Perhaps if we can go to the cover page that
might assist -- that might assist, Your Honour.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you for this clarification.
JUDGE ORIE:  And the cover letter deals with two letters.  Would
we see the other one of the 10th of September as well?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I'm afraid that's not on my exhibit list, no,
Mr. President.  But we can see from this letter that -- the letter that's
attached, it says letter dated 10 September, received from
General Mladic, and a reply thereto is attached.  We don't have the reply
but we have the letter.
JUDGE ORIE:  No.  The letter is of the -- no.  The letter is
dated the 10th of September and apparently received from General Mladic.
What you are presenting us is the --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Response.
JUDGE ORIE:  -- I think the reply.  The response.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  That's correct.
JUDGE ORIE:  And why is the other letter not attached any more so
that we better understand to what it is a response?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  That's a fair question, Your Honour, and I'll
look into it and I'll find out why it's not attached.  For the purpose of
this witness, however, I would still tender -- well, it is already
admitted, I believe, so I --
JUDGE ORIE:  It is admitted already.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I won't belabour the point.  I will find the
other one or look into why we can't find it, if that will assist the
Chamber.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Thank you.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   I'd like to show you a short video-clip if I could.  It's 65 ter
22385A.  And we can just play it straight through.
[Video-clip played]
MR. VANDERPUYE:
Q.   Before I go on to the next clip, I just want to ask you briefly,
do you recognise what you were seeing there?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And what do you recognise it to be?
A.   I can see here Mr. Owen and General Morillon and myself.  We
started at the Presidency and then we moved on to Pale, and there we were
received by Mr. Karadzic.  There was also Dr. Koljevic and
General Mladic.  Afterwards, we were joined by Mr. Krajisnik,
Momcilo Krajisnik.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.  Mr. President, I'd like to tender
this clip before we go to the next one.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Do I understand you do not want to rely on any
part spoken on the clip?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  On this part, no.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 23385A becomes Exhibit P304, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I'd like to show
65 ter 22385B.  I believe we do have a transcript of this part of the
clip.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Vanderpuye, waiting for the video, I'm also
looking at the clock.  Your indication was one hour and a half, isn't it?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  It is, Mr. President.  I'm quite close.
JUDGE ORIE:  Quite close.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Let's proceed.
[Video-clip played]
MR. VANDERPUYE:
.  Do you recognise
the individual coming up there in the middle of the screen to the right
of David Owen?
A.   That meeting was on the following day, because we didn't finish
the discussions on the first day.  So we went back to meet him a second
time.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could I stop you.  The question simply was who's the
person to the right of Mr. Owen, and I take it that Mr. Vanderpuye wanted
to refer to a person with the blue beret.
THE WITNESS:  To the right is [Interpretation] This is
Dr. Koljevic.
MR. VANDERPUYE:
Q.   You mean the far right on the screen?
A.   Yeah.
Q.   Okay.  Let's start from the left.  If you can tell us, who's
there on the left?
A.   Dr. Owen, myself, General Morillon, and Dr. Karadzic,
Dr. Koljevic.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.  We can keep playing it from this
point forward.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think that the transcript is not complete.  If
you can clarify that, Mr. Vanderpuye.  One person is missing.
MR. VANDERPUYE:
Q.   Did you see yourself in the clip that we just played?
A.   [In English] Would you have it back, please, a little bit.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could we play it again or go a bit -- a little
bit --
[Video-clip played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is Mr. Owen shaking hands with
Mr. Karadzic.  This is Dr. Koljevic and General Mladic, and this is
myself.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  For the record, that's at 16.7 in the video.
That is reference to General Abdel-Razek.  Okay.  We can play it from
this point forward, I think.
[Video-clip played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is Mr. Owen.
MR. VANDERPUYE:
Q.   Yes.  Can you tell us where is this --
A.   And I'm to his left.  This is in the meeting room.  The UN party
is to the right, the UN side, and I can see in the picture the special
secretary Major Rida, and myself, and to my right is Mr. Owen, and next
to him is General Morillon.  To the other side I can see Mr. Karadzic,
and to his left General Mladic, and I cannot identify who is he talking
to.
Q.   Okay.  We'll play it through from this point.  Thank you,
General.
[Video-clip played]
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I'd like to admit this video.
JUDGE ORIE:  Do you want to rely on any text?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I do intend to rely on the transcript.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then we should play it again and then it should be
translated to us.  That's the routine in this courtroom.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.
THE INTERPRETER:  Interpreter's note --
JUDGE ORIE:  One second, please.  The interpreters wanted to
address us.
THE INTERPRETER:  Your Honour, the -- the -- it is by Mr. Owen in
English, by Lord Owen.  What do we have to interpret?  And the transcript
contains one mistake.  It says "announced" instead of "unannounced."  "I
went completely unannounced," Lord Owen said.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Mr. Vanderpuye --
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  The English I expect to be translated for the
accused in B/C/S.  Yes.  No, I'm -- I know that perhaps I'm looking at
the wrong booth, but that's the reason why it is played for a second
time.
Mr. Vanderpuye, would you have verified the transcript where
apparently the word "announced" should be "unannounced."  Check that
perhaps together with the Defence and thank the booth for verifying the
transcript.  That was exactly the purpose of this exercise.  And now we
play it again and now it will be translated so that Mr. Mladic also can
have the translation from English.  Please proceed.
[Video-clip played]
"Koljevic:  Hi, welcome to the Republika Srpska.
"Karadzic:  General Mladic.
"Mladic:  General Mladic.  Dobrodosli.
"Owen:  Nice to meet you.  Dr. Karadzic, pleased to meet you.
"Karadzic:  Welcome."
today, and I ...
this was very, very, very depressing.  I don't expect these days to go
into the recovery room and find a shell has gone through it.  It's of the
recovery room.  I went completely unannounced.  I didn't tell anybody.  I
didn't take any press.  I didn't make anything of it, I just went as a
doctor.
"Morillon:  ... mistake, because on the agreement it was
reviewed.  It was in case of a cessation and a ceasefire."
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I think I heard in English "unannounced" as
well.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Indeed.
JUDGE ORIE:  So it must be a mistake there.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I would -- I would
tender the video subject to a corrected transcript.  Obviously we'll fix
that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  The number would be, Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 22385B becomes Exhibit P305, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is -- I would then mark it for identification
until we have the new accurate transcript.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. President.  That makes a
lot of sense.
If I could show the witness the next document, please.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, but I'm a bit concerned about -- you said you
were close.  How close are you?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I've got two documents to show him and then I'll
be done.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Try to do it as efficiently as possible.
Please proceed.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.  If I could show the witness, please,
65 ter 3771.  We don't have anything on the monitors.  Thank you.
Q.   General, this is a document.  It's a report that's issued on the
30th of September, 1992, and you can see that the headline refers to
"Serbs carry out," and it says, "ethnic cleansing operation in Bosnian
capital."
In the second paragraph of this document it refers to an
estimated 150 people forced from their homes in Grbavica, and the Bosnian
police estimate this as 300 -- I'm sorry, 200 people.  First of all, do
you have a recollection of an event like this transpiring during the time
?
A.   [In English] Yes.
Q.   Did you raise this issue with Bosnian Serb leadership to any
extent?
A.   Yes.  We mentioned that more than once with Mr. Galic --
Mr. Galic and Ms. Plavsic.
Q.   I'd just like to go to page 2 of this document just for a moment,
and you will see your name referenced in the middle of the page in
English where it says:
"UNPROFOR Sarajevo Commander Egyptian Brigadier-General Husein
Abdel-Razek also met Bosnian Serb leaders for several hours on Wednesday
at their military headquarters in Lukavica just south of the Bosnian
capital to continue seeking agreements."
Do you have a recollection of these meetings?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And it concerned, as is indicated here, the restoration of
electricity and water; is that correct?
A.   Yes.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I'd like to introduce -- or I'd
like to admit this document as well.
JUDGE ORIE:  What is it exactly, Mr. Vanderpuye?  It says that --
the heading is 45 of 500 the --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  It's a press release.
JUDGE ORIE:  It's a press release.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes, Mr. President.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 03771 becomes Exhibit P306, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I'd like to show the
witness 65 ter --
JUDGE ORIE:  It's described as a press report.  Is a press
release the same as a press report?  I'm just --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I understand it to be the same.
It's -- it's a report of the events like a newspaper report would be of
the events in question.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  And who is Mr. Paul Basken?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I'm afraid I don't know who Mr. Paul Basken is,
Mr. President.
JUDGE ORIE:  Is he a UN official or --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  No.
JUDGE ORIE:  He's not.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  He's not a UN official, no.
JUDGE ORIE:  Well, there was no objection, but I'd like to know
exactly what kind of document this is.  It's not fully clear to me yet.
If we do not know who issued it --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  That's correct, Mr. President.  That's why I was
asking the witness about the facts that are reported in it to determine
whether or not they're accurate for the purposes of its admissibility.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  If I could show the
witness, please, 65 ter 3773.
, like the
press report we just saw, and in the top you can see it says "UN CIVPOL
."  Are you familiar with this report,
General?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And it says the nature of event, expulsion of Muslim citizens
from Grbavica.  In quotes -- I mean in parentheses it says Serbian
occupied territory.
If we go to the bottom of the page, and I think we may have to
go -- well, we can start on the -- on this page in the B/C/S and then go
to the next page, but it talks about at 1645 the unit comes across some
25 people with luggages, and then if you look further down the payment,
you'll see that it reference to some 300 Muslim civilians having been
expelled by the Serbs during the day from the area of Grbavica, 150 of
them gathered at the Bristol Hotel.  Are you familiar -- first of all, is
this the same event that's reported in the -- in the press report we just
looked at?
A.   Yes, I remember it.
Q.   And this indicates that this report is from Sector Sarajevo.  Is
this part of the structure of your unit, your command?
A.   Yes.  Mr. Adnan went there, and I think that he was accompanied
by Major Rida, our own secretary, so that they can double-check what was
happening there.
Q.   Thank you, General.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I'd like to tender this document as well,
Mr. President.  And that will conclude my direct, as I'm out of time, and
I appreciate your indulgence.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar, the number would be.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 03773 becomes Exhibit P307, Your
Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, and it is admitted into evidence.
Thank you, Mr. Vanderpuye.  How going to cross-examine the
witness?  Will it be --
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] Good morning, Your Honours.  My
name is Milan Petrusic and I will cross-examine the general.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Of course we are familiar with your name.
But, Mr. Petrusic, the Chamber is inclined to continue sitting until
12.30 and not have the short break, because we most likely will not sit
any further today because the next witness is not ready to start
testimony, and we have to conclude at 12.30 the examination at least for
today.
Mr. Abdel-Razek, you would be available again tomorrow?
THE WITNESS:  Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Then, Mr. Petrusic, please proceed.
Mr. Abdel-Razek, Mr. Petrusic you'll find him to your left and he
is a member of the Defence of Mr. Mladic.
Mr. Petrusic, and could you give us an indication of how much
time you'd need?
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, please.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] Mr. President, I'll gladly answer.
First I'd like to know, though, whether we will follow the same schedule
tomorrow and finish by 12.30.  If so, I will limit my examination
accordingly and possibly even leave some time for redirect for the OTP.
JUDGE ORIE:  That is appreciated, Mr. Petrusic.  You may proceed.
Cross-examination by Mr. Petrusic:
Q.   [Interpretation] General, sir, can you tell us briefly something
about the information you received in your country?  You received it from
the then Yugoslav ambassador, and I'm interested in how useful that
information was and how accurate and truthful did you find it to be as
?
.  I was
, and I was in charge of the observers' mission.  And during my
I had many contacts, including the Serbian
, and I was keen to learn from him in person the
position and the political background.  We used to held meetings, regular
, and
we used to discuss these matters based on my discussions with him, based
also on media reports, and also based on what I received from
Mr. Goulding and Mr. Annan I was able to have some knowledge about the
situation on the ground.
Q.   General, sir, the first topic I'd like to discuss has to do with
paragraphs 1838 and 106.  It refers to your efforts in dealing with
humanitarian issues such as the supply of water, electricity, and gas to
the city.  In that regard, I wanted to ask you the following:  Did you
know that even prior to your arrival there were problems concerning the
?
, the problems were already existent,
but these problems were not prevailing all over the city.  Some areas
were provided with electricity, water.  However, as a result of heavy
shelling, the situation started to deteriorate, and we were starting the
season of winter, cold weather, and this -- this is what aggravated the
problem, and this is why the problem was discussed and tackled at all
levels.  But the problem was already existent before I arrived.
Q.   In these talks were you aware that the transmission lines for
,
went mainly through areas controlled by the Army of Republika Srpska?
A.   This was a technical issue, and I asked Mr. Ganic and
Mrs. Plavsic to appoint experts along with the experts or technical
advisors of the United Nations professional technical engineers - they
were extremely professional - and to tell me where lies the problem and
how can we find a solution to this problem, be it in the territories that
were under the control of the Presidency or the Bosnians.
and
Ilidza, close to Ilidza, and they said that transmission lines can be
repaired and electricity restored, and we can thus improve the supply of
water, et cetera.
I offered an initiative to establish a technical working group,
and this group was successful to a large extent, and I received -- when I
was commander of the sector, I received thanks from various factions for
achieving success in this matter, and we were happy to have electricity
restored as well water.  However, whenever clashes used to erupt, all
these solutions would be -- would end.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] in keeping with that, I would like
to ask for 1D330.  Page 3 in B/C/S and page 2 in the English version.
Q.   And may I ask you to focus on paragraph 4 in English, which
begins with the words "To repair transmission installations."  It's the
third paragraph from the bottom of this page.  "To repair relay
facilities."  Have you found it, General?
A.   [In English] No, not yet.  Number 4?  What's on here is until
article 3.
Q.   It's the third paragraph from the bottom which begins with the
words "To repair relay facilities."
A.   Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I got it.
Q.   These are minutes from the session of the Government of Republika
Srpska held just before your arrival.  Can we conclude that even before
you arrived, the Government of Republika Srpska raised this problem of
electricity and water supply to the highest level, which we see from the
very fact that it's discussed at cabinet meetings?  Would you agree with
this?
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Petrusic, do you want the witness to conclude
this on the basis of this document, because whether the witness has any
personal knowledge about it, we do not know.  If you want to bring this
to the attention of the Chamber, it could perhaps be done by other means
such as to tender this document from the bar table.  But to ask the
witness to read it, if he has no knowledge about it, and then to ask him
to confirm that what is written here is true or whether that he can
confirm that, that's of course a bit problematic as you well understand.
Mr. Vanderpuye, would there be any objection against having this
document in evidence where it -- at least that's what the Defence says,
where it is showing that matters were discussed at a certain level at a
certain date.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  No, Mr. President.  I accept Mr. Petrusic's
representation with respect to the document.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, these are minutes.  So if the witness knows
anything about it, ask him.  If not, there is no objection against
drawing our attention to what was said in the minutes of the 8th of
of
Bosnia-Herzegovina government.  Proceed as you --
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] Mr. President, with your leave,
I'd like to explain briefly.  My intention was to present this document
to the general, because the document clearly shows that the intention of
the Bosnian Serb government was to resolve this problem, and the
intention was there even before the general arrived.
JUDGE ORIE:  You're giving evidence whether there was intention
or not.  What we see on our screen is that apparently the matter has been
discussed if the minutes are accurate, minutes during this session.  Now,
if the witness knows anything about this, ask him.  If the witness is
supposed just to read the document and say, Well, if that's the case,
there was an intention.  And of course you ask him to do something, you'd
better ask the Chamber to do.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] Yes.
Q.   General, do you know something that's in this document that's
still on the screen about activities undertaken by the Government of
Republika Srpska to resolve the problem of power shortages and blackouts?
A.   Sir, I can confirm that in all the meetings, my meetings, with
Mrs. Plavsic and Mr. Karadzic, whether meetings with myself or in the
presence of Mr. Goulding and Mr. Morillon, and meetings with Mr. Owen, in
all these meetings what we heard was very positive.  And I recall
Mr. Karadzic saying, "This is my city, and I'm keen on providing it with
lots of things."  But we used to notice that on the other side -- or at
the other hand, they wanted to repair the telephone lines or something
like that.  So it was all very relative.  So we heard very positive
comments.  The intentions were very good.  So both sides had control of
some of the utilities, and it was obviously a war game between the two.
I think what matters are not the intentions but the actions, these things
that were essential for the people, for the individuals living there.
All of us at the level of command of the UN or forces on the ground, we
were all keen on achieving this.
But to get back to your question, yes, there were intentions,
and, yes, they did provide us with technicians.  And I organised that
meeting at the airport, and I attended the meeting, and they did do some
work, but some militias were shooting at them, especially from the
Serbian side.  This is something -- this is an information that I
received in a report from the observers and from the technical committee,
and that committee was composed of French nationals.  And the report said
that they were shot at.  Despite that, we continued our actions and we
did succeed on many occasions in restoring electricity and water in
particular, but we still faced problems with fuel and gas.
JUDGE ORIE:  Do I understand you well, Mr. Petrusic, that your
question was about whether the witness was aware of any government
initiative prior to him dealing with this matter and already positive --
positively seeking to resolve the problems?  Was that what you wanted to
ask the witness?  Yes.  Then I would have interrupted the witness halfway
where he did not answer your question.  He was talking about his
experience rather than about his knowledge.
Do you have any knowledge of the government dealing with these
matters before your arrival?  By the government.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I think that the problem was very
difficult in my presence.  It was very serious.  Before I arrived, I was
told --
JUDGE ORIE:  Do you have any knowledge about the government being
involved in resolving this problem prior to your arrival?  Do you know
anything about whether they discussed it or whether -- what they did
or -- prior to your arrival?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Sir, when I arrived, I noticed that
the problem was already there, and I learned that there were attempts,
there had been attempts, from both sides to repair the electricity lines
and the water pipes.  However, due to the violence, everything stopped.
So there had been attempts.  And I started from these attempts to
continue and to establish their technical committee composed of
representatives of various sides in order to continue the efforts.
However, there were attempts, and I knew about them.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  And you have no personal knowledge of it apart
from having heard about such attempts.
THE WITNESS:  Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.  Please proceed, Mr. Petrusic.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   General, we'll now move to a completely different subject,
although I meant to discuss this, but you've said enough.  When you
, were you briefed in the first
region,
units controlled by the government of Bosnia-Herzegovina?
A.   [Interpretation] I'm sorry, the question is not very clear.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could you repeat the question.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation]
, did anyone inform you
region and
controlled by the government of Bosnia-Herzegovina?
, I received a briefing from
Mr. Nambiar and his command, and we looked at the map, and we talked
about the situation, the situation of the forces in the Sarajevo Sector.
We discussed the problems.  So I had enough time to get acquainted with
.  And when I arrived at the end of the
day, I arrived in the afternoon, I asked to receive a briefing about the
situation in the sector.  We discussed the situation for about two hours
in order to determine where are the forces, the Bosnian forces, where are
the Serbian forces, where are the UN positions, the observer positions,
what are the vital targets in the sector, what are the major problems in
the sector.  This is something normal for any commander to be acquainted
with at the beginning of his duties.  I was well aware of the situation.
Furthermore, I had a map that I often referred to to determine the
locations of the various forces.  This is how I used to follow up on the
movements of any vehicle -- any UN vehicle moving inside the sector.
the command of the 1st Corps of the Army of
Bosnia-Herzegovina?  Were they based there?
A.   [In English] I'd say it is a pie in the sky.  I don't remember
really.  But I know the -- I know the -- the 1st Corps headquarter, I
used to have a meeting with -- with the commander there, but I don't
remember whereabout.  I don't remember it.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, but Mr. Abdel-Razek, you -- the -- yes, first
question you confirm that the --
THE WITNESS:  The headquarter of the corps --
.
, yes, yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  But you do not know exactly where.
THE WITNESS:  Yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  The question was a bit ambiguous as to were they
based there.  It seems to limit the question only to whether they were in
and that you can confirm.
THE WITNESS:  Yeah.  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Next question, please.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Did you know the deployment of that unit in the zone of Sarajevo
under the command of the government of Bosnia-Herzegovina?
A.   [Interpretation] Yes.  However, it was from a UN perspective.
So, for example, when we say that here we have a battalion in the sector,
for example, but if we look at the details, these details were not
available to us because we are not on the front line.  But we can
confirm, for example, that in this location there are forces from that
side, and in that other location there are forces belonging to the other
side.  But we do not know that specifically, where is each unit
specifically, because, sir, we -- we didn't have enough staff, enough
individuals.
Q.   Was any military unit deployed in the city itself?  Did you have
occasion to see any such military unit in the city?
A.   Inside the city and particularly in the sector where I was
operating, there were points.  For example, in the street we would be
able to determine that there is a military point or a position with the
light weapons, and I would have, for example, one armoured vehicle.  And
we used to see them moving inside the city, but they were not military
positions per se.  I never saw a military position per se from my -- from
a military perspective.  I didn't see any military posts, any weapons
posts.  There were some forces inside the city, whereas the major forces
were stationed outside the city.  And we would be able to monitor, for
example, the shelling from one side or from the other side.
Q.   What about military units under the command of the government of
.  Those that were around the city, did they also
, some
elevations?
A.   What I can confirm is the following:  They did have mortars, and
I highly objected to that when I talked to Mr. Ganic and Colonel Siber.
He was the military representative in the government.  I told him that
there were some semi tracks that were coming close to the PTT building,
to the command building, and firing from that position, and then they
would -- they would leave.  And we would be faced with the retaliation.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That was the situation, but there
was no heavy artillery or tanks inside the city.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Abdel-Razek, could I ask you to focus your
answer on what was asked.  The question was whether there were any BiH
government troops holding positions at the high grounds around the city.
That was the question.
THE WITNESS:  Yeah.
JUDGE ORIE:  You told us a lot, but it's still not clear to me
whether those troops were holding positions at the high grounds around
the city.  Could you tell us whether they did?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, sir.  I know that there were
forces around the city from both sides.  And concerning the Presidency
forces, they were inside the city and they had forces around the city, at
the limits of the city.  I know that very well.  However, they didn't
have heavy weapons.  They had a lot of weapons.  I can confirm that.
JUDGE ORIE:  For the Presidency forces, they also had positions
on the high grounds around the city?
THE WITNESS:  Not on the high ground.  Not on the mountain.  The
mountain dominated by -- by the Serb forces.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I'm looking at the clock, Mr. Petrusic.
Mr. Abdel-Razek, we will finish for the day.  We'd like to see
you back tomorrow morning at 9.30.  I'd like instruct you that you should
not speak or communicate with whomever about the testimony, either the
testimony you've given today or the testimony still to be given tomorrow.
THE WITNESS:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  You may follow the usher.
THE WITNESS:  Thank you very much.
[The witness stands down]
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] Mr. President.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, Mr. Petrusic.
MR. PETRUSIC: [Interpretation] I will try tomorrow to put
questions in such a way that the witness should be able to answer very
quickly, but if his testimony continues as today, I'm not sure I will
manage that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Petrusic, it's your task to take him back on
track.  I mean, I did it a couple of times after he had gone on for 20,
30 lines, but it's your task to do that.  You can do it in two ways.  The
one is to put clear, concrete questions about facts.  The second way of
dealing with this is that if he is going away from what you want him to
tell us, then please take him back.  Of course, if -- finally I'll do it,
but if you do it yourself, then you certainly will be able to achieve
what you intend to achieve tomorrow.
We adjourn for the day -- yes, Mr. Groome.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, just briefly.  Since the time
limitation that the witness has is roughly equivalent to the time
limitation that the interpreters have doing two-way interpretation, can I
suggest that we proceed with two-way interpretation tomorrow.  I believe
it will not only perhaps have a -- result with a clearer understanding of
the question, but if seems to me that the witness is listening to the
English translation of his own speech, and perhaps that would speed
things up if we proceed in that way.
JUDGE ORIE:  That's certainly a matter to consider.  As a matter
of fact, we suggested the way in which we proceeded today not knowing yet
at that moment - or at least not fully aware of that - the time limits
for the witness were the same as for the interpreters.  So that might
speed up tomorrow.  And if there would be any time -- first of all,
Mr. Petrusic, I did not put on the record yet that your assumption was
right, that the witness can continue tomorrow until 12.30.  And if then
the next witness would be ready after that, that would -- then we would
not lose further time.
MR. GROOME:  We have no information to say that the witness could
not be, Your Honour, so the Prosecution's ready.  The Defence is ready.
JUDGE ORIE:  The witness -- it was preferred that the witness not
start today, and that's reality by now.
We adjourn for the day and we will resume tomorrow, Friday, the
5th of October, at 9.30 in this same Courtroom I.
,
to be reconvened on Friday the 5th day
.30 a.m.
