Tuesday, 28 May 2002
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
--- Upon commencing at 9.07 a.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good morning, everybody.  Please be seated. And
can we hear the case immediately so we can overcome the delay caused by
technical problems.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good morning.  This is Case Number IT-97-24-T, the
Prosecutor versus Milomir Stakic.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  And the appearances, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Nicholas Koumjian with Ruth Karper for the
Prosecution.  Good morning, Your Honours.
MR. LUKIC:  Good morning, Your Honours.  Branko Lukic and Mr. John
Ostojic for the Defence.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good morning.  Shall we proceed.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The witness be brought in, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Perhaps while the witness is being brought in, I
can say for the interpreters and the Court staff, the order of the
documents that I plan to present.  They are S95.  I could also give you
the 65 ter number in a moment, which is 65 ter number 42; S99, which is 65
ter number 81; S100, which is 65 ter number 83; S110, which has the ter
number 261; S112, which has the ter number 263; S106, which is 158; I may
be a bit ambitious in all these documents, S103, which has the ter number
of 122; S105, which has the ter number of 140; S111, which has the ter
number of 262.  S60.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good morning, please be seated.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I think that will take us through the break anyway.
I'll provide the rest later.
WITNESS:  MIRSAD MUJADZIC [Resumed]
[Witness answered through interpreter].
MR. KOUMJIAN:  May I proceed, Mr. President?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Yes.
Examined by Mr. Koumjian:  [Continued]
Q.   Doctor, you were telling us when we broke yesterday about the
visit of Mr. Halilovic to Prijedor.  Did you ask Mr. Halilovic if it was
possible to develop some plan to defend Prijedor?
A.   This did not happen during his first visit.  The first time he
came, we only talked about the Patriotic League.  He wanted to present the
Patriotic League and its aims, and the only thing he wanted was to win
support of the implementation of this idea.  The second time he came,
which was I can't say exactly when but I think it was about October 1991,
we talked about specific measures in terms of organising the Patriotic
League and recruiting people.  We promised that we would, for our part, do
whatever we could to provide support because clearly it was also in our
interest to defend Bosnia and Herzegovina.  More elaborate plans for the
defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina were drafted, probably by those at a
higher level of authority, those sitting in Sarajevo.  And they also made
assessments as to which parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina could be defended
and which not.
The Banja Luka Krajina area was at first assessed as very
difficult to defend, but after the situation was more thoroughly analysed,
a proposal came up which I was only familiar with to a certain degree.  I
don't have a map here now to show you what the plan was supposed to be,
but the essence is that the whole area of the Bosnian Krajina --
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Sir, may I have map S16 -- it was SK48 -- put on
the ELMO. That would, I believe, assist the witness.  It is the map of
Bosnia.  I believe it's S16.  It was SK48.
We're not getting an image.  Is the power on for the ELMO?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] As far as the Bosanska Krajina
region is concerned, which is the area between Bosanski Novi, Sanski Most,
Kljuc, and Sipova, across Jajce, Skender Vakuf, Kotor Varos, Prnjavor,
Srbac, and the north boundary coincides with the north boundary of Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself and the River Sava.  That's a rather large area.
That's a large part of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including 17 municipalities
officially called the Banja Luka region and unofficially termed the
Bosnian Krajina.  In the west, as you can see, there is another region,
the Bihac region, of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is predominantly
Bosniak so that, for example, in the municipalities of Velika Kladusa and
Cazin, about 95 or more per cent of Bosniaks live, while Bosanska Krupa
municipality, there were a bit less Bosniaks.  These elements are very
important because there were two proposals as to how to defend this area.
The first proposal was brought up by the leadership of the Territorial
Defence of the Bihac area.  This proposal included -- it implied -- I
can't see the River Sana in this map which makes it difficult for me to
explain the situation.  But can I just draw the River Sana on this map,
because the course of it is very important for understanding the map.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   We cannot use -- don't draw at this point.  We can get another map
perhaps.  We don't have it with us.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  It's up to Your Honours.  May we draw on this map,
or no.
Q.   Don't draw on the map.  Just point with the pointer where the
river is.
A.   All right.  So I'll try to explain what I wanted to draw.  The
River Sana would follow this direction, so about one third of the area of
these municipalities lies west of the River Sana, and about two thirds of
them lie to the east, including the town of Prijedor.  So the River Sana
would follow approximately this course.
The leadership of the Territorial Defence of the Bihac region,,
which was predominantly Bosniak, proposed a plan to defend the left river
bank of the Sana River, so that's this area I'm pointing at now and to the
west.  This did not include any of the urban areas, not Bosanski Novi, not
Sanski Most, and not Kljuc.  So according to this plan, Prijedor
municipality would stay on the left river bank of the Sana River and was
not included in the defence plans.  But rather, only the part of Prijedor
municipality that was on the left river bank.  The situation was very
similar with the remaining four local communes in the Sana valley.
As far as the population of the remaining 13 local communes with
Serb majority, they were to be evacuated towards Prijedor or towards
Jajce, depending on where the respective local communes were located.  The
leadership of the Patriotic League informed us that the Bosanska Krajina
region was impossible to defend because in Banja Luka, there was the
highest concentration of the JNA in the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina
with very powerful armoured units and battalions.  And as the whole area
of the Prijedor plain was flat, and the situation was similar in the whole
river valley of the Sana River, which includes Bosanski Novi.  So this is
difficult -- this is not such a difficult terrain.  It's easy access for
tanks and artillery, and since we had no anti-artillery weapons,
anti-armour weapons, we didn't stand a chance of resisting such a powerful
armed force because we were not as sufficiently organised nor sufficiently
armed to put up resistance or strategically equipped to defend ourselves.
The plan for the Bihac region was to try to defend west -- to the
west of the left bank of the River Sana.  This plan fell through the
moment that Bosanska Krupa, which was connected with Sanski Most across
the Grmec mountain and where part of the forces from the Bihac region was
supposed to cross in order to establish a line on the left river bank of
the Sana River.  This plan fell through the moment that Bosanska Krupa was
attacked on the 23rd of April, and this practically cut off the left river
bank where most of the Bosniaks and the -- in this region lived, the Bihac
region.  This move left us cut off and unable to defend ourselves.
Q.   Given this strategic situation, did it make sense to -- for the
SDA party or the Bosniaks and those in the Patriotic League to put a lot
of weapons into Prijedor?
A.   The Patriotic League, and I am firmly stating this, never sent a
single bullet, a single barrel, to the Prijedor area, nor were any weapons
or money for weapons sent from the SDA or from anyone else apart from
there being a number of individual initiatives by individuals from certain
villages.  But there was no organised collection or sending of money or
weapons.
Q.   Can you explain that.  Strategically would it have made sense for
the Patriotic League to put its weapons or money in Prijedor given the
situation you just described?
A.   If they assessed the area to be impossible to defend, and as we
have seen from my explanation on the map, it was impossible to defend
indeed, provided the forces that were stationed in Banja Luka, Prijedor,
the JNA forces, once we have said that, it's quite pointless to send
weapons to an area that was to be occupied anyway and impossible to
defend.  That was an assessment by the Patriotic League.  And the
Territorial Defence at the republican level saw the situation in the same
terms.  That was probably also the reason why no weapons were ever sent to
the area, to the best of my knowledge.
Q.   You mentioned the distribution by Arsic in 1991 of some weapons to
the local TOs.  Did those weapons or some of them remain in the hands of
some areas, TOs, dominated by Bosniaks?
A.   Weapons belonging to the Territorial Defence which was
distributed -- I must stress this -- to the regular units of the
Territorial Defence that were preserved from the former system, members
and commanders, officers of the Territorial Defence in Prijedor
municipality were not people who were also members of the SDA.  Those were
official members of the Territorial Defence also before the SDA came to
power, they had been official members of the TO.  Those weapons were kept
until just before the beginning of the conflict.
Q.   Prior to the 30th of April, the takeover in Prijedor, you
mentioned that Bosanska Krupa had fallen.  Did other areas in the
surrounding municipalities in the region of Prijedor fall to SDS-led
forces prior to the 30th of April?
A.   Prior to the 30th of April, the Sanski Most area was also, in the
true sense of the word, occupied by Colonel Basara's brigade.  I think it
was the 6th.  I can't remember the name.  I'll have to remember later, but
it was under the command of Colonel Basara.  The Bosanski Novi area was
occupied in a similar way, as well as the Kljuc area.  Prijedor came last.
Of all these local communes, Bosanska Krupa was the first to be --
municipalities, I'm sorry, was the first to be occupied.  I'm talking
about west of the River Una, which also divided Bosanska Krupa into two
parts, which means that this area was disconnected from any assistance
that might have come from the Bosnian Krajina.  So Prijedor came last in
terms of being occupied.
Q.   What about Banja Luka?  Had Banja Luka been taken over or was
there some manifestation of a change in authority in Banja Luka?
A.   In Banja Luka, there were only 15 per cent of Bosniaks.  Serbs
were clearly predominant, and the concentration of military power was very
high.  So there was nothing special happening in Banja Luka, nor were any
changes noticed from outside.  No changes were necessary because Banja
Luka, as it was, was totally controlled by both military and civilian Serb
authorities.
Q.   Did you go to Sanski Most prior to the takeover in Prijedor and
speak to a military officer?
A.   Yes.  I did go several days before the putsch that was to take
place in Prijedor.  I had been invited by representatives of local
authorities from Sanski Most as a republican delegate in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina parliament.  As communications with Sarajevo were almost cut
off already at that point, they didn't know what to do and they had no one
to consult.  So they asked me to come over in order to share the burden of
all the difficult decisions and talks that were to follow with them.  I
did go to Sanski Most.  I responded to their invitation.  I think it was
around the 20-something of April.  That was a short while before --
several days before the putsch in Prijedor.  When I came to Sanski Most,
at the entrance to Sanski Most, we were pulled over by military patrol.  I
told them that I was supposed to talk to General Talic, and then they let
me go.  But the whole town was teeming with the army, and outside all the
important buildings and facilities, there were security patrols.  When I
entered the municipal building where the negotiations were taking place,
General Talic and Colonel Hasetic, as well as representatives of the SDS
and the president of the municipal government, Mirzet Karabeg, the chief
of -- I'm sorry, deputy chief of police who was Bosniak explained to me
what was really going on.
The evening before, Serb police attacked Bosniak policemen and
Croat policemen; that's non-Serb policemen.  They took the police station
in Sanski Most and expelled non-Serb policemen from the police station.
Then they withdrew to the municipal building of Sanski Most.  I approached
General Talic and asked him what all of this was supposed to mean, why the
army virtually occupied the town.  He replied that the army's aim was to
prevent conflict, which was an explanation used in many other situations,
an excuse for the army's occupation and intervention of many other parts
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, or Croatia for that matter.  It was a tried and
true recipe.  He said it was only a temporary measure until the political
situation calmed down.
Q.   Was General Talic the commander of the 5th Corps of the JNA?
A.   He was the commander of the Banja Luka Corps.  I'm not sure
whether that's the 5th Corps.  Anyway, it was the corps for the Banja Luka
area and the wider region surrounding Banja Luka.
Q.   Was he the superior officer to Colonel Arsic, or
Lieutenant-Colonel Arsic at that time?
A.   Yes, he was Colonel Arsic's superior, but Major Zeljaja, although
he had a lower rank, he received a special order.  He was put in a
position of what is called special command.  He was put in charge of
cleansing the Sana River valley.
Q.   Okay.  Now, let's go back to Prijedor and the events just prior to
the takeover.  Did you have a conversation with Colonel Arsic on the 29th
of April?
A.   Yes, I did.
Q.   Can you explain to us the circumstances and the conversations that
you had with Colonel Arsic and others that day.
A.   That day, we first had a conversation in the premises of the local
police station.  The police force was divided.  Serb police officers
insisted that the Prijedor Police Station should join the Autonomous
Region of Krajina, that is the Security Services Centre in Banja Luka,
whereas non-Serb police officers were against it.  While I was in the
meeting, a document arrived, a document which was sent by a Serb police
officer who was working in the communications department.  He stated that
an order had come from the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
fact that the police should attack the barracks.  The objective of this
document was to demonstrate the need to severe all communications with
Sarajevo, since instructions and orders coming from Sarajevo were totally
unacceptable for citizens of Serb ethnicity.
At 5.00 on the same day, a telephone call came for me from Colonel
Arsic who wanted to see me immediately in the barracks.  I told him that I
would prefer to talk on a neutral ground, that I was not willing to come
to the barracks.  However, he insisted on my coming to the barracks.  He
said that Miskovic was already with him, and that the matter was quite
important and quite urgent.  So I left and went to the barracks where I
found Colonel Arsic, Mr. Miskovic, and another younger officer who was
sitting next to Colonel Arsic.  As I sat there, Colonel Arsic showed me a
document, a piece of paper, and said:  "Will you please read this."  The
title of the document read "the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" with
a signature of Alija Izetbegovic, allegedly, the president of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.  The document purported to be an
instruction issued to the police stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina with
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
the specific task given to the police, the task being to encircle the
barracks and to cut off all communications and to secure the surrender of
the JNA.
After I had read the document, Colonel Arsic asked me:  "Can you
comment on this?  Is there anything you can say in response to this?"  And
I said that I was not exactly familiar with the document and that I did
not believe that the document had been sent by the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and I told him that I thought that the document was a
forgery.  Had such a document been sent, we would have never decided to
act on it because we believed that it was senseless in view of the ratio
forces that I just described.  However, I said that I would try to contact
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina find out what this was all about.
Colonel Arsic made a comment and addressing also Simo Miskovic, he
said:  "Whoever should try to attack the JNA we will retaliate with all
the forces available to us."  I said once again that it was by no means
our intention, that we didn't have any such plans, whereupon the meeting
ended.
Q.   After the meeting, where did you go?
A.   After the meeting, we all went to dinner.  We were joined by Major
Zeljaja and Zoran Karlica.
Q.   Did you have dinner in Prijedor, in the town?
A.   Yes, in Prijedor town in a restaurant called Evropa.  Colonel
Arsic found a motive for this dinner.  He said:  "Since all seems to be
fine and dandy, why don't we have a dinner together and talk a little,
informally."  And he also said something to the effect that Simo and I
owed him a dinner because he had distributed us some weapons.  And what he
meant is that he distributed part of the weapons to the Territorial
Defence.  I believe I described this yesterday in my testimony.
Q.   Yes.  I'm sorry, I need to go back for a moment to the meeting.
You indicated that this document came that Colonel Arsic said he had
received which was indicated it was from Alija Izetbegovic and the
Presidency.  You said that you would check on it.  Did more information
come to you and to the others in the meeting regarding that document
before the end of the meeting?
A.   Not at that moment.  However, the next day, I learned that the
document, that is, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina denied that
they ever sent a document of similar contents.  It was later established
that the document in question had probably been sent by the
counterintelligence service of the JNA in order to provide the army with
the pretext for intervention.
Q.   So the next day, did the Presidency of Bosnia deny having authored
the document and indicate that they had no plans to attack the JNA?
A.   Yes, you're quite right.  The next day, the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina publicly denied that they had sent a document of that or
similar nature, and they also denied that they had any intention to enter
into a conflict with the JNA.
Q.   At the dinner, did you talk politics or more normal, mundane
matters?
A.   The dinner was rather informal.  We stayed until about 11.00,
discussed other issues unrelated to politics.  But there was one sentence
that was said and that I remember from that meeting.  Colonel Arsic
jokingly asked me:  "Mujadzic, so, are you going to attack us or not?"
And then I said:  "Well, Sir, Colonel, I already told you that we had no
such intentions, that such a move would be completely senseless."  And
then he said:  "I'm not very sure about that.  You Muslims are very
obedient people."  He was probably alluding to the possibility that we
might venture such a move, regardless of its being completely senseless,
which tells me that he probably didn't know of the true nature of the
document, or maybe it was just a manner of speaking.  It's very hard for
me to judge what exactly it was that he meant from this point in time.
Q.   What happened when you woke up the next day, the 30th of April?
A.   The next morning at around 6.00, Salih Sistek, the secretary of
the party, called me and said:  "Have you heard the news?"  And I said:
"No, what's up."  And he said:  "Prijedor has been occupied."  It was a
possibility that had been in my mind for some time in view of the events
that had been taking place in the towns that I have indicated.  But
despite that, I was surprised with the course the events took, in view of
this friendly dinner that I had had the previous night with Colonel Arsic,
Simo Miskovic, and others.
Q.   Doctor, do you believe that the takeover was something that was
planned and authorised only on a local level, or do you believe that there
were higher authorities that were aware of the plan for the takeover prior
to its implementation?
A.   After I had heard the news, I left the apartment.  I wanted to see
for myself what was going on in town.  And outside all major institutions,
I noticed presence of military patrols, that is, guards who were guarding
these buildings, and a number of checkpoints in various parts of the town.
Some of these individuals were recognised by local citizens as members of
the brigade of Colonel Colic or commander Arsic.  However, there were a
certain number of individuals who were not from the territory of the
Prijedor municipality.  Later, we were informed that members of the
special police force from Banja Luka had taken part in the operation
alongside a number of other units alien to the territory of the Prijedor
municipality.  It was obvious from the composition of these units that the
operation had been planned at the regional level.
Later on, we got certain indications that the operation -- that it
was likely that the operation had been planned at a much higher level.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  May the witness be shown S95, 99, and 100.  And for
Your Honours, those are 65 ter numbers 42, 81, and 83.
Q.   Doctor, first looking at S95, is it correct -- do you have that in
front of you?
A.   Yes, I do.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  And for the record again, it's headed at the top
"Serbian Democratic Party of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Prijedor SDS, municipal
board of the Serbian Democratic Party."
Q.   Does this appear to be minutes from the 27th of December, 1991?
A.   You're quite right.  This was the meeting of the Serbian
Democratic Party held on the 27th of December, 1991.  The meeting of the
municipal Prijedor board of the SDS.
Q.   Looking at item number 1, does it indicate that Mr. Miskovic, the
president of the party at that time, read out instructions from the SDS --
from the higher levels forwarded to the SDS municipal authorities?
A.   Correct.  The first point on the agenda was the implementation of
the decisions and positions taken by the Assembly of the Serbian People of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.  That is, the implementation of the decisions and
positions taken at the level of the republic.  These decisions and
positions had to be implemented at the level of the municipality.
Q.   I'd like to now go to number 99.  Does S99 appear to be a document
dated the 23rd of March, 1992, from Radovan Karadzic, president of the
Serbian Democratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and addressed to all
the presidents of municipalities?
A.   Yes.  This is a very interesting document in which the president
of the Serbian Democratic Party directly addresses the representatives of
the local municipal authorities.
Q.   Doctor, do you understand when he addresses this letter to the
"presidents of the municipalities" that this would have been meant for
Mr. Cehajic?
A.   Of course not.  The document was addressed and forwarded to the
Prijedor Serbian Democratic Party, and not the president of the
municipality, Mr. Cehajic, who was legally appointed president of the
municipality.  So this letter concerns and is addressed to the presidents
of municipalities in which Serbs had the majority and in which the
presidents of municipalities were Serbs.  In the cases of those
municipalities where this was not the case, such as Prijedor, Serbian
municipalities had been established and self-proclaimed.  The presidents
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
of these Serbian municipalities had been illegally elected in these
municipalities.  So this letter was addressed to the presidents of Serb
municipalities.
Q.   I'd like to direct your attention to the fourth paragraph.  I will
read it.  "The municipalities now face an obligation to urgently connect
their own information centres with regional centres, if it has not been
done so far. And to provide for the personnel and other requirements in
order to monitor the situation in the field.  Keeping in mind the current
situation in the republic, it was necessary to cooperate with the SJB by
providing the centre with a duty shift and ability to convey and receive
information 24 hours a day nonstop, Saturdays and Sundays."
Doctor, does this -- does this document influence your opinion as
to the communication of information through the presidents of the Serb
municipalities to higher authorities?
A.   The document clearly demonstrates that the orders and instructions
in respect of all major decisions and events were coming from the
leadership of the Serbian Democratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina.  In
this case, as far as I can see, the source was the president of the SDS
himself, Mr. Karadzic.  The document indicates the need to organise local
communication centres who would then have links with higher levels within
the police.  Information centres are part of the police force or the
Territorial Defence.  There are special centres for information within the
Territorial Defence.  Both such centres are state authorities, state
bodies, and it is clear that Mr. Karadzic, as the president of the Serbian
Democratic Party at the level of the republic, was directly addressing in
this letter police bodies and the relevant authorities with very specific
instructions and orders.
Q.   I'd now like to move on to S100.  I'll ask you to take a look at
that document.  At the top it indicates it's from the Serbian Republic of
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Assembly of the Serbian People in the Prijedor
municipality.  It indicates it's a summary of the minutes of the fourth
session of that municipality, held on the 26th of March, 1992.  I would
like to direct your attention to the bottom of the page which indicates
the decisions, and decision number 2, which I'll read, indicates that
"Milomir Stakic reported on the meeting between the main board of the SDS
and presidents of the SDS municipal boards."  Can you comment upon that
item?
A.   Clearly, the document shows that Mr. Stakic was a member of the
main board of the SDS and that he attended the meeting in question where
he received certain instructions from the republic board of the SDS.  He's
now informing the municipal Prijedor board of the contents of these
instructions.
Q.   Going to the third decision item, it indicates that "an election
was held for representative in the Autonomous Region of Bosnian Krajina
Assembly."  Can you tell me who received the most votes for being in the
position of representative or for representatives to that body?
A.   Please give me a moment to just have a look.  It is quite obvious
that Dr. Milomir Stakic got the highest number of votes, 40 votes.
Q.   Thank you.
Doctor, in your opinion, after the takeover, can you tell us --
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
excuse me.  Strike and start again.  Can you tell us after the takeover --
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I'm done with those three documents, and they can
be removed, just to avoid confusion.
Q.   After the takeover, Doctor, did you have any dealings with the
authorities now in power in Prijedor?
A.   Not in a formal sense.  But informal contact by phone, yes, and to
several people.  I was in touch with Srdjo Srdic by phone and Simo
Miskovic, too, also by phone.  He used the Prijedor radio station to speak
to Prijedor citizens just after the putsch, the takeover.
Q.   I'm sorry, are you speaking now about Mr. Miskovic used the radio,
or Mr. Srdic?
A.   Mr. Miskovic was the one who used the radio station, and Srdjo
Srdic was in a private house.
Q.   Can you tell me, did you -- tell me the contents of the phone
conversation that you had with Mr. Srdic.
A.   Just after the takeover in the village of Brezicani, three
civilians were killed.  At the same time, following the takeover, the town
was flooded with posters saying that this was a measure taken to remove
those representatives of the SDS [as interpreted] Who had committed a
number of crimes, who committed theft, who stole money, from the companies
and that this act was necessary but that Bosniak and Croat citizens of
Prijedor would, after six months, have an opportunity to appoint their own
more adequate candidate, representatives, and that they could keep their
peace.  The same thing was told by Mr. Miskovic on the radio station.  I
called him then and said:  "If you can really guarantee safety to all
citizens, Simo, how is it possible that immediately after the takeover
three citizens were killed?  Can you explain this to the citizens?"
Q.   Before you go on, the translation indicates that you said that
when the posters appeared, they said these measures were taken to remove
those representatives of the SDS.  Is that what you intended to say?
A.   No.  Maybe it was a mistake.  I meant representatives of the SDA,
Party of Democratic Action.  All I said before was related to the SDA and
not the SDS.
Q.   What did Mr. Srdic say when you asked him if he could guarantee
the safety of the non-Serbs?
A.   Knowing from our previous conversations at that Mr. Srdic, of all
SDS leaders, also having known him as a colleague because we worked
door-to-door in the hospital, and as delegates, we used to know each other
quite well, he was a town Serb, so to speak, a man open to being talked to
about many things.  So I called him at his home number.
He wasn't in, but his wife, whom I also knew, gave me another
phone number of the place where Srdo was at that moment.  I called the
number and asked Srdjo to call back.  He called back.  And then I asked
him:  "Srdjo, what does all of this mean?"  He said:  "You know full well
what it means, and if you don't, you're bound to find out very soon.  We
are well prepared for the war, but are you?"  I then asked him:  "But why
war?  What sort of war are you talking about?"  Although I had seen these
things coming, I was still shocked at this moment and scared by the
prospect of the things to come.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I'd like to have the witness shown S110, S112, and
S106.  Those are 65 ter numbers 261, 263, and 171.
Q.   Sir, from the information you had, who was the authority after the
takeover?  What body or persons were governing Prijedor?
A.   After the takeover, the radio station in Prijedor broadcast news
all day long, news related to these events.  Among other things, citizens
were told that power in the municipality had been taken over by the Crisis
Staff, the president of which was Dr. Milomir Stakic.
Q.   I'd like you now to look at S110.  It's a copy of the official
gazette of Prijedor municipality dated the 25th of June, 1992.
A.   S106?
Q.   S110.
A.   Yes, I have it in front of me.
Q.   Doctor, does this indicate to you that the -- some attempt was
made to formalise the authority of a Prijedor Municipal Crisis Staff?
A.   Yes.  The official gazette, this means that the whole thing is
becoming legitimate.  But as an illegitimate body here passing a law, what
follows is that the law adopted by an illegitimate body is not really a
law.  But this clearly shows that this body is trying to make its own
actions and procedure legal.
Q.   I'd like you to now look at the last page.  And just before
decision number 19 starts, the last part of this decision, number 18, can
you tell me who is the person listed as the signatory of this decision?
A.   Dr. Milomir Stakic.
Q.   Now, no actual handwriting appears in this gazette.  I notice next
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
to the name "Dr. Milomir Stakic" are the letters SR.  Can you explain what
that means, what its significance is?
A.   In all official gazettes, there are never any signatures.  But in
original documents, the person who passes a certain document act, adopts
it, signs.  But in official gazettes, you only put SR, meaning that the
person whose name is given had previously signed the document.
Q.   I'd like to direct your attention to Article 2, which I will read:
Prijedor municipal Crisis Staff has been established to coordinate the
functions of the authorities, the defence of the municipal territory, the
protection of safety, of people and property, the establishment of
government, and the organisation of all other fields of life and work.  As
coordinator, the Crisis Staff shall create conditions enabling the
municipal executive committee to discharge its legal executive functions,
manage the economy and other areas of life."
And I'd like to read Article Number 6 --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry.  Could you please, in order to have also
access for all the members of the Bench, read the Articles in between so
that we have the total.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Okay.
Q.   Article Number 3:  "Should the Municipal Assembly be unable to sit
in session, the Prijedor Municipal Crisis Staff shall decide on matters
falling within the province of the assembly jurisdiction.  As soon as it
is possible to convene a session of the assembly, it shall be the duty of
the Crisis Staff to submit for endorsement all decisions which it has
adopted and which would formally fall within the province of the
assembly."
Article 4:  "Prijedor Municipal Crisis Staff shall have a
president, vice-president, and nine members.  The president of the
Municipal Assembly shall serve, ex officio, as the president of the Crisis
Staff.  And the vice-president of the Municipal Assembly as the
vice-president of the Crisis Staff.  The following shall serve as members
of the Crisis Staff:  The president of the municipal executive committee;
commander of the municipal Territorial Defence staff; commander of the
municipal people's defence staff; chief of the public security station;
secretary of municipal secretariat for trade, industry, and public
services; secretary of the municipal secretariat for town planning,
housing, utilities, and legal property affairs; the health and social
security officer at municipal secretariat for the economy and social
affairs; and information officer at municipal secretariat for the economy
and social affairs."
Article 5, in accordance with the assessment of the political and
security situation and realistic requirements, the Crisis Staff shall
adopt relevant decisions on the organisation and work of the Municipal
Assembly, its organs, and other municipal organs and local communes.
Article 6:  "In discharging its functions in the area of defense,
the Crisis Staff shall, in particular, coordinate the work and activities
of all components of all people's defence, consider issues of
mobilisation, development and reinforcement of the armed forces, and other
organisations and foster their cooperation with other responsible
municipal organs.  On special request of the commander of the municipal
TO, deal with issues of supply requirements and funding sources for the
TO.  Keep abreast of all aspects of the situation in the municipality
essential for the waging of armed combat and take appropriate measures.
Monitor the implementation of the recruitment plan.  Where necessary, take
measures for successful implementation thereof."
Doctor, based upon this document, do you have some opinion as to
the authority of the Crisis Staff over matters of the security situation
in Prijedor and the influence of the Crisis Staff over police and army?
A.   What we have just read clearly demonstrates that the president of
the Crisis Staff has authority over all state organs in Prijedor
municipality, including the police, the Territorial Defence, and all other
segments, and that he is fully responsible for all elements essential for
armed fighting.  And in that sense, he's taking all the appropriate
measures and has authority over all these fields, areas of activity.
Q.   I'd like you now to look at S112.  It is indicated that it's,
again, from the official gazette.  It's actually decision 19, and
indicates a decision reached at the meeting of the 20th of May, 1992 of
the Prijedor assembly.  Decision on appointments to Prijedor Municipal
Crisis Staff.  Doctor, is it correct that this document indicates that the
president of the Crisis Staff was Dr. Milomir Stakic and among the members
was, at number 6, Simo Drljaca, chief of Prijedor public security station?
A.   Yes, that's correct.
Q.   I'd like you to look at S106.  This is a document that, on the
top, it indicates it's from the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Autonomous Region of Krajina, Prijedor Municipality Crisis Staff.  And
it's dated the 22nd of May, 1992.  It's addressed to all commercial and
social enterprises, and it's signed at the bottom, president, Dr. Milomir
Stakic.
I'd like to read the second paragraph into the record:  "The
purpose of introducing permanent operational duty by the Crisis Staff is
to provide continuous monitoring of the situation in the civilian sector
on the territory of the municipality.  The giving of additional
instruction for the implementation of conclusions, decisions, and orders
of the Crisis Staff of the Prijedor municipality, and at any given moment
outside working hours, government agencies and commercial can be
activated.  The permanent operational duty of the Crisis Staff shall be
organised on the premises of the Municipal Assembly, shall be on a 24-hour
basis.  Any important occurrences and events shall be reported to the
following telephone number, 22055."
Doctor, do you understand this document to indicate -- to who do
you understand this document to be directed to?
A.   The economic and social subjects of the municipality, meaning all
institutions, all enterprises, all schools, all segments, all public
institutions.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   Which means that the Crisis Staff has authority over all aspects
of life in the municipality.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I'd like now to have these documents collected and
ask that the witness be shown --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry, just for clarification.  Could you please
draw your attention to the last page, and on the basis of other documents
in the past, you were asked whether or not you can identify the signature
to be found there.  Can you identify this signature as the signature of
Dr. Stakic?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.  That is Dr. Stakic's
signature.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could the witness please be shown Document 101B.
Witness, I would like to hear your comments on the signatures you
have before you.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] It is quite obvious that they are
different in certain aspects.  But the graphology, I think, is the same.
I think it is the same handwriting.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  But you can see the difference?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, there is a difference there.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  This was only to ask you to be careful with the
assessment whether or not you really can identify the one or other
signature from an earlier signature because you have to be aware you are
here under your solemn declaration.  And if you are asked whether or not
you can identify, you shouldn't say:  "Yes, I can see it here," but it
should be a recognition of a signature you have seen several times in the
past, if so.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That is related to the previous
signature, the 26th of March, 1992.  I do recognise this particular
signature.  So I'm talking about the document dated the 27th of March,
1992.  I do recognise the signature there.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  As you said before as regards Document S101B, to
be concrete.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, would you like me to go on?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Should I look at these documents?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The only question was the last one.  As regards
Document S106, and here my question was if you still maintain your
declaration that you can identify this signature as the one of Dr. Milomir
Stakic.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] If I compare the two signatures,
then I'm no longer sure that the other one is his.  As far as the 26th of
March is concerned, I am certain, but the other one, although they are
very much alike, but the other one I'm no longer sure that it really is
the signature of Dr. Milomir Stakic.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for this clarification.
The Prosecutor may proceed for another five minutes.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Okay.  Thank you.  In that case, I'd like the
witness shown 103, 105, and 111.  See how far we go with those three.
Q.   Starting with S103, which has a 65 ter number of 133.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  For the record, it's from the Serbian Municipality
of Prijedor, Executive Committee, dated the 7th of May, 1992.  The
indication is that it's signed at the bottom, the name below the signature
is president of the Executive Committee, Dr. Milan Kovacevic.  The
decision states in item number 1:  "Dzemal Sefa [phoen], director of the
PBS," -- that's Commercial Bank of Sarajevo -- "main branch office in
Prijedor, is relieved of his duty as of 7th of May, 1992."
Q.   I'd now like you to look, Doctor, at S105, which is, again, from
the Prijedor -- it's now from the --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry.  Evidently, there is no French
translation to be heard.
Okay.  You can continue.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Do I need to repeat anything?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I think the last question.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Now I'm directing you to last S105.  It appears to be a document
from the Prijedor Municipal Assembly dated the 8th of May, 1992.  It's
signed at the bottom, the signature above -- the name below the signature
is president of the assembly, Dr. Milomir Stakic.  It indicates:  "The
Municipal Assembly of Prijedor, at its session held on the 16th of April,
1992, adopted a proposal to elect Mico Cerka [phoen] as President of the
Lower Court in Prijedor and Milenko Tomic as public prosecutor."  And
before I ask you the last question, -- the next question, Doctor, I'd also
like to direct your attention to 111, 65 ter number 262, which indicates
that at a meeting held -- it's again from the official gazette, decision
number 55, at its meeting convened at 16:30 on the 29th May, 1992,
Prijedor Municipal Crisis Staff adopted the following:  Number one, Major
Slobodan Kuruzovic, commander of Prijedor Serbian Territorial Defence is
relieved of his duties as of 29 May, 1992, and placed under the command of
the command of the region."  And it's signed, and below the signature
appears Dr. Milomir -- excuse me.  There's no handwriting.  The indication
at the bottom is Dr. Milomir Stakic, President of the Crisis Staff, and
next to the name appear the letters SR.
Doctor, these three decisions relating to an appointment to a
bank, to appointments to the judicial system, and the appointments to the
Territorial Defence, do they indicate to you the authority of the Crisis
Staff?
A.   This clearly shows that the Crisis Staff could both dismiss and
appoint persons to any position at the local level, including bank
managers.  The other position was justice, the Territorial Defence,
placing the commander of the Territorial Defence under the jurisdiction of
the command of the region.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  This would be an appropriate time to break.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  The trial stands adjourned until
11.00 sharp.
--- Recess taken at 10.33 a.m.
--- On resuming at 11.03 a.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please be seated.  You may continue.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honours, I would now ask the witness to look
at what he has before him, S104, ter Number 139; S60, which has the ter
number of 158; and S109, which has the ter number, I believe, of 222.
Q.   Sir, looking at S109 first -- excuse me, S104 first.  S104.  This
is a document dated the 8th of May, 1992.  It indicates it's from the
Autonomous Region of Krajina War Staff, Banja Luka.  The documents states
that:  "At the meeting held on 8 May, 1992, the War Staff of the
Autonomous Region of Krajina adopted the following:" I'm interested in the
third, but I'll read the first three.  "Presidents of the national defence
council are too submit detailed reports about conducting mobilisation in
their municipalities to the War Staff of the Autonomous Region of Krajina.
Two, the distribution of oil products and consumer goods is to be placed
under the control of the national defence councils.  Three, presidents of
the national defence councils are to report to the War Staff of the
Autonomous Region of Krajina about any actions they may have taken in
order to disarm the paramilitary units and individuals possessing illegal
weapons and ammunition."
The document is signed -- excuse me, is not signed, but the name
printed at the bottom is "President, Radislav Brdjanin," and there is a
stamp.  Doctor, can you tell us, are you familiar with a body known as the
national defence council?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Was this body also organised on the municipal level; and if so,
can you explain the structure of that body?
A.   If we are talking about the legal national defence council, the
one that was provided for in the applicable law of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, then it is the national defence council which is presided
by the president of the municipality, and its members are the chief of
police, the commander of the Territorial Defence headquarters, the
commander of the civilian defence, chief of the secretariat for national
defence, and a certain number of other individuals who are appointed if
necessary.  But the individuals that I have indicated are, according to
the statutory provisions, members of that body.
Q.   I'd now like you to look at S60, ter number 158.  The document is
entitled:  "Minutes of the 4th meeting of the council for national
defence," held on 15 May, 1992, starting at 10.00 hours.  Dr. Milomir
Stakic, president of the council, chaired the meeting.  The meeting was
attended by, and it lists Dr. Milomir Stakic, Dr. Milan Kovacevic, Simo
Miskovic, Vladimir Arsic, Pero Colic, Slobodan Kuruzovic, Radmilo Zeljaja,
Rade Javoric, Slavko Budimir, Simo Drljaca, Cedo Sipovac, Vojo Pavacic,
Bosko Mandic, Ranko Travar, Milenko Rajlic, Dragan Savanovic.  Spiro
Marmat kept the minutes.
Doctor, are you familiar with most of the names of the individuals
I've just named?
A.   Yes, I am familiar with the majority of the names here.
Q.   The document indicates the following agenda was confirmed:  "One,
decision on the organisation and functioning of the Crisis Staff.  Two,
mobilisation in the municipality.  Three, the issue of the status of
deployed forces.  Four, disarmament of paramilitary formations.  Five,
taking over the duties of the military department."  It then indicates on,
I believe, agenda item number 1:  "The decision on the organisation and
function of the Crisis Staff, the following participated in the
discussion:  Dr. Milomir Stakic and Slavko Budimir.  After the discussion
the following discussion was adopted:  The draft on the decision of the
organisation and functioning of the Crisis Staff is approved under the
proviso that a representative of the garrison in Prijedor be added to the
proposed list of members of the Crisis Staff."
Agenda items 2 and 3:  "Mobilisation in the municipality and the
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
issue of deployed forces, the following persons participated in the
discussion:  Slavko Butmir, Pero Colic, Radmilo Zeljaja, Simo Miskovic,
Slobodan Kuruzovic, Dr. Milan Kovacevic, Vladimir Arsic, Simo Drljaca,
Rade Javoric, Dr. Milomir Stakic, Cedo Sipovac, Bosko Mandic, and Ranko
Travar.  After the discussion, the following conclusions were adopted.  No
crisis staffs can be formed in companies or other legal entities.  All
persons who have failed to respond to the mobilisation callups starting
from 17 September, 1991, may not participate in decision-making on
organisation of work and security matters in companies and other legal
entities.  The directors of companies and other executive organs are
responsible for the immediate implementation of this conclusion."
"Three, start of the transformation of both the TO staffs and form
a unified command for control and command of all the units formed in the
territory of the municipality.  Four, in the assignment of the remaining
conscripts to units, priority is to be given to the reinforcement of war
units 4777 and 8316.  Five, call all conscripts who have been issued
uniforms and other military equipment and who have not joined up to return
their equipment as soon as possible."
"Four, disarmament of paramilitary formations, the following
persons participated in the discussion.  Simo Drljaca, Radmilo Zeljaja,
Slavko Budimir, Rade Javoric, Dr. Milan Kovacevic, Bosko Mandic, and Ranko
Trava.  After the discussion, the following conclusion was adopted, the
public security station, in concert with the army command, should draft
the plan of disarmament after which the actual process should be set in
motion, without predetermined deadlines and with the assistance of the
media.  Taking over the duties of the military department, this is agenda
item number 5, Slavko Budimir and Dr. Milomir Stakic participated in the
discussion. After the discussion, the following conclusion was adopted:
The municipality secretariat for national defence is requested to prepare,
for the Municipal Assembly Executive Committee, a draft staffing table to
the secretariat which shall include the tasks taken over from the military
department.  The chairman ended the meeting at 12.10 hours."
On the left it indicates "clerk" and then below that "Dr. Milomir
Stakic."  Looking at B, the original, on the right, it appears "President
of the National Defence Council" and then printed, "Stakic, Dr. Milomir."
First, May 15th, the stated day of this meeting, was this before
or after the incident at Hambarine?
A.   This took place before the incident at Hambarine.
Q.   Is it correct that this meeting included representatives of the
police force, the chief of police, and the top two commanders in the
Prijedor area, top two army commanders?
A.   Obviously, the chief of police by virtue of his office and in
accordance with the law and the decision reached by the Crisis Staff of
Prijedor is a member of the Crisis Staff.  And as you can see from this
division, one of the members of the Crisis Staff was also the commander of
the garrison, that is, the local JNA unit deployed in the area.  At the
time it was still a JNA unit, the one which was quartered in the area of
the Prijedor municipality.  That was the segment that I referred to in my
previous testimony when I said that other members can also be appointed to
the Crisis Staff.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, at this point I would like to have
played video S7, previously been marked and admitted into evidence.  I'd
ask the witness to look at the screen.  We're going to play a short
portion.
Q.   And Witness, we would like you to identify persons that you
recognise at this scene that will be displayed.  You may ask us to stop
the tape at any point in order to point out the individuals you recognise.
[Videotape played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Can we stop the tape, please, here.
The image is blurred, but on the left-hand side I can recognise Dr.
Kovacevic in the mid portion of the image, that is in the left half of the
photograph.  One can see Dr. Stakic at the head of the table.  The image
is shaking.  It's very difficult to make it out.
I think that the man on the right, in the right corner, is Mr.
Savanovic.  As for the person next to Dr. Stakic, I'm not sure I can
recognise him.  The gentleman on the right -- can you let it play a bit.
[Videotape played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.  I recognised also Mr. Zeljaja.
Here we see Mr. Kuruzovic.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Can we go back.
Q.   And can you tell us, who is Major Zeljaja?
A.   Just a little more, please.  Yes.  Stop.  Major Zeljaja is, if
you're looking from left to right, is the last person in this row in the
forefront.  The last one looking from left to right.
Q.   Holding the pen in his right hand?
A.   Yes.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  You can play the video further.
[Videotape played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is Mr. Kuruzovic.  Mr.
Kovacevic, Mr. Kuruzovic once again.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Can we go back.
Q.   Right there, do you recognise the individual on the right of the
screen in the white shirt?
A.   If I'm not mistaken, this should be Mr. Arsic.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Perhaps we can go back a little further.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Again, the image is not clear.  Can
I see some more, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Back up a little bit, and then play it forward.
[Videotape played]
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] The image is blurred and dark.  The
last individual that you mentioned, the one wearing a white shirt, I'm
really not sure as to his identity.
This is Dragan Savanovic, the one with the beard in the middle of
the image.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Okay.  Thank you.
Q.   Did you know by sight Dr. Slavko Budimir and Simo Drljaca?
A.   I must say that I did not know Mr. Drljaca before.  I just heard
of him.  And I knew him by sight quite superficially.  I'm not sure that I
would be able to recognise him now.
Q.   What about Slavko Budimir?
A.   Likewise.  I'm not sure I'm able to recognise Mr. Slavko Budimir
now, although I saw him a couple of times and I knew him by sight.
However, I'm not sure I remember him.
Q.   You have before you S109, which is a very long document.  It's
issue 2 of the official gazette of the Autonomous Region of Krajina, dated
the 5th of June, 1992.  I'm going to ask you just to look at the first
decision which indicates at the top "pursuant to the decision of the
ministry of national defence of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, number 192, dated 16 April, 1992, and an evaluation of the
situation on the territory with the aim of defending and protecting the
people and property and of maintaining peace for all who live in these
areas, the secretariat for national defence of the Autonomous Region of
Krajina has made the following decision:" I'm interested in Number 4 and
5.  Did Your Honour want me to read all five?
Number 4, a curfew shall be introduced on the entire territory
during the period from 2200 hours until 0500 hours except for persons with
official police authorisation, military police, and members of the Serbian
Territorial Defence.
THE INTERPRETER:  Can we please have the 65 ter number for this
document.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Sorry.  That's 65 ter number 222.
Q.   Do I need to go back to 4, or can I proceed with 5?  Are the
booths ready?
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Number 5:  "All paramilitary formations and individuals who
illegally possess weapons and ammunition are to immediately by 1500 hours
on the 11 May 1992 surrender them to the municipal headquarters of the
Territorial Defence or to the nearest public security station.  After this
deadline, competent bodies shall carry out a search and confiscate weapons
and ammunition with the application of the most rigorous sanctions."  It
then lists reasons, and then on the next page of the English translation,
I'm going to read number 4.  "Presidents of municipal crisis staffs shall
be responsible for the implementation of this decision.  And for the
implementation for this decision, they are given all authorisation."  The
document at the bottom indicates "secretary of the national defence,
secretariat of the Autonomous Region of Krajina, Lieutenant-Colonel
Milorad Sajic."
Doctor, who would you understand to be the person in item number 4
that I just read, president of the municipal Crisis Staff who was given
all authorisation to implement that decision.  Who would that be for
Prijedor at the time of this decision?
A.   From the contents of the document, it is clear that it refers to
Dr. Stakic.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  These documents may be collected, and the next
group of documents I'd like to show the witness are S61.  I'll get the 65
ter number for you.  That would be 65 ter number 172.  S70, which has the
65 ter number of 225.  And S102, which has the 65 ter number of 120,
1-2-0.
Q.   Starting with S61, it's indicated at the top:  "pursuant to the
decision of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the general
public mobilisation of forces and material in the republic, the Crisis
Staff of Prijedor municipality, considering the current situation and
conditions at the meeting held on 22nd May, 1992, reached a decision on
mobilisation in the territory of Prijedor Municipality."
The document then lists six separate actions.  I'll just read --
related to mobilisation.  I'll just read the first and last.  "All
conscripts assigned to the following war units, 477, 3507, 5456" --
several other numbers are listed -- "are requested to report to their war
units immediately."  And number 6 indicates:  "Failure to respond to the
mobilisation sham result in legal action."  It's dated 22 May, 1992, and
on the lower right appears printed, president of the Crisis Staff of the
municipality, Dr. Milomir Stakic.
Doctor, can you remind us of the relationship in time between this
decision on mobilising forces and the incident in -- and the attack on
Hambarine, the incident and attack on Hambarine?
A.   This decision was reached on the 22nd of May, 1992.  And as far as
I remember, Hambarine was attacked on the 23rd of May, 1992.  So one day
after this decision was reached.
Q.   You talked about the incident at Hambarine.  You said you were
home when you heard shots fired.  Approximately -- remind us again,
approximately what time was it that you heard the shots fired?
A.   I happened to be in my parents' house because I could no longer be
in my apartment for reasons of my personal safety.  The spot where I was
sitting was some 300 metres away from the place where the shooting
occurred.  I heard the shooting at 7.00 p.m.
Q.   You described the scene and going to the scene and treating some
of the wounded.  But just to continue in your testimony regarding that
incident, did you speak to the people that you met at the checkpoint
regarding what had happened before you arrived?
A.   Yes, I did.  I also talked to two people out of six who were in
the car.  I also spoke to the members of the Territorial Defence and some
other eyewitnesses who happened to be at the scene who were local
residents, people from the nearby houses and who had seen and witnessed
the entire incident.  It was on the basis of the stories that I was told,
by the persons I indicated, I reconstructed the event.  I think I
described the event yesterday in my testimony.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I'm not sure -- perhaps my recollection is -- I
don't think he described the event.
Q.   Doctor, can you recount at least what your impression was, after
speaking to go these people, regarding the sequence of events that
happened at that checkpoint.
A.   I'm not sure either whether I described the incident or not.  But
let me briefly tell you now what I was able to conclude on the basis of
what these people had told me.  It appears that at the checkpoint located
near the Polje bus stop, which was manned by three or four members of the
Territorial Defence in the afternoon hours of that day, a car passed,
having come from the direction of Ljubija.  It was a Lada car.  And the
group of people manning the checkpoint noticed that the car carried a
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
group of individuals in uniform, which was the reason why they stopped the
vehicle, in order to check their identity.
Q.   By the way, Doctor, did you see the individuals in the car?
A.   Yes, I did.  They were standing around the car.
Q.   Did you recognise the uniforms as belonging to any particular
group or in any other way did you determine which group these individuals
belonged to which were inside the Lada car?
A.   Four of them were members of the special paramilitary units.  They
were not JNA members, nor members of the Territorial Defence, but much
rather members of the Bijeli Orlovi White Eagles paramilitary units.
These were Vuk Draskovic's paramilitary units.  He was the president of
the Serbian Rebirth and Reconstruction Movement.
Q.   Were the white eagles Vuk Draskovic's or under Seselj?
A.   I've probably made a mistake.  I was refer to Vojislav Seselj.
I'm sorry.
Q.   So I'm sorry.  I interrupted you.  You had said that it was a Lada
car, and that the car was stopped because people were in uniform.  What
happened then, according to what you were told?
A.   The shift commander at the checkpoint, Aziz Aliskovic approached
the vehicle and saw that soldiers were in the vehicle carrying white
eagles insignia.  He said that they should report to the barracks in order
to put on more adequate clothes.  And he also said that they should turn
in their weapons here.  One of the members then came out.  They opened the
door.  One of them came out, and then the others followed.  I'm referring
to those four.  They started firing at the crew manning the checkpoint.
Members of the Territorial Defence manning the checkpoint threw themselves
to the ground and remained lying in order to take shelter from the fire.
At that moment, I can't say with any precision whether he was carrying his
own weapons or whether he took a weapon that one of the Territorial
Defence members had thrown away, a man who just happened to pass by and
who was probably with the Territorial Defence members, talking to them.
He ran over and fired a machine-gun, discharged a burst of fire at the
group that had come out of the car.
This burst of fire hit and killed two of the members.  One was hit
in the head and the other in the chest.  The remaining three were wounded,
and I think one of them was not even injured.
Q.   Did you attempt to get any medical help for those who were
injured?
A.   When I reached the checkpoint, first thing I did, I approached the
wounded.  I ascertained that two of them were obviously dead, and that
there was nothing I could do.  The remaining three wounded were not --
their lives were not threatened at that moment, but any deferral of
medical assistance could have put their lives in danger, including the
wounded man from the Territorial Defence.  We had no phone connection to
the town of Prijedor.  I can't remember who it was, but I know I told
someone to quickly go to the local commune building where there were
phones with direct communication line used only in wartime, which was not
the same as the usual phone connection, and to report urgently to first
aid, the first aid unit, to come over and take these people to a hospital
so they could be seen to.  I had no medical kit on me to give these people
the treatment they needed.
Q.   What happened then?  Did anyone arrive to take the wounded away?
A.   I think it was less than 10 minutes, in a very short time, an
armoured vehicle appeared at the scene, a police armoured vehicle,
equipped with a light gun, a light cannon, and a machine-gun.  No one left
the armoured vehicle, but I approached them, spoke loud and clear for them
to hear me and asked them to transfer the wounded as soon as possible to a
medical institution.  They requested the surrender of Aziz Aliskovic
immediately and the whole group.  It struck me as strange that they should
know that Aziz Aliskovic was present, because they came from the town 10
minutes after the event had taken place.  I said that it was not within my
competence, and that I was not authorised to discuss this surrender.  They
then went about 500 minutes [as interpreted] away from the spot in the
direction of the town of Prijedor, fired several bursts of fire with the
weapon that was mounted on the armoured vehicle against the checkpoint,
hitting no one because everyone had already escaped from the checkpoint
and taken shelter.
At that moment, in a field which was about a kilometre away from
that place in the direction of the town, there were two abandoned houses
in the field, and they began to burn.
Q.   You mentioned that you were at your parents' house because of
concern for your personal safety.  Can you describe what happened to you
between the takeover and this incident.  What were you doing, and how much
time did you spend in the town of Prijedor?
A.   Immediately after the takeover, the next day, I went to all the
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
local communes in the Prijedor municipal area, mixed local communes, with
mixed population.  Kozarac, Brdo, and Ljubija.  I talked to the locals and
to representatives of the local communes to see what could be done in a
situation like that, following the takeover in Prijedor.  That was the day
after.  Two days later, I was warned by a friend, whose name I will not
say now for safety reasons, who was not Bosniak, that I was running a
great risk to my life, and he told me not to go back to the town because I
was certain to be arrested.
So from that moment on, I no longer moved around the town of
Prijedor or Kozarac.  I spent most of my time on the left river bank of
the Sana River, spending most of my time at my parents' house or in the
surroundings.
Q.   Did you hear your name mentioned on the media during that period
of time?
A.   Just after the takeover, in which only the very core of the town
was occupied by the army.  All the other parts where Bosniaks and Croats
were a clear majority had, up to that point, been intact.  Every day, on
Radio Prijedor, the news was broadcast at frequent intervals describing
the leaders of the SDA, including me personally, as criminals, extremists,
very bad people -- without naming all the names that both myself and the
other leaders of the party were called.  The news also said that people
should give up on us so they would not be made to pay for our mistakes and
our transgressions.  In this way, my scope of activity was restricted
because a significant number of people bought this propaganda because it
was powerful and convincing, including the stories that I had stolen some
money.  At a later point, there were stories that I had escaped to Hawaii
with a lot of money, that I was in a safe place, various types of
propaganda aiming to destroy my reputation and remove me from active
contact with the population.
Q.   Was there information on the media that you had been arming,
providing arms, to extremists?
A.   Yes, indeed.  The media also said that we had armed groups of
extremists and that we were backing them, these extremists who were
preparing to carry out different criminal actions over the non-Serb
population.  So these things were said, above all, to Serbs in order to
justify the activities or, in other words, the crimes that were later
committed.
Q.   Doctor, did you ever provide arms to members of any military or
paramilitary group in Prijedor?
A.   I was not personally involved with weapons.  And I can say, in a
decided way, that I did not give or distribute any weapons to anyone or
any units.  Speaking of weapons, perhaps I should add what sort of weapons
the Territorial Defence or certain units had at their disposal, or maybe
you deem it not necessary.
Q.   I think it's very important.  I thought you had discussed that
earlier.  You mentioned before the weapons that were distributed by Arsic
in 1991 and that some of those remained with the local units.  In addition
to those weapons, can you tell us if there were any other weapons in the
possession of Bosniaks and Croats in Prijedor?
A.   As a deputy in 1990, I put this question to the parliament of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to provide information as regards the possession of
legal weapons, so weapons with the relevant documents and certificates.
And, according to the national structure, provide information on who
exactly owned these weapons.  After receipt of this information, the
structure for Prijedor municipality was as follows:  Legally registered
rifles and other such weapons as pistols, so we're talking about legal
weapons used  for personal safety, personal self defence or hunting
weapons, in Prijedor municipality, there were about 5.000 such registered
weapons.  Around 3.300 were owned by Serbs, and about 1.700 owned by
non-Serbs.
Q.   Did you yourself --
A.   Excuse me, if I may just be allowed to finish.  There are 33 local
communes, or 35 if we take into account also the Croatian local communes,
and about 23 weapons distributed by Arsic or the JNA to the Territorial
Defence.  This would total to about 3.000 guns.
Q.   So you're saying that 23 were distributed to each of the
settlements, each of the 35 settlements received about 23 weapons.  Is
that correct?
A.   Not every village got as much.  Some got a bit less.  But apart
from the Territorial Defence weapons, every -- in every local commune, the
reserve component of the police was also mobilised so that everyone
reserve policeman, there were about 7 and 10 such in each of the local
communes, depending on its size, which means that in every commune,
between 30 and 35 people were legally armed.  If we multiply that by 35
local communes, the result is about 1.200, perhaps 1.300, legally owned
weapons in every local commune.  And these legally owned guns, hunting
weapons, we're talking about 3.000 pieces.  There were also pieces that
people obtained illegally in different ways.  But according to our
estimate, those did not amount to more than several hundred, perhaps four
or five hundred pieces.  We did not have any accurate information
regarding this, because that was out of our control, and we could not have
any more accurate information regarding that.
Q.   You talked about propaganda against yourself and other political
leaders of the SDA.  What about propaganda against other professionals,
perhaps doctors that you knew, who were not involved in politics?  Were
you aware of any propaganda against these individuals?
A.   They knew that, regardless of a person's political allegiances,
whether the person belonged to the SDS [as interpreted] Or not, every
citizen of Prijedor was a patriot.  That's why they arrested and many of
those people were later killed in the Keraterm and Kozarac camps.  They
arrested a number of people who were never into politics in any kind of
way.  On the contrary, these people were sometimes very friendly with
Serbs from Prijedor.  For example, a colleague of my, Dr. Zeljko Sikora,
who treated patients visiting villages and houses, he was well-loved by
Serbs from the village of Tomasica and the surrounding area.  People loved
him and respected him because he was a very kind and generous man.  From
what I learned later, he had been accused, as he was specialising in
gynecology, allegedly he had a hidden agenda to sterilise all Serb women
in Prijedor municipality, so they said.  This accusation led to his
disappearance, as was the case also with many other intellectuals and
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
prominent citizens of Prijedor in the Keraterm, Omarska, and other camps
in the municipal area.
The aim of this was to disorientate the people, to destroy any
possibility of resistance.  Another aim, as important, was to present what
they talked about as hidden agendas about people who appeared to be kind
and generous but actually behind everyone's backs cooked up plans for the
destruction of Serbs.  They used such pretexts to destroy a large number
of prominent, well-respected citizens of Prijedor who had nothing
whatsoever to do with any military or other activities.
Q.   What was the ethnicity and religion of Dr. Zeljko Sikora?
A.   Dr. Sikora was Czech.  He was a Catholic, although he never said
openly that he was a Catholic.  He was not a very religious person, but he
was a selfless person, a noble person.  He was helping everyone.  As he
was Czech, a Czech who had lived in Prijedor for two or three generations,
that's his family, he spoke of himself as Bosniak -- Bosnian.  So that Dr.
Sikora was neither a Croat nor a Bosniak.  He was just simply a man from
Bosnia of Czech origins.
Q.   After the takeover, did you discuss strategy with other members of
the SDA, such as the president of the municipality, Mr. Cehajic, and the
possibility of negotiating some kind of settlement with the Serbian
authorities?
A.   As I've already said before, the only possibility I could see was
to evacuate the population from the occupied area to the area of the
western Krajina, then controlled by the Territorial Defence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that was later to become the BH army.  That was my conviction,
and it was shared by a significant majority of people.  Some other people,
quite many, believed that by talking to and negotiating with
representatives of the SDS, agreements could be achieved, although those
who shared my opinion were in the majority, I did not want to rule out the
possibility of negotiations.  I didn't want anyone to be able to say later
on that by missing our opportunity to negotiate, we compromised our
chances of solving the situation in a peaceful way.  That's why I allowed
a negotiating team to be set up, although I took no part in this myself
because I thought it was pointless.  A group of seven people held
negotiations with representatives of the SDS several days after the
takeover.  It was on the 3rd or 4th of May and lasted until the 16th of
May, 1992.  I would also like to point out that a minor group of people
that believed that one should fight and resist, by military means, the
JNA, the then JNA, and the forces of the SDS.
Q.   Who were the leaders that were among the group that went to
negotiate with the SDS authorities?
A.   It was Mr. Cehajic that thought negotiations should be held with
the SDS.  Ilijaz Music, Medunjanin, Meho Tursic, Islam Bahonjic, these
were some of the members of the Executive Board and some of the more
prominent people who eventually took part in these negotiations.  I'm not
sure about Mr. Cehajic.  He was only advocating the idea.
Q.   Did you have any conversations with Mr. Cehajic regarding his
personal safety?
A.   Even after the takeover, Mr. Cehajic moved around freely in the
town of Prijedor.  And as I was not in a position to do so, he used to
come to my parents' house where I was staying.  And among other things, he
said that it might be a good idea for us to exchange our flats, the flats
we had in Prijedor, for flats in Sarajevo.  I'm only mentioning this as an
example of how unaware Mr. Cehajic was of the danger to him and to many
other people at that time.  I told him:  "Muhamed, leave the flats be
right now.  That's not important right now.  What matters more is your
life.  You are in danger.  You and your family should leave Prijedor as
soon as possible.  Try to escape from Prijedor and find shelter in a safe
place."  He asked me:  "But why, Mirza?  What could possibly happen to me?
What did I do wrong?  Did I wrong them in any way?  We never did anything
nor did we plan anything of which we could be accused."
Despite my efforts to persuade him to leave, he was still not
completely aware of the danger and could not see the situation coming.
The same applied to a number of other prominent people, public figures,
who had nothing to do with politics.  A typical reply from them was:  "Why
should we run?  There is no reason for anything to accuse us of anything,
even less arrest us."
Q.   Were you able to get your wife and children out of Prijedor?
A.   Yes.  Although I was rather concerned and worried because of the
events that were happening and stayed almost 24 hours a day outside my
apartment and had no time to think about my family, my brother, at one
point in time, I believe that it was as early as the 12th of April, 1992,
told me that his brother-in-law and his wife had a flat, a house, in
Zagreb that would be made available to them by a friend who is a seasonal
worker in Germany.  And he also said that it would be perhaps wise for me
to send my wife and children together with them over there.  I agreed, and
on the 13th of April, which was the last day that it was possible to cross
over to Croatia, because the last bridge was -- across the Sava River was
blown up the next day and all connections with -- between Bosnia and
Croatia were severed, they left.
Q.   I'd like to go back to two documents that are before you.  One is
Document S70, which has 65 ter number of 225.  It is -- at the top it
indicates "Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Krajina Autonomous
Region, Prijedor Municipality Crisis Staff."  It has a number, and it's
dated 6 June, 1992.  It indicates that "pursuant to Article 7 of the
decision on the organisation work of the Prijedor Municipality Crisis
Staff at its session held on 6 June, 1992, in connection with free passage
permits and the continuation of the blockade of the town, the Prijedor
Municipality Crisis Staff adopted the following conclusion:  One, the
blockade of the town shall remain in force."  And the second point is:
"Approval is hereby given for train service on the Prijedor/Banja Luka
line, but travel shall be allowed only with appropriate permits issued by
the public security station.  This conclusion shall enter into force on
the day of its adoption."
On the bottom right, it indicates a signature and a stamp:"Crisis
Staff president," and it appears to be Stakic, printed.  To the left, it's
indicated that the document is sent to, number one, public security
station, number two, Prijedor railway station, and number 3, files.
Before I ask you any question, I'd also like to you to look at
S102, which has a 65 ter number of 120.  It is dated the 5th of May, 1992.
"Serbian Municipality of Prijedor Executive Committee.  Pursuant to
Article 78 of the rules of executive procedure of the Serbian Municipality
of Prijedor at its meeting on 5 May, 1992, the government of the Serbian
Municipality of Prijedor adopted the following decision:  Eso Bucan is
hereby dismissed of the post of commander of logistics security, effective
as of 5 May, 1992.  Number 2, this decision shall take effect on the day
of its adoption, and Major Radmilo Zeljaja shall see to its
implementation."  The document is signed and stamped, and below the
signature, it's printed president of the executive committee, Dr. Milan
Kovacevic, copied to Major Radmilo Zeljaja, Eso Bucan, and files."
Doctor, based upon these documents and your knowledge of events do
you believe that the Crisis Staff in Prijedor had some influence on the
army units stationed in the Prijedor municipality?
MR. LUKIC:  Objection, Your Honour.  This document does not show
any trace of Crisis Staff.  It says that it's executive committee of the
Prijedor Municipal Assembly.  So I would ask my colleague to show the
foundation of his line of questions.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  May I respond.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Yes, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  The person, Dr. Milan Kovacevic, as we have seen
from prior evidence is a member of the Prijedor Crisis Staff.  And one of
the first documents we looked at today regarding the formation of the
Crisis Staff --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry to interrupt you.  We should be quite
clear in our language, and I agree with the objection of the Defence.
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
When a document is signed in the capacity as a president of the Executive
Committee of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbian
Municipality of Prijedor, Executive Committee, then it should be quoted as
such.  And all the other insinuations are questions of the evaluation of
evidence.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  If I could just point out, complete my argument
regarding that -- I don't know if Your Honour wants me to.  Or would you
rather me not go into that, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  No, I think it's quite clear.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Doctor, let me ask you the following question:  Earlier we looked
at a document regarding the Crisis Staff and its relationship to the
executive committee.  First let me ask you about the Municipal Assembly's
relationship with the executive committee.  What is the relationship
between the Municipal Assembly and the executive committee of a
municipality in normal peacetime?
A.   In normal peacetime, the executive committee is a kind of local
government which cannot reach any significant decision without the
assembly or the president of the municipality having to approve, issue his
approval in respect of this decision.
Q.   Is the executive committee then a subordinate body to the
Municipal Assembly?
A.   Of course.  The Municipal Assembly, or the president of the
Municipal Assembly, is superior to the president of the Executive Board.
Q.   Earlier this morning, we looked at a document indicating the
establishment of the Crisis Staff.  And if you recall, it indicated that
the Crisis Staff would exercise all authority of the Municipal Assembly
when it could not meet and would guide the work of the executive
committee.  Is that consistent with the structure as you knew it and the
relationship between the assembly and the executive committee?
A.   In wartime, as it is indicated here, due to the fact that the
session of the assembly cannot meet as frequently as necessary, the
assembly being a very large body, a Crisis Staff is formed.  The president
of the Executive Board, or the Executive Board itself, according to this,
is merely an executive body of the Crisis Staff.  That is, the Municipal
Assembly, which has been replaced by the Crisis Staff.  By virtue of its
function and in accordance with law, it is required to pass decisions and
issue instructions and similar documents given by the Crisis Staff.
Q.   Going back to S70, the document that bears the -- indicates under
the stamp that it is the Crisis Staff president -- excuse me.  Let me
withdraw that question.
Do you find it, would it be normal, according to the legal
relationships between the army and civilian bodies, that a civilian body,
be it the assembly, the Crisis Staff, or the executive committee, name the
logistics officer, name an officer in a military unit?
A.   In normal circumstances, it is the superior military command that
is in charge of appointing the subordinate officer.  In this case, the
executive body of the Crisis Staff is the body that appoints an officer,
who was no longer a member of the JNA but a member of the Serbian army,
and actually issues an order to Radmilo Zeljaja, who was the commander of
the local military unit, to implement the decision made by the executive
body of the Crisis Staff.
Q.   You indicated that the JNA was no longer the JNA but the Serbian
army.  Can you discuss with us the events of the 16th of May and how that
affected the military force, the former JNA, that was in Bosnia.
A.   After the JNA had withdrawn from Slovenia and Croatia, almost all
military forces, military troops of the former JNA concentrated in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.  I'm referring to the units that had withdrawn from
Croatia and Slovenia which constituted a significant majority.  In my
previous testimony, I stated that the JNA, up until the 16th of May, had
declared itself as a Yugoslav People's Army and had publicly denied any
relationship with the Serbian Democratic Party.
However, on the 16th of May, a public communique was made, to the
effect that the former JNA in the area of Bosnia and Herzegovina was no
longer Yugoslav People's Army but was being renamed into the Serbian army.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  We should have a break now until 12.40.
--- Recess taken at 12.17 p.m.
--- On resuming at 12.45 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please proceed.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  May I proceed, Mr. President?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Doctor, on the 23rd of May, after the incident, the next day after
the incident in Hambarine, was there any ultimatum given to the citizens
of Hambarine?
A.   Yes, there was.  An ultimatum was given by the Crisis Staff.
Q.   Can you tell us your best recollection of what you heard on the
radio.  First, let me ask you, did you hear this on the radio?  I'm sorry.
A.   Yes, I did.  I heard on the local radio station in Prijedor an
announcement given by the Crisis Staff.
Q.   Who read the announcement?  Was it a politician or an employee of
the radio station?
A.   I think that the announcement was read by a presenter of the radio
station in Prijedor.
Q.   What is your best recollection of what was stated in that
announcement?
A.   "Citizens of Hambarine" -- unfortunately, I can only paraphrase
the contents of the announcement.  "Citizens of Hambarine, you are
required to surrender weapons and the extremists who perpetrated the
offence at the checkpoint, Aziz Aliskovic and others.  If you fail to
comply with this request tomorrow by 12.00, you will suffer consequences,"
which implied shelling of the settlement from all available weapons.
Q.   Was it indicated who was giving this order?
A.   Yes, it was.  At the end of the announcement, it was said that it
was the president of the Crisis Staff, Dr. Milomir Stakic, who was giving
the announcement.
Q.   Just to be clear, a speaker, presenter, for the radio station read
the announcement and said that this decision or order was given the Crisis
Staff, Dr. Milomir Stakic as president?
A.   The speaker read the entire document, the title, Crisis Staff of
the Municipality of Prijedor.  Then he went on to read the contents.  And
at the end, he said:  "The president of the Crisis Staff, Milomir Stakic."
Q.   What happened after noon on May 23rd?
A.   At 12 minutes past 12.00, after the ultimatum had expired, the
area of the village of Hambarine, but not only Hambarine but the entire
area comprising a number of neighbouring villages located on a hill, there
are seven villages in that area where Bosniaks are the majority, the area
is called Brdo.  It came under shelling from mortars and other artillery
pieces.  The shelling lasted until 3.00 approximately.
Q.   What happened then?
A.   After that, two or three tanks set out from the direction of
Prijedor which were followed by infantry troops who were moving along the
Prijedor/Ljubija Road which cut the village of Hambarine in two sections,
and the area of Brdo in general so that the village of Carakovo, Zecovi,
and half of the village of Hambarine were on one side, and Rizvanovici,
Rakovcani, and Biscani were on the other side.  At the foot of the area
called Brdo in Bosnian language, the word "Brdo" means hill, but it is
also a proper name of this geographical area, a group belonging to the
Territorial Defence put up resistance but to no avail because they had no
anti-armour weapons.  And the tanks that I mentioned needed not more than
10 or 15 minutes to climb up the hill and take positions on the top of the
area.  So at about 4.00 or 5.00, they were already there.
They positioned themselves in the middle of the village of
Hambarine, in the middle of the area of Brdo, thereby dividing the area in
two sections, which I described.
Q.   Where were you at that time?
A.   I found myself to the left of this road looking from the direction
of Prijedor, in the left half of this area, more precisely in the village
of Carakovo, which was some -- which was perhaps 1 kilometre away from the
scene of the incident.
Q.   What happened then?
A.   On the same day, the residents of the villages which were to the
right side of the road, that is, the villages of Hambarine, Rakovcani,
Rizvanovici, and Biscani, gathered together all the weapons they had,
belonging to the Territorial Defence and the police force and any other
weapons that they may have had, placed it on a tractor, loaded up on a
tractor and handed it over to the Serb military.
Q.   What happened then?
A.   The residents of the left part of the area, the villages of
Carakovo and Zecovi did not surrender weapons on that day.  And the
following day, aware of the fact that the other villages had already
surrendered their weapons the previous day and frightened of what might
happen to them, but also knowing that I and a number of other individuals
were with them, asked me what they should do, whether to surrender the
weapons or continue with the resistance.  I said that it was up to them. I
didn't want to -- I didn't want anyone to be left with the impression that
they should go on fighting just because I was there, merely because of my
presence in the area.  They withdrew, and after several hours they came
back to me and told me that they had decided that they should surrender
the weapons.
Then I said:  "In that case, I can no longer remain here.  I have
to take to the woods," and I fled to a nearby forest, which is called
Kurevo, with a small group of people, whereas the residents of these two
villages then surrendered the weapons that they had on the following day.
And I stayed in the woods.
Q.   Did you have a weapon with you?
A.   Yes, I did.  I had a pistol for which I had a legally valid
permit, a pistol that I had obtained on my own and which was legally
registered with the police station in Prijedor.
Q.   Can you tell us where you stayed in these woods and for how long
you were there?
A.   I stayed in a very thick area of the woods.  We dug out a hole in
the ground.  It was 1 metre and 20 centimetres wide, and perhaps 1 metre,
80 centimetres deep.  We had to do this because the woods were being
shelled on several occasions, at various times, because there were a
number of other groups from various villages including the town of
Prijedor itself consisting of people who did not wish to surrender their
weapons and were afraid for their safety.  They, too, remained in the
woods.  Due to frequent shelling, our movement was restricted, and I was
no longer in communication with these other groups of people.
We made an attempt to establish communication with them through a
brother of one of the people who was with me.  These people were my close
associates, and the brother of one of these people was captured and killed
on the same day.
Q.   How many people were with you?
A.   If we're not counting this man who was killed, then that would
make three of us.  Before we were four.
Q.   Were the three of you all staying in this hole?
A.   Yes, all four of us, and later three, were in that hole until
about the 27th of June.  Exactly between the 27th and the 28th of June.
So in the period between the 23rd of May and the 27th of June, we stayed
in that hole.  The other brother, because the young man who was with us
had two brothers, the other brother who had survived used to bring us food
so that we could survive, every three or four days.
Q.   Was one of the people with you your brother?
A.   Yes.
Q.   The third person who was with you, do you have any concern with
naming that person?
A.   It is for safety reasons that I will like to leave this for a
closed session or I would like to inform Your Honour without making this
public, because the area is now under the control of Republika Srpska.  So
by naming him, I think I might put his life on the line, and I would not
like to do that.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Actually, I don't need his name.  I don't know if
Your Honours or the Defence need his name.
May I proceed.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Yes, we can proceed without quoting the name.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Sir, this third person, did he at one point make a suggestion
regarding the tactic that you should adopt?  Did he ever consider
surrendering?
A.   Yes.  We were all in a very desperate situation.  We did not know
what to do.  And then he came up with a suggestion, this man I don't want
to name, and my brother considered this possibility, too, that it might be
a good idea for us to simply surrender and to try to explain that we meant
no harm and that we prepared no overthrow, we prepared to commit no
genocide, to say that we could prove our allegations and prove our
innocence.  We thought we had best just leave the weapons behind and dig
them there in the forest.  This other man had a pistol, and my brother had
an automatic rifle that he had signed for as a member of the Territorial
Defence.  That moment, I told both of them:  "If they find you here in the
forest carrying weapons or outside the forest carrying weapons or without
weapons, if you surrender or if you're captured, in all of these
eventualities, you'll meet the same fate, no reasons given.  Can't you see
that there is a fixed plan predetermining everyone's fate?"  And our fate
is the people who, in their opinion, were the main culprits was clearly
predetermined in a way.  It was only then that they became aware of the
risk we were all running, and they both broke down and cried because they
were very frightened.
I tried to calm them, and I said that all was not lost yet.  We
could still continue to hide in the forest and escape from the Serb-held
territory to a free territory.
Q.   You indicated that there were armed groups in the woods that you
sometimes -- or at least on occasion had contact with.  Do you know if a
person named Slavko Ecimovic was in the woods?
A.   I just want to make sure whether I understand your question.  Your
question seems to imply that I maintained contact with him later on.  I
would like to point out that after Brdo was shelled and after the attack
on the Hambarine, due to the fact that the forest itself was shelled, I
could not have any contact to any group whatsoever because we could not
move.  We did try to make contact through this young man, the fourth man,
but he was captured and killed.  After that, we made no further attempts
to make contact.
Prior to this event, I did have contact with representatives of
the Patriotic League.
Q.   And was Slavko Ecimovic a member of the Patriotic League, to your
knowledge?
A.   Yes, he was.  He was the commander of the Patriotic League.
Q.   Thank you for clarifying your contacts with these other groups in
the woods.  Would it be correct, then, that you were not aware or had no
contact with any group that conducted an attack on Prijedor or attempt to
retake Prijedor on the 30th of May, 1992?
A.   The information I have regarding these events dates to a period
almost one year after these events.  I obtained my information from those
who survived, persons I met later on, somewhere in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
But at the moment the event took place, I had no contact with people who
tried to liberate Prijedor.
Q.   If those people had come to you before their attempt to liberate
Prijedor, what would you have said to them?
A.   Had I been able to get in touch with these people, provided
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
that --
MR. LUKIC:  Your Honours, this is pure speculation.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sustained.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   How long did you stay in the woods?
A.   Until the 27th of June, 1992.
Q.   What did you do then?
A.   I set out with this group of two people to the Sanski Most area,
in order to avoid the offensive announced due to take place in the forest.
We heard that a group of special forces, special troops, was coming from
Mis to mop up the forest from anyone who was still left in it.  It should
have been, according to their announcement, around 700 green berets.  We
had a small radio receiver, and every day, at regular intervals, we
followed the news on Radio Prijedor and Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina, so it
was in this way that we obtained a certain amount of information
concerning the events which I have referred to.
Q.   When you set out for Sanski Most, can you describe what happened?
A.   In Sanski Most, we went from village to village trying to reach
the Grmec hill.  Some of my relatives from my mother's side lived in
Sanski Most.  The posse after me and these other people was organised on a
regional level.  In Sanski Most municipality, there was a group of people
who were in charge of trying to capture or ambush my group and myself.
The man who tried to capture his group was called Kudra.  He offered
people 5.000 German marks in exchange for any information regarding me.
We moved from village to village but didn't stop in any of the villages
for longer than 24 hours because I knew that within 24 hours, there would
be a leak of information on us.  Unfortunately, very often from Bosniak
sources.  So the next day, in the village where we stayed, the group of
military policemen appeared and searched the village.  By applying these
tactics, we used to cross through Sanski Most municipality, cross the
Grmec hill, swim across the River Una and reach Bihac.  That is, free
territory controlled by the BH army.
Q.   How many days did your journey take on foot until you got to the
river?
A.   We travelled for 15 days, and at this point, food was very scarce
among the Bosnian population.  So we only had two loaves of bread, and we
were five people because in the meantime, we had been joined by another
two young men from Sanski Most.  We were convinced that we could cover
this ground in three days, but our compass broke, and on the third day, we
ran out of supplies.  The rest of the time, we survived by eating
mushrooms, fruits found in the forest, and snails.
Q.   What happened when you got to the river?
A.   It was raining for days, so the river, which is more of a mountain
torrent actually, was flooding, and it was very fast.  After escaping from
a series of ambushes and all attempts to hunt us down, when we were only a
stone's throw away from our freedom, we saw this river and thought that it
was impossible to cross.  But then we put together a sort of a raft.  We
put all our things on this raft and tried to cross the river.  But at
first, we failed, so we got back to the riverbank.  There were water
eddies and a waterfall very close to where we tried to make the crossing.
So the second time, we were only several metres far from the other
riverbank, but the stream carried us off, and we fell down the waterfall.
My brother, who was standing on the opposite riverbank, got scared, ran,
and shouted my name.  A young man who was with me and I managed to go
back, but confused as we were, we went back to the same riverbank and not
the other one.  At that moment -- all of this is happening in the Una
canyon. Several tens of metres high -- sounds of barrage fire were heard,
and there were bullets flying all around us.
At that moment, I realised that there was nothing else for us to
do but try to swim across, hungry and weary as we were.  We didn't think
that we could succeed.  The first to set out was the oldest among us, and
he said:  "If I make it, you'll all make it."  He jumped into the river.
He managed to swim across.  I followed him, and as soon as I jumped, there
was -- someone was firing at me.  And then I got carried away by the
current.  And by the time I reached the other river bank, the firing had
stopped.  Unfortunately, one of us drowned in the river, and the other
crossed the bridge by putting two socks he wore on a stick and waving the
socks as a token of his willingness to surrender, he crossed the bridge
which was around a kilometre and a half from the place which I have just
described.  So in this way, he confused both sides, the Bosniak and the
Serb side on the two opposite banks because they respectively thought that
it was Serbian delegate or someone trying to surrender.  And by this ploy,
he managed to cross the river by taking the bridge.
The Bosniak side was really surprised that he made it because he
walked through a minefield unharmed.  Both sides were mined.
Q.   I'd now like to go back to the documents and discuss with you the
relationship of the Crisis Staff to the police.  I'd first like you to
look at S107, which is 65 ter number 200.
This is a document at the top left it indicates "Serbian Republic
of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Ministry of the Interior, Security Services Centre,
Banja Luka, public security station, Prijedor, strictly confidential."  It
lists the number and the date, 31 May, 1992.  The document on the bottom,
on the last page is addressed to seven recipients:  Crisis Staff, security
services coordinators, Security Services Centre, Banja Luka; police chief,
security chief; general manager of the Ljubija iron ore mines; and files.
There's a signature below which appears:  "Chief of Public Security
Service, Drljaca" and there is a stamp.
The document states at the top:  "With a view to the speedy and
effective establishment of peace on the territory of Prijedor municipality
and in accordance with the decision of the Crisis Staff, I hereby order
the following:  The industrial compound of the Omarska mines stripmine
shall serve as a provisional correction centre for persons captured in
combat or detained on the grounds of the security services operational
information.  Two, together with the appropriate documents, the persons
taken into custody shall be handed over to the chief of security who is
dutybound in collaboration with the national, public, and military
security coordinators to put them up in any of the five premises allocated
for the accommodation of detainees.  Three, a mixed group consisting of
national, public, and military security investigators shall be responsible
for the work with and categorization of detainees. They shall organise
themselves respecting the parity principle."  Mirko Jesic, Ranko Mijic,
and Lieutenant-Colonel Majstorovic shall be responsible for their work.
It goes on to list 17 points in total.  I'd now like you, Witness,
to look at Document S114, 65 ter number 276.  It has the letterhead:
"Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, ministry of internal affairs,
Sarajevo, Security Services Centre, Banja Luka, public security station,
Prijedor."  A number and the date 1 July 1992.  It states:  "Crisis Staff
of the SO Prijedor, Municipal Assembly Prijedor, reference your documents
number  02111236/92 dated 23 June, 1992, and 02/111236/92, dated 30 June,
1992."  At the bottom, it appears a signature, and below that, chief
public security station, Simo Drljaca.
The document reads in the beginning:  "In reference to your
documents of the above numbers and dates, we hereby inform you that
conclusion number 02111108/92, by which the release of prisoners is
prohibited, is being fully observed."  It lists several others, but I'm
going to go to the second page of the English translation, the fourth
paragraph from the end of the document:  "Regarding order number
02111215/92, dated 17 June, 1992, the Prijedor SJB has established an
integrated intervention platoon which together with the military police is
actively involved in the prevention and determent of all sorts of crime.
It has started to produce results in controlling break-ins and robberies,
and in confiscating illegally acquired goods."
I'd like you then to look at S115, 65 ter number is 289.  This
document on the letterhead indicates:  "Serbian Republic, Autonomous
Region of Krajina, Prijedor Municipality, Municipal Assembly
administrative services."  It's dated 13 July, 1992 and entitled "Report
on Implementation of the Conclusions of the Prijedor municipal Crisis
Staff."  The document, at the end, there appears a name without a
signature.  And the name and title are secretary of the Municipal
Assembly, Dusan Baltic.  The document begins:  "Number one, the
conclusions for which the public security station is responsible, the
first of these is conclusion number 02111108/29 on banning the release of
detainees is being fully observed."  At the very bottom of that page on
the English translation, or the 9th separate point under number 1, it says
with regard to order number 02111215/92, dated 17 June, 1992, the Prijedor
public security station has formed a unified intervention platoon which is
actively engaged with members of the military police in the prevention and
suppression of all forms of crime.  The first results can be seen in the
areas of cracking down on looting, robbery, and the confiscation of
illegally obtained property."
I'll ask you to direct your attention to the second to last
paragraph of that document which indicates:  "However, not all the
documents of the Crisis Staff have been included in this report.  The
reasons for this are that a certain number relate to personnel issues,
(dismissals, appointments, the formation of working groups and boards,
establishing the obligation for confirmation of proposed appointments and
the like) which were immediately implemented."
I'd now like you to look at S116, which has a 65 ter number of
298.  It's entitled "A Summary of Conclusions Adopted by Prijedor
Municipality Executive Committee Relating to the Public Security Service
SJB and Regional Command from 29 April to 17 August, 1992."  That's the
first title in which six points appear below that.  The next title is:  "A
Summary of Conclusions and Orders -- a Summary of Conclusions, Orders, and
Decisions adopted by the Crisis Staff/war Presidency relating to the SJB
and the Regional Command from 29 May to 24 July, 1992."  At the bottom of
the document appears no signature, but the words "Crisis Staff, War
Presidency."  And under the second point, on the points regarding the
Crisis Staff, the 2nd page of the English translation, in the number 2,
the seventh paragraph, it reads:  "Inclusion number 02111145/92 of 6 June,
1992, obliging the SJB chief and Slobodan Kuruzovic to coordinate the
security of Prijedor hospital."
And then going to the third from last paragraph of that document,
it reads:  "Conclusion Number 0102345/92 of 2nd July, 1992, forbidding the
individual release of persons from Trnopolje, Omarska, and Keraterm."
Sir, based upon these documents and upon your knowledge of the
relationship between government bodies and municipal authorities in
Bosnia, do you have a belief that the -- there's any relationship or
superior relationship between the Crisis Staff and the police in Prijedor
after the takeover on the 30th of April, 1992?
A.   I would like to ask you to please just clarify the points in the
last document you referred to.  I'm talking about point 2, that's in
Bosnian translation, item 2, or as I seem to have heard, you said 02111/92
by which the chief of the police and Slobodan Kuruzovic must provide
security for Prijedor hospital.  Did you mean that, or 02111/135 about
confiscation of property from persons who illegally took property?  I'm
not sure which one of these two you were referring to, the one I read
first or the next one?
Q.   I was referring to the one regarding the Prijedor hospital, but so
the record is clear, I think I should read the one you're referring to.  I
believe that's the top -- the first point under number 2, order number
02/111/135/92 of 5 June, 1992, ordering military police and SJB organs to
confiscated all illegally confiscated or misappropriated property from
persons who have confiscated and misappropriated such property and deposit
it to the appointed places in accordance with previous orders."  Is that
the point that you were referring to?
A.   Yes, that's exactly what I was referring to.  Because this order
is mentioned in the previous documents, and I thought that was the logical
sequence of documents.  So that's why I failed to understand your
question.  But if that was the question, now I do understand.
Q.   Do you have any comment, based upon your knowledge of the
relationship between municipal authorities and police authorities before
and after the takeover, regarding the relationship, subordinate or
otherwise, between the police in Prijedor and the Crisis Staff?
A.   Your Honours, with your permission, I would like to just take
several seconds to have a look at all these documents since I am required
to make a statement regarding all four documents.  So if I could just
please have a minute to look at them again in order to make an accurate
statement.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  And if you feel necessary, don't hesitate to
quote the one or other passage you want to refer to.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.
In the first document mentioned by Mr. Prosecutor, in item 1, it
is stated that as a temporary collection point for persons who are
deprived of liberty or captured, the industrial compound of the Omarska
mines strip shall serve as a provisional collection centre for such
persons.  This document talks about the fact that the chief of the public
security station or the chief of police of the Prijedor municipality, who
at the time was Mr. Drljaca, is designating the industrial compound of the
Omarska mine strip as a provisional collection centre which would
constitute a document whereby the Omarska camp was established.
The next document is a collated report in which the police chief
informs the Crisis Staff of the implementation of the orders that had been
given to him.  In item 1, he talks about the order on the release of
prisoners of war, the release of prisoners which makes reference to the
prohibition of such release.
The following document, S115, is also a broad piece of information
regarding a number of conclusions implemented by the Crisis Staff of the
Prijedor Municipality.  Among others, a conclusion here is made on the
implementation of decisions in charge of the public security station.
Conclusion number 02111108/92 on banning the release of detainees is being
fully respected.  Then it goes on and mentions conclusion number 0211135
on securing funds to play police salaries.  Another conclusion that has
been fully implemented, which clearly shows that the police, which had
previously been financed from the budget of the republic, is now being
financed, and thereby directly subordinate to, by the Crisis Staff.
The last document, S116 --
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   I'm sorry, before you go on to that document, perhaps there's a
couple others conclusions I'd like to direct your attention to.  The sixth
and seventh conclusions on that list under number 1 reads:  "Conclusion
number 02111183/92, dated 12th of June, 1992, related to the legalisation
of passes allowing citizens freedom of movement is being carried out to
the letter.  Passes are not issued for crisis areas or to individuals who
are on the registrar of persons wanted for committing crimes."  The next
point is:  "In addition, work has started on issuing permits to persons
who are moving out of the area of the municipality."
I'm sorry, please continue.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  For clarification, could you please indicate the
exhibit number, the provisional one.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.  Again this is S115, 65 ter number 289.  I was
reading from the page with the ERN number stamp of 00969539.
Q.   Did you want to comment on the last document?
A.   Yes.  The issue here is the registration of persons whom the
Crisis Staff had declared as individuals who had engaged in some form of
wrongdoing.  I never had access to this -- to these records, but I know
that it was a rather lengthy list comprising several hundred or several
thousands of people who were wanted.  This document prohibits freedom of
movement to all such persons by prohibiting the issuing of passes, because
only those individuals who had been issued by -- the relevant passes by
the police station were allowed freedom of movement which included
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
departure from the area of Prijedor.
If I may comment on the last document, please, Document 116, order
02111135, which is referred to -- if I may take a moment, please.  The
order I think can be found on page 2 of the English version of the text at
the top of the page under Item 2.  The order orders police stations to
seize the property from persons who have confiscated or misappropriated
such property and deposit it at the appointed places in accordance with
previous orders."  What is quite telling here is the fact that it was the
Crisis Staff that issued an order both to the civilian police, that is,
the public security station, and the military police to confiscate all
illegally acquired or misappropriated property.  But that that property
should not be returned to its legal owners but deposited at the appointed
places.  It was generally known that the property belonging to the people
who were either evicted from the territory of the municipality of Prijedor
or killed in the camps was confiscated or misappropriated by the bodies
such the Crisis Staff.
Q.   Sir, you mentioned that your wife and children were able to leave
Prijedor in April.  Did you have any uncles that you were close to in
Prijedor?
A.   Yes, I did.  Next to my parents' house, there was a house
belonging -- actually, two houses belonging to my two uncles, Esref
Crnalic and Asif Crnalic.  Crnkic, if I may correct the interpretation,
not Crnalic.
Q.   What happened to them after the takeover on the 30th of April?
A.   I'm sorry, I see that the names are not correctly spelled.  Esref
Crnkic and Husein Crnkic are the names of my two uncles.  They have been
misinterpreted.
Q.   What happened to them during the conflict?
A.   Esref Crnkic was the manager of one of the departments of the
mine, or complex.  He was an engineer of electronics and was one of the
eminent residents of Prijedor.  My other uncle was a professor and, at the
time, was the schoolmaster of the local grammar school.  He was also one
of the eminent and influential citizens of Prijedor.
Esref Crnkic was not directly involved in any events.  Husein
Crnkic, on the other hand, was deputy of the local parliament representing
the Party of Democratic Action.  They were both killed in the Omarska
camp.
Q.   Sir --
A.   If I may finish, please.  Because it was believed that they were
responsible for the policy, whereas I, as a young man, was not considered
to be an author of such policy, which was not true.
Q.   Sir, I have only one more question for you:  Based upon your
knowledge of the context in which these events took place, the history and
politics, do you have any explanation for why Prijedor suffered so much
during the conflict and after the takeover by the SDS authorities?
A.   What is characteristic of Prijedor in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
the fact that it is a city which suffered horrible crimes at the very
beginning of the conflict and mass deportation of non-Serbs, Croats and
Bosniaks.  According to the currently available information, it has been
established that over 3.500 people had been killed in the camps of
Omarska, Keraterm, Trnopolje, and other camps and similar places in the
territory of the Prijedor municipality.
At the same time, if we compare this with some other localities in
Bosnian Krajina, such as Sipovo, which had a clear Serb majority and where
only -- and where there were only about 20 per cent of Bosniaks, we see
that there were almost no crimes committed in the area with the exception
of several individual killings.  The similar situation can be found in
some other areas of the Bosnian Krajina, that is, the areas which had a
Bosniak minority such as the town of Bosanska Dubica and some others.
What happened in Prijedor can be explained with three reasons: The
first, and perhaps the most important one, was obviously the strategic
reason.  From the military point of view, the Sava River valley, that is,
the municipalities of Sanski Most, Kljuc, Bosanski Novi, and Prijedor, is
situated only some 50 or 60 kilometres away from Banja Luka and
constitutes an area inhabited by almost 120.000 Bosniaks, which
constitutes a significant concentration of Bosniaks living in the
immediate vicinity of the town of Banja Luka.  So that was one of the very
important military considerations and the reason why Major Zeljaja was
given the order to cleanse the area of the Sana River valley of non-Serbs
and to place the entire area under the military command.
The second very important reason for what happened can be found in
Karadzic's reaction and in what I was able to conclude from my immediate
contacts with him and other leaders of the SDS who were disappointed with
the fact that the Serb Democratic Party had not won the elections in
Prijedor.  They blamed the Serbian population of the Potkozarje area for
that.  They believed that it was their traditional partisan history,
partisan background, and the fact that they embraced the idea of
brotherhood and unity that was to blame.  And that is why Karadzic placed
his confidence in Dr. Stakic, who comes from the area with a typical
Chetnik background.  He tried to create a rift between Bosniaks and Serbs,
and he tried to impair the sense of tolerance and the belief that it was
possible for these two ethnic groups to coexist in this area.  By killing
such a large number of people, he wanted to instill hatred amongst the
population which would then constitute an obstacle to the coexistence of
different ethnic groups who lived in the area.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you, Your Honours.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The trial stands adjourned until tomorrow,
9.00.
[The witness stands down]
--- Whereupon the hearing adjourned at
1.50 p.m., to be reconvened on
Wednesday, the 29th day of May, 2002,
at 9.00 a.m.
