Monday,  1 September 2008
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
.16 p.m.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Groome, you're back.
MR. GROOME:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm happy to see you.
MR. GROOME:  Thank you very much, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  And who is your next witness?
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, the next witness formerly had
protective measures and the Prosecution is at this time going to move to
amend those protective measures based upon the wishes of the witness, so
if I might introduce Steven Cole to the Chamber.  He will be handling
this witness and will deal with that matter.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Cole.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honour.  This witness, as has
been indicated, was granted protective measures in the Vasiljevic trial.
The witness is prepared during these proceedings to testify openly and I
would ask that the protective measures previously in place be revoked so
that he can testify in open session.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  We have no difficulty with that.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honour, sir.  The witness is
Mr. Huso Kurspahic, and I ask that he called to testify.  He's a 92 ter
witness.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.  Before you bring the witness in,
let me just without to give a decision on some 92 ter applications.
On the 15th of February of this year, the Prosecution filed a
motion requesting that the trial testimony and witness statements of
several witnesses be admitted into evidence under Rule 92 ter.  On the
8th of August, the Prosecution filed a supplemental motion pursuant to
the same Rule in which it requested leave to add several witness
statements to its existing 92 ter witness material.
The Defence of Sredoje Lukic responded to the Prosecution's
motion on the 28th of February.  Defence of Milan Lukic responded on the
28th of March.  Neither Defence responded to the 8th of August motion.
On Monday, the 25th of August, the Trial Chamber issued an oral
decision in respect of both motions insofar as they related to the
following witnesses:  VG-022, VG-011, VG-097, VG-104, and VG-061.
The Chamber remained seized of the motions in relation to the
remaining seven witnesses, namely VG-003, VG-018, VG-025, VG-038, VG-071,
VG-078, and VG-084.
The Chamber has reviewed the evidence submitted in the two
motions with regard to the seven witnesses under consideration.  It finds
that the transcripts, the statements, and associated exhibits are
admissible under Rule 92 ter once the requirements of that Rule are met,
and that disposes of both motions.
Let the witness be brought in.
Mr. Cole, how long do you intend to spend on this witness?
MR. COLE:  I'm hoping, sir, that approximately half an hour, the
allowable time.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well.
[The witness entered court]
WITNESS:  HUSO KURSPAHIC
[Witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let the witness make the declaration.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will
speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You may sit.  And you may begin, Mr. Cole.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honour.
Examination by Mr. Cole:
Q.   Yes.  Good afternoon, Mr. Kurspahic.  Can you hear clearly?
A.   Good afternoon.  Yes, I can hear you clearly.
Q.   Could you please state your name and your date of birth.
,
and
.
Q.   And what is your ethnicity?
A.   I am a Bosniak.
Q.   During the spring of the year 1992, in which municipality did you
live?
, and I worked in the area
of Visegrad and the local commune of Medjedja.
MR. COLE:  Your Honours, Mr. Kurspahic is a 92 ter witness, and
I'll now proceed to confirm his prior statement, his prior testimony and
the exhibits.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, did you give a statement to an ICTY investigator
, and could I just ask you --
A.   Yes.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, could I ask that you don't refer to those
documents in front you while I'm asking you these questions, please.
A.   Yes, I understand.  I won't be doing that.
Q.   Yes.  Thank you.  And the statement that you gave was on the 12th
of May, 2000?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And can you confirm that the statement was typed in English at
the time, it was then read back to you in Bosnian, and you signed the
English version?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And did you have an opportunity last week here at the Tribunal to
review that statement in the Bosnian language?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, was there one matter which you wished to correct in that
statement, namely the name of your nephew who perished in the fire at
?
A.   Yes.  His name was Faruk, not Enver.  That was a mistake.
Q.   And the surname was Sehic?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, with that correction, do you confirm that the statement you
, is true and accurate to the best of your
knowledge?
A.   Yes.
Q.   If I were to ask you the same questions today would your answers
be the same?
A.   Yes.
MR. COLE:  Your Honours, at this point I tender the statement of
Mr. Kurspahic into evidence pursuant to Rule 92 ter.  It is the statement
, and the 65 ter number is 169.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, we admit it.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P36, Your Honours.
MR. COLE:
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, do you confirm that you testified over two days
during the Mitar Vasiljevic trial in 2001, those days being 19 September
and 24 September 2001?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you have an opportunity last week to listen to the audio
recordings of your testimony in the Mitar Vasiljevic trial?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Was that testimony true and accurate to the best of your
knowledge?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you need to make any corrections to it?
A.   No.
Q.   If you were asked the same questions today would your answers be
the same?
A.   Yes.
MR. COLE:  Your Honours, at this point I tender the transcripts
of the witness's testimony into evidence pursuant to Rule 92 ter.  The
, 65 ter number 122; the transcript from
, 65 ter number 123.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, 65 ter number 122 will become
Exhibit number P37.  65 ter number 123 will become Exhibit P38.
MR. COLE:  Thank you.  At this point also, Your Honours, I would
ask that an exhibit which accompanied the witness's testimony and was
produced as an exhibit in the Vasiljevic trial be tendered into evidence
in this trial pursuant to Rule 92 ter.  This is a list of 51 names of
fire and the 65 ter number is 170.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  65 ter number 170 will become Exhibit number P39,
Your Honours.
MR. COLE:  And Your Honours I will deal with a correction to that
list of names at this stage and could I ask that the list of 51 names,
Exhibit P39, please be shown to Mr. Kurspahic.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, can you see the list of 51 names on the screen
before you?
A.   Yes, I can.
Q.   Would you look at number 37 on the list.  Is that the name Hasib
Kurspahic?
A.   That's my father, yes.
Q.   And can you confirm that in fact your father Hasib Kurspahic
survived the Pionirska fire?
A.   Yes.
Q.   For some time after the Pionirska fire did you believe that in
fact your father had died during that fire together with your mother,
your two sisters, your nephew, and many other relatives?
A.   I believed that because it was impossible for him to escape the
fire on his own because at the time he was 70 years of age, he was a sick
person, and that is why I believed that.
Q.   And did you subsequently find out that your father had in fact
survived that fire, and did you meet up with him again in early 1993?
A.   I learned this through ham operators that he had survived, that
and I visited him in 1993 and that
was my first contact with him.
Q.   And, Mr. Kurspahic, last week were you able to view a videotape
of an interview with your father which took place in 1992 shortly after
the Pionirska fire?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And did you confirm that that videotape interview of your father
was produced into evidence during your testimony at the Vasiljevic trial
in 2001?
A.   Yes, but only about ten seconds.  There was just an image of my
father.  I was asked, "Is this your father?"  I said, "Yes," and then it
was finished.
Q.   Yes.
MR. COLE:  Your Honours, at this point I would ask that the
videotape interview of this witness's father in 1992 which accompanied
the witness's testimony and was produced as an exhibit in the Vasiljevic
trial be tendered into evidence in this trial pursuant to Rule 92 ter.
The 65 ter number is 119.
THE REGISTRAR:  This will become Exhibit P40.
MR. COLE:  And along with the actual videotape itself I would ask
at this point that the transcript of the video interview of the witness's
father in English and B/C/S be tendered into evidence also pursuant to
Rule 92 ter.  The English transcript is 65 ter number 120, and the B/C/S
transcript of the videotape interview is 65 ter number 121.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  65 ter number 120 will become Exhibit P41.  65
ter number 121 will become Exhibit P42, Your Honours.
MR. COLE:  Thank you.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, can you confirm that it was your father whom you
could see and hear being interviewed on that videotape?
A.   Yes.
MR. COLE:  Now, Your Honours, I'm going to provide the witness
with some pseudonym sheets.  They are -- well, the pseudonym sheet, it is
not in respect of this witness but in respect of three persons who he may
refer to during his testimony so that he knows the pseudonym numbers to
refer to rather than the witness's name.  If I could provide the witness
with that, and a copy, of course, for the Defence and the Bench.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MR. COLE:  Sir, I have the three pseudonyms on the one sheet.  Is
there any problem with it being dealt with that way?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You have three on one sheet, and the three who
are to be referred to are those three.
MR. COLE:  Yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well, yes.
MR. COLE:  Thank you, sir.
Q.   Now, Mr. Kurspahic, I have given to you -- I have provided to you
a pseudonym sheet, not for yourself but in the event you need to refer to
the three persons listed therein, in which case I would ask you to use
the pseudonym numbers alongside the names rather than the names
themselves.
A.   Very well.  Thank you.
Q.   I'm going to just refer again to the list of 51 names that you
viewed a short time ago.  During the previous trial you made some
corrections to the surnames of three of the names on that list, and you
added three other names during your testimony in the Vasiljevic trial.
Isn't that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, apart from your father, have you ever seen or heard from any
?
A.   Yes.  May I use this, because I have this list in front of me?
Q.   Could I just -- maybe I didn't make myself understood.  Could I
just ask you the question again.
Putting your father aside, his name is on the list currently,
have you seen or heard from any of those other persons on the list since
1992?
A.   No.  I do apologise.  I didn't understand correctly.
Q.   Thank you.  And the list at present includes your mother, your
two sisters, and your nephew?
A.   Yes.
Q.   How many others on that list with the surname Kurspahic are
related to you?
A.   All of them.  We are all related.  Some of them are distant
relatives, some are close relatives.  This is one family.
Q.   And through the inquiries that you have subsequently made, what
do you believe now to be the total or approximate total number of persons
?
A.   There is no accurate number, but there would be about 70 people
who perished there.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, in relation to the videotape interview of your
father, can you confirm that that depicts your father describing this
fatal fire and how he escaped from it?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What date was it that you met up with your father after the fire
in 1993?
.  It was in Visoko.  I'm
not quite sure, but that's what it says.  Yes.  Yes.  23rd or 24th.  You
can read that from my statement, and I stand by what is written in my
statement.
Q.   And what date did your father say to you that the Pionirska fire
occurred?  On what day did it occur?
A.   He didn't tell me the date.  This is what he said exactly:  On
the fourth day of Bajram in Visegrad, and Bajram lasts and you celebrate
.
Q.   And who did your father say were the main perpetrators who killed
your family members during the fire?
A.   My father told me that on that date this was done by Sredoje
Lukic, Milan Lukic, Mitar Vasiljevic, and Bosko Djuric was seen nearby,
then Zoran Joksimovic, a man with the last name Susnjar, Zoran
Joksimovic, and another individual with -- a blonde with white complexion
with long hair, and he was Milan Lukic's escort.  Nobody knows his exact
name.  There were a total of seven men who arrived in front of the house
.
Q.   And, Mr. Kurspahic, were you asked by your father to solemnly
swear to do something as his dying wish?
A.   Yes.  My first encounter with him, he started crying when he saw
me, and he said, "I leave it up to you to tell about what happened on
in Visegrad since I am sick and old and I
probably won't live long enough to see the freedom."  He left it to me,
and I gave him my word that I would do it.
Q.   Now, you were the -- the head of the police station in Medjedja
when you first heard of the Pionirska fire; is that correct?
A.   No.  I was the commander of the reserve police administration.  I
was not the chief.  I was the commander.
Q.   All right.  So who was the first person that told you about the
Pionirska fire?  And please use the pseudonym if the name is on the sheet
in front of you.
A.   The first time I heard about this event was from Witness VG-013.
Q.   How long after the Pionirska fire did she tell you about it?
A.   I couldn't be precise, but I think it was seven or eight days
after the events.
Q.   Yes.  And did VG-13 tell you that she was a survivor of the
Pionirska fire like your father?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, at Medjedja did you also meet the survivor of another house
fire, the Bikavac fire, which also occurred in Visegrad in June of 1992?
A.   Yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just, a minute.  Don't answer.  Mr. Cepic is on
his feet.  Yes.
MR. CEPIC:  I think all of these questions -- most of these
questions have the character of leading questions, Your Honour.  Thank
you.
MR. COLE:
Q.   Who was the --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.
MR. COLE:  I'm sorry, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm inclined to agree that they are a little bit
leading so you have to be careful about that.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, sir.
Q.   Now, at Medjedja did you meet the survivor of another house fire
in Bikavac, the Bikavac fire which occurred sometime in 1992?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Who was that person, and please refer to them by the pseudonym if
the name is on the sheet in front of you.
A.   That person is VG-114.  She came to Medjedja all bandaged up.
She exuded a bad smell.  She had been badly burnt on her face and hands
as well.  She told me there had been a fire in Visegrad in a street
called Bikavac near Kopito in the house of Meho Alic, where around 72
persons had perished in the fire.  She was the only survivor.  She was
hardly able to speak.  That statement, that first statement, was
videotaped, and I believe that this videotape is stored at the Tribunal.
Q.   Were you able to assess how long after the fire incident it was
that you spoke with her?
A.   I think again seven or eight days later.  Her body was an open
wound.  Everything, face, hands, body was covered with wounds that exuded
such a bad smell that you couldn't come practically any closer to her.
Q.   Who did she say were the persons responsible for causing these
injuries to her and the other people?
A.   She only mentioned Milan Lukic, Sredoje Lukic, and Mitar
Vasiljevic, saying that it was them who had set the house on fire.  They
were there.
Q.   Now, last week during your proofing you were shown copies of five
documents that had been provided to the Prosecution by the Milan Lukic
Defence.  Do you recall that?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And these were documents of the style of Visegrad police
documents --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Stop.  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  I haven't got any objections to those documents yet
but I just object because I haven't got any announcement that the OTP
will use those documents.  I haven't got -- received any information,
supplemental information sheet or something similar.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cole, is that so?  As you know, you're
required to --
MR. COLE:  Yes, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  -- provide timely notification.
MR. COLE:  I'm reasonably confident that we did send a
notification.  It's just one of those documents I'm going to be referring
the witness to.  I wonder if I could just check with the case manager,
sir.  I personally was looking after this and asked that a message be
sent.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, do so quickly.
MR. COLE:  Sir.  Yes.  It's been suggested, and can I put it this
way, sir, I'm able to proceed in the absence of that document by asking
questions around it.  Once we have found the confirmation that's been
supplied to the Defence, we can deal with it then, in fact, and on the
screen if there's no further objection.  So with your permission, sir,
I'll continue to ask questions about the document.  It may be that we can
deal with -- without producing it.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well.
MR. COLE:
Q.   Now, Mr. Kurspahic, I'm going to ask you about just one of those
documents that your shown last week.  It was a document that contained a
list of 15 names of persons, and it purported to be the list of 15 police
.  Do you
recall that document?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Yes.  Now, as some background to these questions, were you a
policeman at Visegrad and Medjedja for a number of years?
A.   Yes.
Q.   From when until when were you a police officer there?
, until I fled from Visegrad on
the 6th of April, 1992.  That was the last day I was in Visegrad, and I
was on active duty all that time.
Q.   Do you recall last week when you looked at the list of the 15
names that you saw the name Milan Lukic at number 4 on the list?
A.   Yes, I've seen that name and surname.
Q.   I'm going to ask you, was Milan Lukic a police officer in
Visegrad or anywhere else at any time, to the best your knowledge?
MR. ALARID:  Objection, lack of foundation.  The witness
testified that he left the police department in Visegrad the 2nd of
April -- or 6th of April.  This document post dates that date.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Can you laid a foundation, Mr. Cole.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] If you permit --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  No, don't answer.
MR. COLE:  Well, sir, the document, as I've indicated and as the
witness has confirmed, has a list of 15 names.  Certainly the date is the
13th of June, but as far as he is able to with his experience, he's quite
entitled, with respect, to say that he knew or didn't know that a person
who was named on the list was or wasn't a police officer.  Now, the fact
that he was a police officer till the 6th of April doesn't exclude him
from commenting on or answering the question that he's just been asked.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, are you able to answer that question
whether from your own knowledge or from information that you've acquired?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I am.  Until two days before when I
heard about it, I didn't know that he had ever been on the police force,
any police force.  It's very true, though, there was a court case in
Bosnia-Herzegovina against Zeljko Lalek, where the same question was
asked --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Would you just tell us whether you know and how
you know it.  Just concentrate on that.
had never been on the police
force.
MR. COLE:
Q.   Yes.  Thank you.  Mr. Kurspahic, at the time that you left the
police in April 1992 what was the total number of police officers, both
regular and reserve police officers, at that time?
A.   Well, on active duty there were 31 officers, and together with
the reserve policemen there were a total of 200 or 220 for the whole
municipality, because you have to take into account that there were six
reserve police administrations -- or, rather, police stations in addition
to the police station in Visegrad.
Q.   So just to clarify then, at the time that you left in April 1992,
at that time had you ever heard any suggestion that Milan Lukic was a
police officer in Visegrad?
A.   I had never heard any such thing, and he wasn't a police officer.
You have to understand, people, this was a small town in which I knew
everyone.
Q.   I'm now going to ask you about Mr. Sredoje Lukic, and was he a
colleague of yours in the police in Visegrad?
A.   Yes.
Q.   How many years were you colleagues, a colleague of Sredoje Lukic?
A.   At least eight to ten years.  Ten years.
Q.   How many years is it since you last saw Mr. Sredoje Lukic?
A.   This is the first time I'm seeing Sredoje Lukic here in the
courtroom.
Q.   Can you see him here in the courtroom?
A.   Yes, I can.
Q.   Just one moment, please.  Just hold it there.
MR. CEPIC: [Interpretation] Your Honour, with your leave, we do
not dispute that Mr. Kurspahic knows Sredoje Lukic, but this method of
identification in the courtroom is something we do dispute in general and
in principle, because in decisions in the Vasiljevic and Limaj cases this
particular method of evaluation -- of identification has already been
evaluated.  That is the basis for my objection.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  In a situation where the witness is saying that
he knew him for ten years before, Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC: [Interpretation] Your Honour, as I said, we do not
challenge the fact that Mr. Kurspahic knows Sredoje Lukic.  I just object
on principle to this form of identification in the courtroom, also in
light of possible further situations like this.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well.  Let us proceed.
MR. COLE:
Q.   Yes.  Mr. Kurspahic, you said earlier, "This is the first time
I'm seeing Sredoje Lukic here in the courtroom."  Do you remember saying
that a moment ago?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Where can you see him here in the courtroom, please?
A.   In the last row, the second person from the policeman.  The first
next to the coloured officer wearing headphones.
Q.   Yes.  Any other description?  Let's just make it clear the person
you're talking about.
A.   Well, there is Sredoje Lukic.  I'm looking at him, and he's
looking at me.  You can ask him if he knows me.  We are being confronted.
That's why I wanted to testify, so I can say these things in their faces
in public, that I wouldn't be saying anything behind anyone's back.  I
wanted to say all I know from A to Z.  That is Sredoje Lukic, my former
colleague.
Q.   And just to make it clear for the record, Mr. Kurspahic, was it
the man sitting down or the man standing up that you're referring to?
A.   The man who stood up, yes.
MR. COLE:  The record could indicate that the accused Sredoje
Lukic stood up at that stage.  Thank you, sir.
Q.   And just a couple more questions, Mr. Kurspahic.  Do you have a
brother called -- did you have a brother called Osman Kurspahic?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Is he still alive today?
A.   No.
Q.   When did you last see him alive or hear from him?
A.   The last time I saw him was in Korfica [phoen] village.  I don't
know the exact date when the army marched into Visegrad.  He came with
another man to Kabotica [phoen] village where I was with my unit, and
that's when I saw him for the last time, and he returned to the town.
Q.   What year would that have been?
A.   1992.  I think the first half of May.
Q.   And did you -- did you subsequently receive some information
about what happened to him?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What did you hear -- what did you hear happened to him?
A.   He was executed.  First he was detained at the police
administration in Visegrad, and after that, as I learnt, he was taken to
the Uzamnica military barracks in Visegrad, and that's where he was
executed, as I learned, and if you want to know from whom I learned it,
it was Milan Lukic.
Q.   Yes.  Thank you.
MR. COLE:  Your Honour, I found the information about the advice
to the Defence that the document, the list of 15 names, would be referred
to during the examination-in-chief.  An e-mail was sent on Friday, the
advising that this document would form part
of the examination-in-chief.  So I'm wondering on that basis if --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, you may proceed.
MR. COLE:  I suppose, sir, it's just a matter of it being --
well, in fact the witness has referred to it.  I don't think we need,
sir, any further -- spend any time on it.  The witness covered it without
referring to the list of 15 names, so I'm intent to leave it at that,
sir.  It will be a Defence exhibit.  For the record, Y019-1568.  It's a
document that was supplied to the Prosecution, but it doesn't have a 65
ter number, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
MR. COLE:  So those are my questions.  Thank you, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Alarid.
Cross-examination by Mr. Alarid:
Q.   Good afternoon, Mr. Kurspahic.  Good afternoon, Mr. Kurspahic.
A.   Good afternoon.
Q.   My name is Jason Alarid and I'm representing Mr. Milan Lukic here
today.  May I ask a few questions about your memories?
A.   Yes, go ahead.
Q.   The first thing I would like to discuss with you is the structure
of the police and your experience with the police as you left in April
1992.  Can we do that?
A.   Yes, we can.
Q.   Now, at the time you left Visegrad, what was your position
specifically?
A.   I was the commanding officer of the police administration in
Medjedja, and that's where I was the whole time.  I went there and
continued working there as an active-duty policeman, commanding officer,
that is komandir, of the reserve police administration in Medjedja.
Q.   Now, in terms of the reserve police administration what is the
difference to you between an active-duty police officer and a
reserve-duty police officer?
A.   An active-duty police officer wore a uniform of one kind, and
reserve police officers wore different uniforms from a different
material.  We received a salary and they did not.
Q.   Please describe the differences in the uniforms, please.
A.   The active police had blue uniforms, and the reserve police
uniforms were homespun cloth, also blueish.
Q.   Did anyone wear camouflage uniforms as a member of the police?
A.   In my area, in my detachment, no one.
Q.   And your detachment, was it debanded when the police force broke
up into Serb and Muslim partitions?
A.   Yes.  We were in Medjedja.  We no longer gravitated towards
Visegrad, and, yes, they were disbanded.
Q.   And why did you know longer gravitate toward Visegrad?
A.   Well, it was not our purpose to gravitate towards Visegrad.  Our
area was the local commune of Medjedja.
Q.   And that local commune was a Muslim commune.  Isn't that correct?
A.   No.
Q.   Was it a mixed community?
A.   Yes, it was mixed.  I have a whole study, if you want me to
elaborate on this.  There were 91 per cent Muslims and 9 per cent Serbs
and others.
Q.   And did it stay that way after the fighting began or did the
Serbs move away?
A.   No, it did not stay that way.  The Serbs left the police
administration ten days before the war broke out.  They walked out.
Q.   And what was the police administration before the war broke out?
Who was the commander?
A.   I was the commanding officer, komandir, and Sine [phoen] Furtula,
a Serb, was my deputy.
Q.   And as the commander officer are you saying you had jurisdiction
over the 220 reserve officers?
A.   That's not true.  Maybe you misunderstood me.  In total the
police administration with six local communes had reserve and active
police officers around 220 or perhaps 250 with a full complement.  That
was the situation.
Q.   And so you're including at this time the active-duty officers, of
which you mentioned there were 31?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And as commander you said you were commander of the reserve
force.  Did you have 220 men under your control, or was that divided by
the five communities -- or six communities?
A.   Sir, I definitely had 51 officers in the local commune of
Medjedja.  I commanded 51 active police officers.  Two hundred twenty was
.  I think I was quite
clear.
Q.   And when it broke up how many Muslims were there and how many
Serbs were there?
A.   I've said there were only Muslims.  We were 47, and there were
four Serbs in total, including the deputy commander, and they all walked
out of their jobs ten days before the war started.
Q.   Yet would it -- would it be fair to say that the Serb side of the
police force still considered themselves active duty and working?
A.   I don't know whether they continued to work in Visegrad.  Most
likely they did, but they no longer worked in Medjedja.
Q.   And would it be fair also that you wouldn't have had access to
the Serbian police force records considering that you were in Medjedja?
A.   I had no access from the moment the Serb police force was
established.  I've never seen those files.
Q.   And isn't it true that a police force is something where new
hires do come on, and also this was a time of war so there might have
been people being conscripted or drafted into the police force?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And were there opportunities where you on the Muslim side drafted
and conscripted people into the police force in order to keep order?
A.   Yes, but not then, not at that time at the beginning.  It was in
September 1992 that some new officers joined my unit.
Q.   But you would have no knowledge of new officers that joined the
Serbian side of the police force.  Isn't that correct?
A.   Correct.  I wouldn't know that.
Q.   And so you wouldn't have any knowledge here to give the Court
today whether or not Milan Lukic might have been hired after you left in
April of 1992?
A.   I've made a statement that I had never heard until two days ago
that Milan Lukic had ever been a policeman, active or reserve duty, in
that republic, and you can check and compare my statement with the
statements of policemen who have testified in the court case against
.  There
are three of those witnesses.  If you need their names I'll give them to
you.
Q.   Please do.
A.   And they emphatically said that Milan Lukic had never been on the
police force.
Q.   And do you have their names?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What are their names?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, before we ask the witness the names may
we make some inquiry as to whether these witnesses may be under
court or take it in closed session
to -- in the event that there might be that chance?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well.  Who would know if they are under
protection?  Mr. Alarid wouldn't know, but so -- I believe that out of an
abundance of caution, let us go into private session.
MR. GROOME:  We can make a phone call later today, Your Honour,
to verify whether they are or not and then maybe amended the Court's
order.
[Confidentiality lifted by order of Chamber]
<span lang="FR" style='font-size: 10.0pt;line-height:200%;font-family:"Courier New"'> 8             THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we're in private session.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   We're in private session, sir.  Can you name those witnesses,
please?
A.   If the Court permits me to say that, I will do so.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, go ahead.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Darinko Savic, a desk officer still
working at the Visegrad police administration.  She was a desk officer in
the passport department.  The next one was Miladina Uljarevic.  She was
in charge of the personnel department in Visegrad while I was there
working there.  I don't know whether she's still working there or not.
And the third witness was inspector Boban Tomic, a police inspector.  He
has retired in the meantime as I understand, and he lives in Visegrad, as
all of them do.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, you don't have any real idea of whether these people were
working at the police department during the early months, the spring of
1992, do you?
A.   What people?
Q.   The three witnesses you've just mentioned.
A.   Yes, they were working and they're still working except for
Boban, who has retired.  Miladina, I'm not sure about, but Dara
definitely is working.
Q.   Working today doesn't necessarily mean they were working in June
of 1992 since that was during the war.
A.   Sir, they were working all the time with me for ten years.
Q.   But you had no access to the Serbian side of the police force
after April 1992.  Isn't that true?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  We can go back to public session now.
Just a minute, please.  Witness, just a minute.
Let us return to open session.
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we are back in open session.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, you may proceed now, Witness, with your
answer.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Do you know an officer Momir Lakic?
A.   Momir Lakic was never a policeman in Visegrad.  That is to say
while I was there I had never heard of him being one.
Q.   So you're not aware that over a hundred new reserve police
officers were put into place after the break-up of the Serbian and Muslim
police force?
A.   I don't know, sir.  I wasn't interested.
Q.   But you're a police officer.  Why wouldn't you be interested in
what the Serbian side was doing?
A.   I wasn't interested in that specific aspect, whether they have
reached the required manpower levels.  That was somebody else's concern,
not mine.
Q.   What are the required manpower levels according to your standard
procedures?
A.   Where?
Q.   In Visegrad.
A.   I don't know.  Previously it was between 220 and 250 of both
active and reserve-duty officers as a municipality.  I wasn't involved in
this particular area, and I wasn't interested in that.
Q.   After the break-up of the police department do you have knowledge
of who became commander of the police force?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   Who was that?  Who was the commander of the police force, sir?
A.   Dragan Tomic, who used to be an inspector while I was in active
service, and after the Muslims left and the dissolution of the police
force, Dragan Tomic came on board.  I heard that he was killed in 1992.
Q.   And who was the chief of the police force?
A.   I don't know.  I have certain information that Risto Perisic was
appointed head of the police administration.
Q.   And isn't true that it would have been the Crisis Staff that
would have appointed Mr. Perisic to head of the police administration?
A.   Listen, I don't know about that.  This is not my area.  These are
political issues.  I am involved in police work.  Who is being appointed
and how, I really cannot tell you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, you must bear that in mind.  The witness
says he doesn't have any knowledge in that area.  Let's move on to
another area.
MR. ALARID:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let's move on to another area.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   So what you're saying, sir, is that the appointment of these
officials became a political matter at that time?
A.   I don't know.  You are now trying to provoke me here.  I came
here -- give me specific questions.  I've told you I don't know.  Do you
need anything else from me?
Q.   Well --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Alarid, I have some sympathy for the
witness.  He has said he doesn't know anything about these matters, so
move on.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Do you know a police officer named Vidoje Andric?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Tell me about your knowledge of Mr. Andric.
A.   Mr. Vidoje Andric was a reserve policeman while I was in the
Visegrad police administration.  I have heard that he was killed in a car
along with Dragan Tomic, Vidoje Andric, Milutin's son, I don't know his
near Visegrad, that
they drove over a mine, an anti-tank mine on the road that had been
planted by the Serbs to prevent the Muslims from reaching the bridge,
because there were about 800 Muslims -- Muslim refugees in the forest
.
Q.   What was the date of this mine incident?
A.   I don't know the exact date.  I know that it was the first half
of 1992, because sometime in July these refugees managed to cross over to
the free territory, actually to Medjedja.
Q.   Now, you indicated on direct exam that this was a small town and
you knew everyone; correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   But you did not know Milan Lukic; correct?
A.   Not much, because he left Visegrad a long time ago.  I used to
know him when he was a little boy.
Q.   And how did you know him as a little boy?  How old was he the
last time you could say you saw Milan Lukic?
A.   I think it was the time when he attended elementary school.  If
you want me to explain how I knew him, I can do that.  At the time I was
an active-duty policeman in Kamenica village where a Centrotrans bus from
broke into that bus, and I as the commander
of that sector, Milos Mandic, carried out the on-site investigation, and
that was the last time I saw him, and that is when I became acquainted
with him.
Q.   Did you know his family?
A.   No.
Q.   Did you know who his father was?  Mile?
.  He was working in the forestry department.  I know
him very well.
.
.  I think we
understand each other well.  However, I can repeat if necessary.
Q.   Did you know a police officer Milovan Vilaret?
A.   No.  I know that there is only one Vilaret household in the area
of Visegrad, definitely only one household.
Q.   And you don't know Milovan?
A.   No.
Q.   Now, you -- in this particular case you gave several statements
and those have been introduced into evidence; correct?
A.   What are you referring to?  Yes.
Q.   And you also reviewed your father's videotaped interview on the
television?
A.   Yes, but not entirely.
Q.   Did you review the transcript in B/C/S of the interview?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And you read that in its entirety?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, do you realize that in that particular interview with the
journalist your father does not make mention of any of the names of the
accused except Mitar Vasiljevic?
A.   I know.
Q.   And he did not mention anything about rapes occurring during his
detention there.  Isn't that true?
A.   He said in his interview that he didn't know about rapes, and
that is what I read.
Q.   And he also indicated in his interview that he did not know the
young men who had detained him.  Isn't that true?
A.   Yes, that's true.
Q.   And the only reference that he made to Mitar Vasiljevic was that
Mujo had received a piece of paper giving him safe passage.  Isn't that
true?  Isn't that true, sir, that Mujo had gotten a piece of paper from
Mitar Vasiljevic setting out that he would receive no harm?
A.   That's what it says in my father's statement.  That's what is
written there.
Q.   And he gave this statement pretty close after the incident, in
July of 1992.  Isn't that true?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And yet in your later statements you indicate that your father --
and how old was your father at the time of the incident?
A.   He was 70.  So he was born in 1990 -- 1919.  So if my mathematics
is okay, 72.
Q.   And he died in what year, sir?
.
Q.   And you indicated in your statement that you had spoken with him
on five or six occasions between 1992 and 1996?
A.   Yes, because we had lived together.  From 1995 onwards until he
.
Q.   And when did you retire from the police force?
, from the Centar police
.
from the smaller
community of Visegrad?
A.   I wasn't interested in that.  I had kidney problems at the time.
.  If this Honourable Court
to work as a
security officer, but I wasn't able to leave Gorazde for 11 months.  I
was transferred from Gorazde.  I have papers to support that, and I
.
Q.   As a police officer for several decades, was it your
responsibility to do long-term criminal investigations?
A.   That's an integral part of police work.
Q.   And is an integral part of police work filing police reports,
taking statements?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And being a police officer is really a 24-hour-a-day job.  You
come to work when the need arises.  Isn't that true?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And yet you never filed formal police reports and statements on
fire.
Isn't that true?
A.   What do you mean?  File where?
Q.   Well, according to you, you had specific information through your
father and other witnesses, essentially VG-114 about both the fires of
.  Isn't that true?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And in -- but you did not file any formal police reports in
accordance with your duties as a police officer after speaking with his
witnesses.  Isn't that true?
A.   That's not true, sir.  If necessary, I can explain.  I took
statements and other numerous statements.  After the fall of Medjedja I
set all the records on fire in order to prevent them from getting into
the hands of the Serbs.  It fell on the 31st of May.
Q.   When, sir, the 31st of May?
A.   That is the date when Medjedja fell, and I think I set the
documentation on fire that very same night.
Q.   31st of May when?
A.   1993, and the other one I set on fire in Medjedja when the army
entered, and that would be on the 14th -- give me a second.  The 14th of
.  I had some papers.  I set them on fire in Medjedja when the
Uzice and the Romanija Corps arrived in the area of Visegrad
municipality.  These are -- were former JNA units.
where larger
authorities could take action?
A.   There were no communications, sir.
Q.   Do you realize that if you set them on fire in Medjedja in 1992
that was before the dates of the fires that we're talking about here
today?
A.   That was only part of the records.  It does not refer to the ones
referring to taking criminal statements and things like that, and you
wouldn't be interested in those papers, sir.
Q.   No.  The papers I'm interested in are direct investigations
fire or the Bikavac fire.  Those are the
papers we're interested in.
A.   A report rather than a statement was written by me, and I set
, when I left the area of
Visegrad.
Q.   And yet you waited until March 20th of 1994, more than two
years -- or almost two years after the fire to give your next statement.
Isn't that true?
A.   Who shall I file it to, sir?  I was the main man in the area.  We
were surrounded.  There was no way out.
Q.   But yet in 1994, it was the first time you made authorities in
aware of the fact that you believed -- or in fact you told them
your father reported that Milan Lukic, Sredoje Lukic, and Mitar
.  Isn't that true?
.  It was in Gorazde.
Q.   Gorazde.  I apologise.  And you also indicated in that statement
that your father had -- had indicated that a rape had occurred and named
a name.  Isn't that true?
A.   Yes.  He told me that directly.
Q.   But in the statement given by your father to the journalist just
a month after the incident, he made no mention of knowledge of any rapes
or even knowledge of the identities of any of the named accused other
than Mitar Vasiljevic.  Isn't that true?
A.   That is true, but you have to look at this man, how he looked
like after this tragedy in which 70 of his neighbours and relatives,
including his wife, were burned.  He lost two daughters and two sons.  He
was held captive in Visegrad.  Please put yourself in his position.  He
was seriously ill.  What kind of statement would you, sir, give if you
were in his shoes?
Q.   Well, if I witnessed or knew of a rape, I might say I knew of a
rape.
MR. GROOME:  Objection as to relevance.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  That is a rhetorical question illustrated that
way.  Move on.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, in your statement to the ICTY in the year 2000, was that the
next time after 1994 you gave an interview addressing the fires on
or Bikavac?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you realize that there's no mention of your contact with
VG-114 or the Bikavac fire in your 2000 statement to the ICTY?
A.   It is possible, but I'm here now, and I can tell you.  Ask me
anything you wish.
Q.   Well, the one thing I'd like to ask you is excluding what people
told you or what you heard, you really know absolutely nothing about the
Pionirska Street fire or the Bikavac fire.  This all came second-hand to
you.  Isn't that true?
A.   Well, yes.  I wasn't there.
Q.   And isn't it true that over time your statement has changed and
you have added names to your father's statement since he gave it in 1992?
A.   I gave the statement in which I repeated what he had told me.  I
don't know what he said earlier, nor had I had an opportunity to see what
he stated earlier.
,
you only named four names -- excuse me, three names in relation to the
Pionirska Street fire.  Isn't that true?
A.   I don't know.  You have my statement.  You can check whether it's
correct, and I cannot confirm that until I look at my statement.  You
should be aware of how a long time has elapsed since.
Q.   Well, by the time we get to 2000, you've added and you've implied
that seven people were directly responsible for the fire in Pionirska
Street.
A.   There's mention of seven men being there at the time.  Some were
, Sredoje and Mitar
entered the house while the rest were in the yard, Bosko, Lalco, Susnjar
, according to my father, and I gave my
statement on the basis of his statement.
Q.   Do you realize that a trial has occurred in this case in the
matter of Mitar Vasiljevic, and it's already been concluded?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you realize at that trial Mitar Vasiljevic proved that he had
in fact broken his leg and could not have been anywhere in Visegrad after
in the evening?
MR. GROOME:  Objection.  I'm not sure that's relevant nor am I
sure that's a fair characterisation of what the Trial Chamber found in
that case, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  What's the point of the question?
MR. ALARID:  The point of the question is -- is he's taking from
a hearsay perspective what his father said about people's involvement of
fire that went into the late evening.  In fact, all other reports say the
.  The Trial Chamber found that Mitar
Vasiljevic could -- checked himself into the hospital around 9.30 in the
reference I made was relating the
time it would take someone from actually breaking their leg to get to the
hospital.  And so in that fact it was impossible for Mitar Vasiljevic to
have been at the scene of the fire that evening at the late night hours,
early morning hours of the fire.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. --
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, it would seem to me that if -- I mean
the Chamber today has the task of evaluating this witness's evidence.  It
seems to me if Mr. Alarid is saying that this other -- the findings of
the Bench in Mitar Vasiljevic is evidence that should be used in this
court, then a motion for adjudicated facts should be made.  It's also
inaccurate what is being said about the case.  The Trial Chamber in
Mitar -- in the Mitar Vasiljevic case found that Mitar Vasiljevic was
location and was instrumental in getting
those people to stay there and did provide a document.  Again information
that is corroborated by the -- the witness here today with respect to
what his father has told him, but the Prosecution hasn't stood up here
and -- and said to the witness, well, this is what the Trial Chamber
found in this other case.  I believe it's irrelevant what the Trial
Chamber found to the task that the Chamber is engaging in in this present
trial.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, do you know what the Trial Chamber
found in the Mitar Vasiljevic case in relation to this particular matter?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I don't know.  I wasn't interested.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.  Let's -- thank you.
He doesn't know.  Let's move on.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   If that -- hypothetically speaking, sir, if it were shown that
Mr. Mitar Vasiljevic were not able to be --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  What is the line you're pursuing now?
MR. ALARID:  Well, the line is that again this is second-hand
information, and maybe certain people he spoke to were mistaken.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Go ahead.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   And so, sir, if it was discovered that Mitar Vasiljevic broke his
leg in the early evening hours of the date of the fire and could not have
been present when it started, would that mean that certain people you
spoke to were in fact mistaken or assumed something that was incorrect?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm not going to allow that.
Don't answer that, Witness.
I'm not allowing that question.  It's not for the witness to say
what is in people's minds or how they would view that particular
situation.
MR. ALARID:  And this, Your Honour, as an American lawyer this
provides one those peculiar situations of which when so much hearsay is
allowed to be extrapolated upon of course with the Court being able to
take into consideration the weight of any particular set of evidence, it
is difficult for me to cross-examine this when in fact this witness's
understanding the fire came completely from someone else's understanding.
So essentially allowing him to testify via 92 ter and also reaffirm that
today, you are allowing him to say that his father understood X, Y, and
Z, let's say, and if I'm not allowed to at least challenge that but sort
of put it to the witness as you say, that is really -- you know, where
else can I do that, because there was a trial finding of fact related to
the ability of Mr. Vasiljevic to both be at the Bikavac fire and the
Pionirska Street fire.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Alarid, I'll tell you where else you can do
that.  You can do it in your submissions to us and ask us to attach very
little or no weight to the evidence.
MR. ALARID:  Understood, Your Honour.  I just -- it's hard for me
to put it to the witness any other way.  That's I guess --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let's move on.  Ah, we have passed the time for
the break.  Let us break for 20 minutes.
.48 p.m.
.17 p.m.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Alarid, you have about 15 minutes.
MR. ALARID:  Fifteen or 50, Your Honour?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Fifteen.
MR. ALARID:  Yes.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, I'd like to ask you about a few names and ask you
if you recognise them of members of the reserve police force as you left
in April of 1992.  Do you know a Nenad Tanaskovic?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Who was he?
A.   He used to be a ticket controller in Centrotrans.  He used to be
a reserve policeman during my time.
Q.   And as reserve police officers, do they only come into duty as an
emergency arises or special circumstances?
A.   No.
Q.   So they would be on duty at other times as well; correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you know Sladan Simic?
A.   I can't remember.  The name and surname are familiar.  Possibly.
He could have also been one of the reserve police officers.  I know the
name and surname, but I cannot put them to a face.
Q.   What about Mirko Lakic?
A.   Mirko Lakic was never in the reserve police force if we mean the
same Mirko Lakic who was constantly at Bikavac as a driver for
Centrotrans.
Q.   And he was never on the reserve police force before you left in
April 1992; correct?
A.   No.
Q.   And how about Mladen Markovic?
A.   I know him.
Q.   What was his capacity?
A.   He was on the reserve police force, but I don't know about his
job.  Maybe he worked in Partizan or some other business.
Q.   So you weren't always as familiar with all the members of the
reserve police force as some, i.e., you knew some more than others?
A.   Right.
Q.   How about Zivorad Markovic?
A.   I know that such a person exists.  I know the name and surname,
but I can't recall him now.  I don't know what he was doing.
Q.   Mile Lakic?
A.   I'm trying to recall.  I know the name and surname.  Perhaps if
you assist me, if you tell me what he was doing, maybe I could tell you.
Q.   Was he a reserve police officer?
A.   I don't know.  There was a Lakic.  One Lakic certainly was on the
force.  I can't remember the first name.
Q.   What about Novak Poluga?
A.   I knew him from Preoska Rijeka.
Q.   As a reserve police officer?
A.   He was not on the force during my time.
Q.   How about Zoran Joksimovic?
A.   I know him.  He is one of my neighbours.  He was on the reserve
police force.  Sometime before the end of the war.  I don't know for how
long but I know it was not a long time.
Q.   Now, were you able to actually see, and I would pose this
question to the Prosecution to assist me, is the list shown the witness
earlier on in -- with Milan Lukic's name on it?  Its number is Y019, it's
been updated as Y019-1568.  And could we have that brought onto the
screen, please.
Now, sir, you indicated earlier that you had not seen this
document before; correct?
A.   I did see it two days ago.
Q.   But before two days ago you had not seen it; correct?
A.   No, I did not.
Q.   And would it be fair to say that this is on a regular form of
police documentation?
A.   Well, as for the heading and the format, it looks like an
authentic document.
Q.   Including the stamp at the bottom?
A.   At that time that stamp was not in use.  There was a very big
round police stamp.  But speaking of stamps, a small police stamp was
used in Visegrad by Muslims to designate liquidation.  When they put a
big stamp it means passage.  I have never seen this, though, not before
two days ago.
Q.   And in looking at the names on the list, I went through some of
the names.  Isn't it true that the names that you recognise as reserve
police officers, some of them are on this list?
A.   Perica Markovic and all these other names and surnames gravitate
towards Visegrad territory, Andric Vidoje, Tasic Zeljko was my colleague,
was never a policeman.  The next one
was liquidated a year ago perhaps.  He was killed after testifying in
.  Spasoje Vidakovic, active-duty policeman, he used to be in
working as an active-duty policeman, and he had not come to the
police station when I was there.  I checked his records when he went to
the police academy.  Novica Savic, the Savic family is dispersed.  They
live in two or three different places.  I can't recognise that.  Mladen
Andric, I don't know.  Nedeljko Gogic, I don't know him personally.
Joksimovic, I can't make out the first name, Timotije.  I know Joksimovic
Timotije was in Kragujevac.  I know only one Joksimovic.  I'm not sure
about the first name.  Mirko Lakic, I've explained already.  Goran
Zecevic was never on the police force during my time.  He was working in
.  Sladjan Simic, I know there was one Simic in Koritnik, but
whether this is the same person, I'm not sure.  Miodrag Bozic, the Bozics
live in one part of Visegrad in the Lijesak [phoen] and some others live
in the Visegrad-Zupa.  Mile Lakic, I've already explained.  Anything else
you want to know?
Q.   And so some of them were reserve police officers before you left,
before your time there in Visegrad, correct?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   And the rest, you would not know if they came on after you left
because you were not -- you did not have access to those records after
your departure?
A.   Correct.
MR. ALARID:  No further questions at this time, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
MR. ALARID:  Your Honour, one moment.  Could we introduce the
last document that we put in, the Y019-1568.  We'd like to introduce it
as evidence.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  It will be admitted as Exhibit 1D25, Your
Honours.
MR. CEPIC:  May I, Your Honour?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, yes.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you.
Cross-examination by Mr. Cepic:
Q.   [Interpretation] Mr. Kurspahic, good afternoon.
A.   Good afternoon.
Q.   My name is Djuro Cepic, and I appear here for Sredoje Lukic.
A.   Nice to meet you.
Q.   Before I ask you anything, I want to say on behalf of my entire
team that we sympathise with you, and we want to express our condolences
for the deaths of your family members in that tragic incident.
My client Sredoje Lukic is very sorry, but he's unable to address
you directly but those are the rules of the Court.  He has no opportunity
to ask you any questions himself.  He only stood up in order to look you
in the eyes.
Mr. Kurspahic, I maintain to you that my client Mr. Sredoje
.  He was
not in Visegrad, and he had no part in that incident.  Do you understand
me?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   May I ask you, were you there on that fateful day in Visegrad?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness.  Witness, it is not for you to ask
questions.  Your role is to answer the questions.
MR. CEPIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   You've told us that you had worked with Sredoje Lukic for ten
years.
A.   Yes.
Q.   Is it correct that Sredoje Lukic was a good colleague and he
socialized equally with Serbs and Muslims alike?
A.   Yes.
Q.   As far as you are concerned, did Sredoje Lukic always express his
respect for you and said that you are a good head of your family?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you perhaps remember that his first child was born in a Muslim
house while he was living with your common colleague, Taib Barukdzic?
A.   Yes, all of that is correct.
Q.   Do you also recall that he also had Kustur Hajira [phoen] among
his friends?  He was another one of your colleagues, and they even
travelled to the seaside together.
A.   Yes, we were all friends.
Q.   In the Vasiljevic case you said your father knew Sredoje Lukic
very well?
A.   Yes, he did know him.
Q.   Would you agree that you also knew Sredoje's father Djordje?
A.   Yes.
Q.   The police station in Visegrad, is it close to the green market?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Was Wednesday the market day in Visegrad?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you perhaps recall that on market days Sredoje's father
Djordje dropped by the station to say hello to his son, and if he did not
find him there he would leave a message either with you or another one of
your colleagues?
A.   Yes, but you can't say it happened only on Wednesdays.  He
dropped by on other days as well.
Q.   Was it the same situation when your father dropped by the police
station and left messages for you with Sredoje?
A.   Yes.
Q.   When you met in the street, your father, you, and Sredoje, would
you shake hands, say hello, ask after each other's health?
A.   Yes.
Q.   In 1982 and 1983, was Sredoje your next-door neighbour?
A.   Yes.  He lived in my street.
Q.   Did he know your brother Osman?
A.   Yes.  You should ask him, because I don't have the right to ask
him.  Yes.
Q.   Is it correct that Sredoje often visited you at your home?
A.   Yes, if that means anything.
Q.   Did he also call on your brother Osman?
A.   I believe so, since he lived in the neighbourhood.  If not at his
home, then he dropped by at the shop where my brother worked.
Q.   Did your father also go to that house where you were with
Sredoje?
A.   Of course.
Q.   And when he would call on you he would have to pass by the house
where Sredoje lived?
A.   I didn't pay attention, but he should have.
Q.   Did you ever visit Sredoje's home as a guest playing cards, you
and your colleague Mr. Hanic?
A.   Yes, while he was building a new house I did call on them a few
times in that area, Seganje.
Q.   Was Sredoje a policeman in town, or was his beat around
surrounding villages?
A.   He worked in town, in the traffic police service.  He had many
duties.  It was nothing specific.
Q.   Let me ask you about certain traditions.  I hail from a
patriarchal community myself.  The women in villages, especially in
Koritnik village, your birthplace, were they able to visit bars and
taverns without husbands?
A.   Well, they could have but it was not customary.
Q.   But married women and mothers with children did not go around
bars and taverns?
A.   Don't ask me things like that.  My wife didn't go out alone.  She
did go out with me.  I didn't ask other people what they did.  Where
would I get the right to ask who is going where?
Q.   Would you agree with me that VG-13 and VG-18 did not know Sredoje
Lukic?
A.   They should know him, and if they come here you have to ask them.
Plus the -- the opportunity was there.  It was possible for them to know
him.
Q.   You will agree that among these persons who met their death at
Pionirska Street, your father, late Sahib , knew Sredoje the best?
A.   How would I know that?
Q.   You mentioned today that Milan Lukic had never been a policeman.
A.   Yes.  Not that I know of.  I've never heard of him being a
policeman.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. --
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, I put it to the Court that it's the
Chamber that should decide whether the witness is going on to irrelevant
matters.  I'm noticing a pattern here.  Mr. Cepic by saying the word
thank you, he's cutting the witness off from saying the witness's
complete answer.  If the witness is giving irrelevant information, again
I put it the Chamber should decide that, not Mr. Cepic.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I must say I hadn't noticed that, but,
Mr. Cepic, I'll be on the lookout for that, and don't cut off the
witness.  The witness is entitled to give his answer in its entirety
unless the Chamber stops him.
Please continue.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.  Just to speed up procedure
but if any issue is raised, there's redirect examination and witness can
clarify additionally to the OTP, so I'm just trying to --
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, the problem is, I mean as you can see
from the transcript, while I do know that "hvala" means thank you, it
doesn't appear anywhere on the transcript, so it's happening so quickly
that the interpreters are aren't able to translate it and put it on the
record.  Of course, anything that is on the record that we are aware of
we will afford ourselves of our opportunity to redirect if necessary.  I
would just ask that the witness not be interrupted.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  And please observe the pause between question
and answer.  Witness, do you hear that?  You both speak the same language
so there's tendency to overlap, so observe a pause between question and
answer and let us ensure that the interpretation is as accurate as is
possible.  Please continue.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   [Interpretation] Mr. Kurspahic, unlike Milan Lukic, you will
agree with me Mr. Sredoje Lukic was a policeman.
A.   Yes.
Q.   And according to the information that you share, he was a
policeman during the first months of the war.
A.   He was a policeman throughout, until he went to the forest
together with 12 other men in the beginning of April.
MR. CEPIC:  Could we go to the private session, please.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
[Private session]
<span lang="FR" style='font-size: 10.0pt;line-height:200%;font-family:"Courier New"'>11  Pages 919-920 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we're back in open session.
MR. CEPIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, you would agree with me that you had an extremely
friendly relationship with Sredoje Lukic since you used to call each
other "Amidzic"?
A.   Yes.
Q.   I compared the transcripts in both the B/C/S and English
languages and I noticed a mistake and I'd appreciate if you could clarify
that for me.  Am I right to say that during the liberation, Sredoje had
short hair?  He didn't have a shaved head, he wasn't bald.
A.   I remember whether it was -- he had rather long hair but with a
part that was shaved off.  Whether it was in the form of a cross or what,
I'm not sure.  You can ask him, he's here.  But I noticed that.  He came
out with his hands behind his head.  I told him, "Amidzic, don't be
afraid, I'm here."  He's here alive and well and he can confirm that.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Does "Amidzic" have a special meaning?  Witness,
I was asking, does "Amidzic" have a special meaning?
A.   There's no special meaning.  It -- this refers to sons of two
brothers.  This is what we Muslims called "Amidzic".  This is your
brother's son, for example.  If it is your sister's son, it's referred to
as "Tetic," et cetera.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.  May I continue?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you.
Q.   [Interpretation] Also captured there were Niko Vujicic,
Dragicevic, although Dragicevic was a higher ranking one, you did call
only Sredoje Lukic because you were on friendly terms with him.
A.   Yes.
Q.   On that occasion when you went your separate ways did you embrace
one another, and did you have tears in your eyes?
A.   No.  I never approached him.  We were about three to five metres
apart when I told him that, but when my men came to take him away, I
wasn't on the spot.
Q.   Thank you.  Mr. Kurspahic, while you were thinking about this
event, about this crime, did you ever have any suspicion that it could
really have been done by your colleague and friend Sredoje Lukic?
A.   I didn't think along those lines.
Q.   No, no.  Please give me a specific answer.
A.   No.  Why would I suspect that?  I could have suspected it if I
think he did it.  I wouldn't be able to tell -- to do this to me.  Allow
me to say this to the Court.  Don't interrupt me.  I wouldn't be able to
do to him what he did to me after I saved his life at my own risk without
any commands or order.  I did it at my own risk, on my own volition, and
I risked my life.  I released the 13 of them.
Q.   Does it sound reasonable to you that after such kind of
relationship that the two of you had he would do something like that to
you?  Is that logical?
A.   To a real man it's not logical.
MR. CEPIC: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.  I have no
further questions.
Thank you, sir.
Questioned by the Court:
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness.  Witness, when did you first learn that
Sredoje had committed the crime against your family?
A.   Approximately in the first half of June.  So approximately seven
to eight days later.  Don't hold me on that.  When VG-03 witness came to
Medjedja where I was, she told me about what had happened and that my
people were not involved there, but after some thinking and making some
conclusions, there -- it was not possible that someone of my people were
there, but two days later she told me the whole truth from A to Z, how
the whole incident evolved and took placement.  We were sitting in my
office in Medjedja, and she gave me the full account.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  And what was your first reaction when you heard
about Sredoje's involvement in those crimes?
A.   It was hard to believe, but I did believe, and it actually
happened.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  But why did you believe it, considering that you
had been on friendly terms with him?
A.   I believed the witness who told me about that, because she had no
reason to tell me something that was not true.  No person would tell you
a story that didn't happen.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, I'm not sure about that.
JUDGE VAN DEN WYNGAERT:  Witness, I want to verify something in
the transcript.  When you were asked by Mr. Cole questions about your
brother Osman Kurspahic on page 19 of the transcript, you say that your
brother -- when you were asked what did you hear happened to him, you say
he was executed.  Now, on the list of the victims --
A.   Yes.
there
is a person of the same name.  Could it be that there were two Osman
Kurspahics, two persons of the same name?
A.   Yes.  This Osman Kurspahic is a cousin of mine.  He is 80 years
old, but my brother was born in 1954.  He was detained in the Visegrad
police administration where he was questioned and interrogated.  After
that he was transferred to a military facility in Visegrad called
Uzamnica.  I later found out that he had been executed by Milan Lukic on
the compound on that facility.
JUDGE VAN DEN WYNGAERT:  Thank you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cole, any re-examination?
MR. COLE:  Yes, I have, Your Honour.  Thank you.
Re-examination by Mr. Cole:
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, I now have the opportunity just to ask you a few
questions on re-examination on matters that have arisen during the
cross-examination of two Defence counsel.
A.   Yes, go ahead.
Q.   Firstly, when and where was it that you heard for the first time
the suggestion that Milan Lukic was a police officer in Visegrad?
A.   I heard that from you, Mr. Prosecutor, two days ago here in the
OTP.  That was the first time I heard about that in my life.
Q.   Yes.  Now, you told Defence counsel you had set fire to some
documents on two occasions, and you mentioned April 1992 and the 31st of
.  So I'm --
A.   Yes.
Q.   -- going to ask you now what type of documents were they that you
set fire to in April 1992?
A.   Those were personal documents of the police administration who
were containing full names of people employed with the police, and there
were some criminal reports referring to some criminal offences committed
at the time in the territory where I was working and also other police
records.  I destroyed them all by setting them on fire when the Romanija
and the Uzice Corps entered, and that happened in the Medjedja police
viewing
from Gorazde to Visegrad.  The police station was housed in a private
house because our police administration that used to be located in the
centre of Medjedja had been shelled by the army before and was targeted
by the Serbian mortar from -- and heavy artillery from Koriste [phoen].
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MR. COLE:  Thank you.
Q.   The -- Mr. Kurspahic, you mentioned a name a short time ago.
Could you give us now the pseudonym for that person.
A.   That's Witness VG-013.  I had her statement.  I had also a
statement given by a witness which I noted down who had gone to hospital.
That was actually not a proper statement.  It was my Official Note which
she did not sign and the witness mentioned here under the pseudonym also
didn't sign it.  That was the Official Note.  Witness number 114 was in
such a serious condition that she was unable to sit down.  She wasn't
able to sign the Official Note that I made, and I didn't insist on that.
And there was some other documents as well which are not related to this
case, please.
Q.   Can I just clarify that with you?  Were there documents relating
both to VG-13 and VG-114 that were amongst those that you set fire to in
May of 1993?
A.   Yes.  Yes.
Q.   Right.  Now, you were asked by Defence counsel about not
.
I just want to ask you this:  Were you asked about VG-114 by the
investigator who took that statement?  Do you recall?
A.   No, he didn't.
Q.   I'll ask you now about the time you spoke to VG-13 shortly after
Milan
Lukic, Sredoje Lukic, and Mitar Vasiljevic at that time shortly after the
fire?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Don't answer.  Mr. Cepic.  No, don't answer yet.
Let us hear Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.  I think that we already have
these answers in direct examination, as far as I remember.  Thank you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  The point being made is that the evidence is
redundant, Mr. Cole.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  I won't pursue that any further.  It was -- it
was referred to again, from memory, during the cross-examination.  Yes,
thank you, sir.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, when you provided the names of the perpetrators of
, and in
your prior testimony in the other trial, who was the person who had told
you the names of the perpetrators?
A.   That was Witness VG-013 and also my father told me directly by
giving their full names.
Q.   How many times did your father tell you the names of the
perpetrators?
A.   Look, in a casual conversation you know how it is in families
when someone comes who hasn't seen him for a long time, you start these
debates within a family circle.  Five or six times.  Please don't ask me
that.  This is irrelevant.  I'm here in front of you to tell you
everything.  Please do not tire me with some minor questions that are not
relevant for these proceedings.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, Witness, I have to tell you that whether a
question is relevant or not is a matter for the Chamber to determine.
Mr. Cole, you might think now that you have exhausted your
re-examination.
MR. COLE:  I have a few more matters, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  A few matters.  Okay.  Let's move quickly.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, sir, Your Honour.
Q.   The document that has now been produced by the Defence bearing
the number -- in fact, it's now Exhibit 1D25, the list of 15 names of,
we'll say police officers, you referred to the stamp on that document.  I
wonder if that could be shown to you again, Exhibit 1D25.
Can you see that document in front of you, Mr. Kurspahic?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, did you say in answer to counsel's question that the stamp
on that document was not in use by the police in June in 1992?
A.   Yes, that's what I said.  It wasn't in use.
MR. ALARID:  Mischaracter --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Alarid.
MR. ALARID:  I would object at this time to mischaracterisation
of the evidence.  I believe he left April of 1992, and he wouldn't have
had personal knowledge as to a stamp in June of 1992.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Cole.
MR. COLE:  I'll ask the question again, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MR. COLE:
Q.   The stamp in the document, was that stamp in use at the time that
you last saw a police document in 1992, and was it April?
A.   No.  You can establish precisely when the stamp of the Republika
Srpska or the Visegrad municipality was designed.  One can establish that
quite precisely.
Q.   I just wonder if you can assist us personally.  Was the stamp on
that document in use in April 1992 when you last saw active police
documents?
A.   No, it wasn't.
Q.   What type of stamp was in use on police documents, let's say in
April 1992, and how would that type of stamp differ from the one in front
of you?
A.   As far as the stamp is concerned, it maintained the same round
shape.  However, we had two in our police administration.  The larger one
was smaller than this one, and the smaller one was used to cancel some
documents inside the police administration, whereas the larger one was
put on all official documents that the police issued.
Q.   Yes.  Thank you.  Now, counsel for Mr. Sredoje Lukic asked you
about the good relationship that you had with Sredoje Lukic as a police
colleague.  Do you recall that?
A.   Yes.
Q.   So accordingly, you would have had -- you would have no motive to
tell lies about Sredoje Lukic.
A.   I wouldn't even think about it, people.  He knows I'm not lying.
He's here with us.  Please, if there's anything to be clarified in front
of this highly esteemed Court, let us clarify the details.  I volunteered
to be an unprotected witness so that I can be face-to-face with him.  I
have a moral obligation to say the truth and nothing but the truth.  He
knows very well that I didn't add even a single comma.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, you were asked by counsel whether you would agree
with him that VG-13 and VG-18 did not know Sredoje Lukic.  Do you recall
that question?
A.   I never heard anything of the sort.  They should have known him.
I don't know about that.  If they ever appear here, you will have to ask
them.  There were opportunities for them because Sredoje Lukic was a
publicly known figure who was everywhere around the municipality.  I
or not.  I don't know
whether they knew him, but there were some victims that went to school
with Milan Lukic in Prelovo near Visegrad.  That is an elementary school.
Q.   Now, you mentioned that Sredoje Lukic would also go out for
.
A.   Yes, on many, many occasions.
Q.   And how far afield?  How far from Visegrad would these villages
be at the extreme?
A.   There's one village further on named Zemljice and Rujiste.
Rujiste is the place where Sredoje Lukic was born, and it's about 30
kilometres due north towards Bratunac municipality.  That is the furthest
village.
Q.   All right.  Just a couple more questions for you.  The capture
and release of Sredoje Lukic in April of 1992, can I just ask you if you
noticed any signs of injuries or ill-treatment on Sredoje Lukic at that
time?
A.   I didn't.  It was for a very short time.  It didn't last more
than a minute.  I didn't have anyone's approval to do that.  I did it on
my own.  I stayed there for a short while.  I told him that he shouldn't
be afraid.  I said, "Amidzic, don't be afraid.  As soon as night falls
I'll come over and release you and transfer you," and that is -- "to
Visegrad," and that is how it happened.
Q.   And the last matter I wish to raise with you, Mr. Kurspahic, is
when you were talking with VG-13 when she came to Medjedja, from your
answers in cross-examination --
MR. CEPIC:  Excuse me.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  I think that this question is not raised from the
cross-examination.  We already discussed what VG-13 said to the witness,
and that was in direct examination and again in redirect examination.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Tell us how it arises, Mr. Cole.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  At page 55 of the transcript the note that I
made, the witness was answering questions to the effect that she -- VG-13
told certain facts to the witness but then, I think two days later told
the truth about it.  I just want to clarify with the witness what the
original details were that she told him and what the truth was that she
told him some two days later.  That's perfectly legitimate, in my
submission, and arises directly from cross-examination.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  Ask the question.
MR. COLE:  Thank you, sir.
Q.   Mr. Kurspahic, in answers to counsel you told the Court that
VG-13 told you some details about what had happened in relation to your
family and then two days later told you the truth about it.  My question
is this:  What was it that she told you on the first occasion, and what
was the truth that she told you two days later?  If you could just
explain that slowly to us, please.
A.   My first encounter with this person, VG-013, took place in
Medjedja sometime in the afternoon.  I can't recall the exact date.  I've
already said it must have been seven or eight days after the entrance of
the Uzice Corps into Visegrad.  She was wounded.  She had the left upper
arm bandaged.  I asked this person under this pseudonym what had happened
and this witness told me that the entire population of that village, the
women, children, the elderly, from my were brought to Visegrad and then
and that on that critical night they were set fire to
by Milan Lukic, Sredoje Lukic, Mitar Vasiljevic and some other men, and
my family allegedly did not enter that house.  They went to Orlovo
instead.  And sometime later that night, as I was thinking it all over, I
realized it was impossible.  That story couldn't have been true.  Why
would they alone be set free, and then the next day she told me the whole
story of that event.  I can tell you what she told me, but I wrote it all
down in a statement that she wasn't able to sign because I didn't write
, when
.
Q.   So on the first occasion, VG-13 told you that your family had
escaped the fire.  On the second occasion, she gave you the awful news
that in fact they had perished in the fire.
A.   Yes, but it's not a woman --
MR. CEPIC:  Leading question, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I agree.  We must bring this to an end now,
Mr. Cole.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, sir.  Then just one final matter.
Q.   Did VG-13 explain why she hadn't told you the truth on the first
occasion?
A.   She told me that she was afraid I would have a heart attack or
something and there were no doctors or anything.  And then she finally
told me the next day.
Q.   Yes, thank you, Mr. Kurspahic.
MR. COLE:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you, Mr. Cole.
Witness, that concludes your evidence.  We thank you for coming
to the Tribunal to give it.  You may now leave.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Mr. President, may I just ask you
Lukic and Sredoje --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, we have procedures that we follow --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I'm begging you.  Please allow me.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  We have procedures that we follow and we have
listened attentively to your evidence, and you have played your part in
the procedure.  You may now leave.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, I'm begging you, sir.  Let me
just say if they know --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, it's not part of our procedure to have
statements from witnesses at this stage.  Please leave.
[The witness withdrew]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Next witness.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, the next Witness is VG-38, and
Mr. Ossogo will be leading that witness.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Mr. President, the Prosecution is
now calling the next witness, VG-038.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm told the witness is slightly inconvenienced
but will be here very shortly, so we'll wait.  Well, it's been suggested
that we take the break now, and I think that's a good idea.  Half an
hour.
.25 p.m.
.58 p.m.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let the witness make the declaration.
Mr. Cepic.  Before the witness --
MR. CEPIC:  I apologise.  Your Honour, this morning we received
information report from OTP, and this is actually confidential material.
Could we go to the private session, please, just for one minute.
[Private session]
<span lang="FR" style='font-size: 10.0pt;line-height:200%;font-family:"Courier New"'>11  Pages 936-937 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we're back in open session.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you very much, Mr. President.
Examination by Mr. Ossogo:
Q.   [Interpretation] Good afternoon, Witness VG-38.
A.   Good afternoon.
Q.   Do you feel well enough to answer my questions?
A.   Yes.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Mr. President, this witness was
granted protective measures following an order by the Trial Chamber on
the 24th of July, 2001.  This is the reason why I shall ask the usher to
give him a pseudonym sheet, which is the pseudonym that will be used
throughout his testimony.  It had been given by way of this order.
Q.   Witness, please look carefully at this sheet and tell me whether
you can see your name written on it.  Do not say your name, please.  Can
you see your name on this first sheet you have?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Is it also your date of birth?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Next I shall ask you to look at the second sheet.  There are
two -- there's another sheet after the first one.  Some names can be
found with pseudonyms.  If at any time throughout your testimony you want
to refer to one of the names during the examination-in-chief or
cross-examination by the Defence, please only use the pseudonyms you can
see there.  Did you understand me?
A.   Yes.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Mr. President, after the witness has
signed the pseudonym sheet we would like to ask for this to be tendered
into evidence.
Please sign, Witness.
THE REGISTRAR:  It will be admitted as P43 under seal.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation]
Q.   Witness VG-38, do you remember testifying in the Prosecution
versus Mitar Vasiljevic case on the 1st and 2nd of October, 2001?
A.   Yes, I do.
this weekend.  Have you had an
opportunity to listen to your testimony again in a language you can
understand?
A.   Yes.
Q.   To the best of your recollection is the testimony you have
listened to fair to what you said here before this Tribunal before?
A.   Yes.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Mr. President, the Prosecution would
like this document to be tendered into evidence.  This is the transcript
bearing exhibit -- 65 ter exhibit numbers 110 and 111.  These were --
this was evidence tendered in the Vasiljevic case through this witness.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, 110 will become Exhibit P44 under
seal, and 111 will become Exhibit P45 under seal.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] The Prosecution also seeks to tender
documents accompanying the statement made by Witness VG-038 on the 1st
and 2nd of October, 2001.  They are 65 ter numbers 104, 105, 106, 107,
108, and 109.
Document 104 is an aerial photograph showing the town of
Visegrad.  In the Vasiljevic trial, it had the exhibit number P17.1.
Document 105 is an aerial photograph, a black and white
as marked by the witness.  In
the Vasiljevic trial it had Exhibit number P17.1.VG-38.
As to document 36, it is a coloured photograph of the Pionirska
Street showing the school next to the street and the creek that is
opposite the school.  It was identified and marked by the witness under
Exhibit number P17.114.VG-38.
Pionirska Street
and marked by the witness.  It's a black and white photograph.  In the
Vasiljevic case it had Exhibit number P17.3.VG-38.
Document 108 is a black and white photograph of the house
belonging to Mr. Adem Omeragic that -- in which was the fire, and the
photo was marked by the witness showing this house and another two houses
in which the Koritnik group had been put up.  This was document
P17.7.VG-38 in the Vasiljevic case.
Finally document 109 shows a series of photographs signed --
there is a signature in the photograph of Mr. Mitar Vasiljevic.  It was
P17.20.VG-38 in the Vasiljevic case.
These were the documents attached to the testimony of Witness
VG-038 in the Vasiljevic case which we would like to introduce into
evidence further to Rule 92 ter following today's decision by the Trial
Chamber.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, the documents will become
Exhibits P46, P47, P48, P49, P50 and P51 under seal.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] We would like to make a suggestion
to the Trial Chamber with regard to some of these documents, the black
and white photographs.  The quality is not very good.  Back then we did
not have any sophisticated electronic means such as the ones we have
today at our disposal.
These are documents -- I'm thinking of document 107 in
and was marked by the witness.  It
was a black and white photograph.  Just for the sake of clarity for the
Trial Chamber to have a better view of this black and white photograph,
we would like to offer a colour photograph that will be given to the
registry so that the Trial Chamber can compare both photos and have a
better idea of the location of the building.
We also have document 108.  It, too, is a photograph showing
Mr. Adem Omeragic's house as marked by the witness where there was the
fire.  There, too, we would like to offer an unmarked photo, a colour
photo, so that the Trial Chamber can better see the photograph.
These are our two suggestions we would like to make to the Trial
Chamber for practical purposes, and the Prosecution could have them
uploaded electronically.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you very much, Mr. President.
Q.   Witness --
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Are we now in open session or in
private session?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  We're in open session.
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just to clarify, we were in open session when
you made your inquiry.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Could we please move into private
session.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Private session.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you.
[Confidentiality partially lifted by order of Chamber]
Q.   To go from Koritnik to Visegrad, which is the closest village
after Koritnik?
A.   Greben village.
Q.   Did you know a person by the name of Milorad Lipovak in that
village -- or Lipovac?
A.   I do.
Q.   What was his trade?  What did he do in that village?
A.   I think he was working in Varda company.
Q.   Was Milorad Lipovac involved in this group of being escorted from
Koritnik, the group you were in that was escorted in 1992?
A.   Yes.  He took us to the Red Cross.
Q.   What did he tell you as he was escorting you?
A.   Well, that we had to leave the village, that we were no longer
safe there.
Q.   Was he armed?
A.   Yes.  He had an automatic weapon.
Q.   What was his ethnicity?
A.   Serb.
Q.   When you arrived at the Red Cross, as you said, was he the one
?
A.   No.  It was Mitar Vasiljevic.
Q.   Did you know Mitar Vasiljevic?
A.   Yes.
Q.   How did you know him?
A.   He used to work as a waiter.
Q.   Where did he work as a waiter?
A.   In Panos and in Vilina Vlas Hotel.
Q.   Could you tell us when Mr. Vasiljevic took over from Milorad
Lipovac where he led you, where he led you to?
, to the house of Jusuf Memic.
Q.   Were you taken to one or several houses?
A.   We were in Jusuf Memic's house, and we were in Mujo Memic's
house, which is the house across the road from the first one.  There were
seven of us in Mujo Memic's house.
Q.   You said that there were about seven of you in that house.  Can
you tell us whether there was any connection, family connection, between
Jusuf and Mujo Memic?
A.   Yes.  They were father and son.
Q.   Who was the father and who was the son?
A.   Jusuf was the father.  Mujo was his son.
Q.   You said that there were seven of you in Mujo Memic's house; is
that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Could you tell us who you were with in that house?
A.   VG-13 and the others who had burned.  Do you want their names?
Q.   Well, if you remember the names you can give us the names.
A.   Hana Kurspahic, Kurspahic Safa, Kurspahic Medo, Kurspahic Medina,
Redzo Memisevic, Fazila Memisevic.  That's it.
Q.   In the second house, Jusuf Memic's house, how many people were
there that belonged to the same ethnicity as you?
A.   There were about 60 of us.
Q.   At some point in time did Milan Lukic and Sredoje Lukic do
something in one way or another?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What did they do?
A.   They asked for money and gold.
and Sredoje Lukic, don't
you?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you agree to their terms?
A.   Yes.  We gave them everything we had.
Q.   When did this happen?
A.   In the evening, at 1700 hours.
Q.   And at that time you were in Jusuf Memic and Mujo Memic's house.
All the Muslims were in those houses then?
A.   No.  When they asked for money and gold, we were -- had all been
transferred to Jusuf Memic's house.
Q.   When Milan Lukic and Sredoje Lukic obtain the gold and the
jewellery from you as you have described, what did they do after that?
was
and Mitar Vasiljevic.  Susnjar Milan aka
Lalco and Sredoje Lukic were in the house.
Q.   I'd like to talk about Milan Susnjar now.  He was the third
person other than Milan Lukic and Sredoje Lukic.  Were there any other
people there?
Susnjar,
aka Laco.
Q.   I'd like to spend some time talking about Milan Lukic and Sredoje
Lukic.  Let's first talk about Milan Lukic.  Did you know him before
these events occurred, these events that took place in the Pionirska
Street?
A.   No.
Q.   Can you tell us when you discovered that it was him?
A.   There was some people who went to school with him, so through
them I learnt his identity.
Q.   Could you tell us who these people were, those people that gave
you this information?  If these people are protected people, please just
give us a pseudonym.
A.   VG-101, and Sajmija Kurspahic.
Q.   These are the two people who told you that it was Milan Lukic; is
that right?
A.   Yes.  There were some other people who knew him as well.
Q.   Do you know these other people who knew Milan Lukic?  Could you
give us their names, and if these people are protected, just give us
their pseudonym, please.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Are we still in private session?  Do we need to
be in private session, Mr. Ossogo?
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Your Honour, I believe that we need
not remain in private session.  Thank you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Public session.
[Open session]
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation]
Q.   Let me repeat my question, VG-38.  You said that two people who
were with you that were of the same ethnicity as you whose names and
pseudonym you gave us, outside these two people -- other than these two
people, I was just about to ask you did you know these two people who
identified Milan Lukic or who told other people in the room that it was
Lukic?
A.   There was Jasmina Vila, and there was some other people who said
that, but I couldn't see them because there was so many of us in the
room.
Q.   Did you know Jasmina Vila?
THE INTERPRETER:  Regarding the previous question, "the people
who were with you and who came from Koritnik," and not "of the same
ethnicity," interpreter's correction.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation]
Q.   Do you know what became of this person after the incident that
?
A.   She perished in the fire in the house where we were set on fire.
Q.   I'd like now to move on to the identification of Sredoje Lukic.
, which is when
--
A.   I used to --
Q.   -- and --
A.   -- see him on the street.  He was an official working in
Visegrad.
Q.   Do you know what position he held in Visegrad, which is where you
saw him?
A.   He was a policeman.
Q.   Did you see him in a uniform since you said he was a policeman?
A.   Yes, I did.
Q.   Did you meet him often?
A.   Well, on my way to school and back I used to see him in the
street.
Q.   When you say when you left school, when you went to school, which
school do you mean, the one you mentioned earlier, the Vuk Karadzic
school?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   Did you meet Sredoje Lukic before the incident around the
Pionirska Street or in your school?
MR. CEPIC:  Leading question, Your Honour.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Not only --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  No, no.  Don't answer yet.
How is that leading, Mr. Cepic?
MR. CEPIC:  All references are give to the witness just to say
yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Reformulate the question.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation]
Q.   Witness VG-38, you went to the Vuk Karadzic school, didn't you?
Could you tell us where you came across Sredoje Lukic?
A.   I was walking across the Rzav bridge, and the police station was
nearby.  This is where I saw him most often.
Q.   How far would this bridge be from the Pionirska area,
approximately?
A.   You mean the distance between the Rzav bridge and Pionirska
Street?
Q.   Approximately, yes.
stretches up to
one kilometre.
Q.   Do you know any people or members of your family who were
colleagues of Mr. Sredoje Lukic?
A.   Huso Kurspahic.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Your Honour, just for a short while
may we move into private session.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
[Confidentiality partially lifted by order of Chamber]
Q.   Witness VG-38, since you have provided us some information which
enabled you to identify Mr. Milan Lukic and Sredoje Lukic, this
information which you provided in addition to your prior statement dated
, I would now like you to turn your head either
to the right or to the left and tell us whether you recognise Milan Lukic
or Sredoje Lukic.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC: [Interpretation] Your Honour, we have already put
forward an objection in principle to this method of identification, and I
would like to reiterate that.  Thank you.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Your Honour.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  We have in mind the objection you've made,
Mr. Cepic.
Please proceed.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.  Without it
having an impact on your decision, I would like to specify that when
these two accused were identified by Witness VG-115 you said, Your
Honour, that in light of your discretion you maintained that identifying
the accused during a trial like this one is extremely important.  In
essence, it is very important.  You can't exclude one identification
method from the other.  I think identifying in the courtroom is extremely
important.  I'm submitting this so that you can weigh all of the material
that has been presented to you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  Please proceed.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   VG-38, do you remember the question I put to you?
A.   Sredoje Lukic is on the left.  Milan Lukic is on the right -- I
mean, the opposite.
Q.   When you say to the left, could you describe him to us, please,
the person and the clothes he's wearing?  First describe Milan Lukic to
us, please.
A.   Milan Lukic is on the left.  Sredoje Lukic is on the right.
Q.   Could you show him to us with your finger, please?
A.   Right and left.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  And your evidence is that you -- you knew them
before?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, Sredoje.
[Trial Chamber confers]
?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Ossogo.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.
I would like it to be recorded on the transcript that Witness
VG-38 recognised and identified Milan Lukic and Sredoje Lukic.
Milan
Lukic.  It would be by exclusion only.  I don't think a proper foundation
was laid as to the identification of Milan Lukic.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  And, Your Honour, if I may add, during the
identification witness said on the left, then on the right, and I was
quite confused about that identification.  Thank you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  It seems to me that ultimately was clarified.
Ultimately I think it will be for the Trial Chamber to assess all the
evidence and to determine what weight to attach to the witness's
identification of the accused.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] May I proceed, Your Honour?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, yes.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Witness VG-38, you described in detail what happened in Jusuf
Memic's house.  Can you confirm that after Mr. Jusuf Memic's house, after
you were taken there, where were you taken afterwards?
A.   They transferred us to the house of Adem Omeragic.
Q.   When you say you were transferred to Adem Omeragic's house, who
took you there?
A.   The same four men that I named.
Q.   Could you give us their names again, please, for the sake of the
record?
Susnjar
aka Lalco.
Q.   What happened in Adem Omeragic's house?
A.   At around 10.30 in the evening they set us on fire in the house
of Adem Omeragic.
Q.   The entire group of Koritnik you were part of, were all these
people in that house?
A.   Yes.  There were some other people -- or, rather, women that were
.
Q.   Can you describe to us in addition to what you've told us already
in your testimony in the Vasiljevic case, what did Milan Lukic and
Sredoje Lukic do, each in turn?
A.   I couldn't see because we were locked up in the house, but I do
know that they set us on fire and that there were shots fired at the
house where we were.
Q.   VG-38, today you are alive.  How can you explain to the Bench in
addition to the details you have provided already?  Can you tell the
Bench how you managed to escape from this house where you were locked up
with all the people from Koritnik?
A.   God only knows how I managed to do that.  I managed to escape
because VG-18 was the first one to break the windowpane and to jump out.
Then I jumped out, as well as VG-84.  As for the others, I didn't know
how they survived.  I didn't see, because I didn't dare linger any
longer.  Both these persons that I named were shooting, shooting at the
house in which we were and which was set on fire.
Q.   You told us that you were amongst others VG-013.  Do you know
what happened to this person?
A.   I didn't know until the fall of Zepa.  I know that she was
wounded in that house when I saw her, but I don't know anything relating
to what was before that.
Q.   Were you in Zepa?
A.   No.  I was in Zenica.  When Zepa fell I moved to Zenica.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Ossogo, we'll take the break now and
resume --
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] I was just about finished.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Well, please finish if you're just about to
finish.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation]
Q.   In addition to VG-84 and the other person you mentioned, do you
know if other people survived?  Can you give us their names and
pseudonyms, please?
A.   VG-13, VG-018, VG-078, VG-084, VG-101, and Hasib Kurspahic, and
Edhem Kurspahic.  These are the people who managed to escape from the
house.
MR. OSSOGO: [Interpretation] Your Honour, this was the last
question I had for this witness, and I would like to refer to the
testimony that this witness also gave in the Vasiljevic case.  Thank you,
Your Honour.
,
to be reconvened on Tuesday, the 2nd day
.00 a.m.
