Monday, 13 May 2002
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
--- Upon commencing at 11.05 a.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please be seated.  Good morning, everybody.  And
could you please call the case.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good morning, Your Honours.  Case Number
IT-97-24-T, the Prosecutor versus Milomir Stakic.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you very much.  And the appearances.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Nicholas Koumjian with Ruth Karper for the
Prosecution.  Good morning.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  And for the Defence?
MR. LUKIC:  Good morning, Your Honours.  Branko Lukic and Mr.
Danilo Cirkovic for the Defence.  Mr. John Ostojic will join us during the
day.  Thank you.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Without preliminary remarks, let us finally hear
Witness 26.  It still remains open session, no other protective measures
necessary?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Correct, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  Then the witness be brought in,
please.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good morning, Mr. Kapetanovic.  Can you hear me
in a language you understand?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, I can.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could you please take the solemn declaration.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will speak
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  Please be seated.
WITNESS: NIJAZ KAPETANOVIC
[Witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  If you could start with the examination, please.
Examined by Mr. Koumjian:
Q.   Sir, could you please tell the Court your name?
A.   Nijaz Kapetanovic.
Q.   Mr. Kapetanovic, can you tell us where and when you were born.
A.   I was born in 1946 in Prijedor.
Q.   Are you married, and do you have any children, sir?
A.   Yes, I am married, and I have three sons.
Q.   Can you tell the Court the years of birth of your three sons.
A.   One was born in 1976, one in 1978, and one in 1987.
Q.   Mr. Kapetanovic, what is your ethnicity?
A.   I'm a Bosniak.
Q.   And the ethnicity of your wife, please?
A.   The same.
Q.   Sir, do you practice a religion?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   And what is your religion?
A.   I should perhaps explain.  I think that the God is endless, that
his power is limitless, that he's just.  That he created humankind so that
together they would fight for good and not for bad.
Q.   By your explanation, do you mean that you don't practice any
formal religion, but believe in God?
A.   Yes, well, you can put it that way, although it depends.  People
have different ways of practicing.  And I think this is good.
Q.   So it would be correct then to say that you respect all religious
beliefs who believe in a God?
A.   Yes.  I believe that Adam and Eve are our forefathers, that people
should respect the ten commandments of Moses, that they have to be
inspired by love as Jesus was, and so on and so forth.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Can you tell us what is your profession?
A.   I am a teacher by occupation.  Currently I am teaching technical
subject and subjects in computer science in an elementary school.
Q.   Where were you educated, sir?
A.   I was educated in Rijeka, in Tuzla, partly in Sarajevo and in
Banja Luka.
Q.   Mr. Kapetanovic, we've heard in this trial that military service
was compulsory in the former Yugoslavia.  Can you explain to the Court
what your experience was with compulsory military, and why you did or did
not complete that service?
A.   Of course, like almost all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
was called up to do my military service.  During the first month of the
training and before we were sworn in, due to the dynamics of the training,
that is, the rhythm of the training which was conducted even in rain, and
I exercised daily.  I practiced marching, which we were supposed to do
during the sworn-in ceremony.  After that, I remember the day, the day
after I came from the exercise.  I lay down.  I didn't change my clothes,
which was probably my mistake, and the next day I woke up seriously ill. I
have some -- I did some damage to my kidneys, and I was sent to hospital.
And after the checkup, after the examination, I was sent home.
Q.   Sir, can you explain to the Court why you are wearing sunglasses
today?
A.   Yes, I can.  Since I spent almost one year, minus ten days, in a
camp in the military detention prison in Banja Luka as a result of
beatings and psychological mistreatment, I suffered many illnesses,
including an eye condition.  I cannot stand too much light.  I visited a
doctor for that, and he recommended that I should spent as much time as
possible in dark.  I apologise for this.  I don't know whether I speak too
fast for the interpreters.  I have no problems if they want to warn me to
slow down.
Q.   I think you're doing fine, sir.  Thank you very much.  If you
forget and go too fast, we'll remind you.  Thank you.
Mr. Kapetanovic, do you suffer from any other medical conditions
at the present time?
A.   I have a number of problems.  My rib cage was broken in several
places, and I have some heart problems and kidney disorders as well.
Q.   Just to clarify, so we know its relationship to this case, your
arrest was in 1995, and the beatings that happened to you happened in a
prison in Banja Luka municipality.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes, it is.  If I may add, this lasted one entire day, from 7.00
a.m. until 9.15 p.m., and it was actually a miracle that after this
beating, things improved and were relatively good.
Q.   Mr. Kapetanovic, can you tell the Court what your involvement was
in politics; and in particular, with the SDA party in Bosnia?
A.   Even as a small child, I listened to the radio with my father.  We
listened to the "Voice of America," to the BBC later on, Deutsche Welle.
The radio was always very loud.  We had to turn it down from time to time.
But this gave me an experience in differences amongst people.  And I think
that that is why we were given all these characteristics by God.  I have a
very humanistic view of religion.  Some individuals attempted to impose
their religion to other people.  During the time of communism, the most
prominent figures, the leaders, were Tito, Lenin, Marx, and Mao Tse Tung.
One was not supposed to criticise them.  And I believe that the religion
was very important for the historical development of man and his
civilisation.  And I believe that in that spirit, it would be good to have
a multiparty system in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  So I assisted in forming
both the SDA and HDZ, and I attended pre-electoral rallies of the HDZ and
SDS also.  I attended rallies organised by other political parties as
well.
It is true that at the time, I simply didn't believe that people
could be so narrow-minded and not tolerate other people's opinions.  It
was my view that they tried to impersonate some deities, and they believed
they held the keys to the truth.  And with this truth of theirs, that they
can impose themselves -- that they could impose themselves to other
people.  But it was already too late.  So it is true, I participated in
the formation of both the HDZ and SDA.
Q.   In 1990, were you living in Prijedor?
A.   Yes, I was.
Q.   Can you tell the Court -- you told us you were born in Prijedor.
Have you lived in Prijedor for all of your life?  Can you explain when you
were not in Prijedor?
A.   Since I come from a family which is one of the founding families
of the town of Prijedor, I am very profoundly linked with Prijedor.  And I
was present in -- lived in Prijedor most of the time except for -- except
during my studies and when I worked in Jajce for a year.
Q.   Where did you live now, what town?
A.   I also -- I live in Prijedor.
Q.   Did you hold a position with the SDA political party in 1990 or
1991?
A.   Yes, I did.  Ever since the beginning, I was vice-president of the
party.
Q.   So from the founding of the party, was that in 1990 in Prijedor,
the founding of the SDA?
A.   Yes.  No, in 1991.
Q.   From the founding of the party, and at some point, were you
replaced as a vice-president and just become a normal party member?
A.   Yes.  It happened prior to the outbreak of war in Slovenia.
Internal party elections were held.  Mevludin Sejmenovic, who was another
vice-president, we got about 500 votes from various -- out of 500 votes
from various communities, I got 5 votes, and Sejmenovic got 6.  And we
didn't get through.
Q.   So in 1991, with the outbreak of the war in Slovenia, you were no
longer the vice-president of the SDA in Prijedor.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Have you since the war obtained -- I'm sorry.  Do you need to
explain your answer?
A.   I was the president of the Merhamet humanitarian organisation in
Prijedor.
Q.   Yes.  Thank you, we'll come to that in a moment.
At the present time, do you have a position with the SDA party in
Prijedor?
A.   No.
Q.   After the conflict, did you ever hold a position in the SDA party
in Prijedor?
A.   Not in Prijedor.  I did in Sanski Most.  For a period of time, I
was trying to present my opinion to the community there, but it didn't
really work out.
Q.   You told the Court that you also had a role, in addition to having
a role in the founding of the SDA, the Muslim political party or the
Bosniak political party, you also had a role in the founding of the
Croatian Democratic Union, the HDZ in Prijedor.  Can you explain that?
A.   As I stated at the beginning, I am pleased to be able to cooperate
with as many ethnic and religious communities as possible.  It is a key
factor to any development, because people who are intellectually
narrow-minded are not prepared to accept differences of other people.  So
I was happy to see as many political parties as possible to be formed at
that time so that democracy could be developed and could prosper.  I went
to see a Catholic priest.  I talked to him, and he told me that Croats in
Prijedor were afraid of founding an HDZ branch there.  And I said that,
well, I'm willing to help.  They wanted to vote for the SDA in Prijedor,
but they also wanted to have their own political party there.  So I tried
to assist them as best as I could.  I attended a number of talks with them
which lasted over a period of two months, I believe.
Q.   Did the SDA party in Prijedor include only Bosniaks, or were other
ethnicities members of that party prior to the war?
A.   Prior to the war, there were Serbs, Croats, Ukranians, Yugoslavs,
and many more.
Q.   Can you tell us the names of any Croats who were members of the
SDA party prior to the war that you can think of at this moment?
A.   Let me give you an example:  I remember a person by the name of
Pero.  His family name escapes me now.  He was originally from Hambarine.
He's a Croat, and his wife is a Serb.  He was later killed.  We had a
Ukranian from Trnopolje who was a deputy to the Municipal Assembly.  There
were people from -- other people from Prijedor and Donja Puharska who were
members of the SDA but were Croats or Yugoslavs.  At this point, I cannot
remember names, but I'm sure that there were such members of the SDA. This
was something that I most strongly advocated at the time.
Q.   You told us that you were the president of Merhamet.  Can you tell
the Judges, what is Merhamet?
A.   Merhamet is a Bosniak humanitarian organisation.  Prior to the
outbreak of the crisis in the former Yugoslavia, a humanitarian
organisation, whose name I cannot remember, arrived from Germany.  They
worked very well.  They provided food, but also various type of equipment
such as heating devices and so on and so forth.  They supplied flour,
powdered milk, sugar, many things.  Two trailer trucks arrived carrying
this food.  One trailer truck, 50 per cent went to Serbs and the other
one, the second one, was split in two.  25 per cent went, therefore, to
Croats, and 25 per cent to Bosniaks.  This humanitarian aid, we
distributed to all those whom we thought to be in need.
Later on, when Serbs try to check whether I was helping only
Bosniaks or others as well, they could see on those lists that I was
helping all.  And they could see what my opinions were, that is, that we
are all children of God and that we are all brothers and sisters.  And as
such, we are required and obliged to help each other and to help those who
are in need.
Q.   When were you the president of Merhamet?
A.   In 1991, in the month of November, I was unofficially elected
president upon a proposal of a Catholic priest who suggested that Muslims
should have their own humanitarian organisations, because Catholics had
their humanitarian organisation there.  And since I was there, and I was a
Bosniak, and I grew up next to a Catholic church, never minded chimes of
its bells at the time of prayer, so they knew me.  They contacted me for
that purpose, and I was unofficially elected.  Later on, a certificate
arrived from Sarajevo whereby I was -- I became officially president of
Merhamet in January 1992.  A delegation came from Sarajevo, and they
confirmed me officially as the president.
Q.   How long did you remain the president of Merhamet?
A.   Up until the takeover of power and the outbreak of conflict in
Prijedor.
Q.   After the takeover of power on April 30th of 1992, did you
continue to work with Merhamet?
A.   Since all the humanitarian aid was actually distributed out of the
warehouse of Merhamet, I was actually unable to find premises for the
humanitarian organisation, and I actually turned to my own house, where I
actually opened up an office.  And Merhamet continued with its activities
with the arrival of the international Red Cross.  When contacts were
established I attended a meeting with the Adil Solo, and when we were
asked by the international Red Cross if there was a Bosniak organisation
present, he answered yes, there was.  And according to what Adil told me,
Serbs themselves said that Merhamet was not present in Prijedor.  However,
he said that I was the president of Merhamet and that Merhamet, in fact,
did exist.
And then the representatives of the international Red Cross
visited me at my home.  I was already then, at the time, in some sort of a
home detention, house detention.
Q.   So would it be correct to say that because of your role with
Merhamet, you had contacts with foreigners from western countries before
the conflict and during the conflict in Bosnia?
A.   Yes.  The first initial humanitarian aid that arrived from
Germany, I, of course, spoke to the people who brought the humanitarian
aid since it was already the start of the so-called "Jogurt" revolution,
road barricade revolutions.  Since we needed aid and we couldn't get it
from the former Yugoslavia, this particular aid was very useful to us.  We
already felt the shortage of baby food, and this really came as a help
from God.
I would like to use this opportunity to thank all the people of
goodwill who were there to help all the people in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Q.   In 1990, were there all-party elections in Prijedor?  And can you
tell us the basic results of those elections?
A.   As I have already said, I was -- as I already said, I was
interested really in having this religion of communism.  Perhaps people
like hearing me say "religion of communism," but this was my opinion
because different opinions were imposed on people to represent them.
I was really enthusiastic about the fall of the Berlin wall, and I
was really looking forward to the increasing progress in the world, that
there would be increasing accord between people and religions, and that we
would do our best to improve the world because this is something that
mankind, that human beings do deserve.  I really did not think that we
would live to see the problems that we did live to see.  I was always
doing my best to respect the personality of any person that I met,
regardless of the person's background.  I am not the one to actually judge
people on behalf of God, or to change them.  I think that God was there.
He created the world with the reason he created us in order to develop our
knowledge.  And I was really happy that a multiparty elections were to be
called, and the results of these elections in Prijedor, to put it this
way, the SDA won most votes, together with some other parties. Serbs were
dissatisfied, and I can understand that.  All the people in
Bosnia-Herzegovina, in the former Yugoslavia, felt threatened, and I also
understand that feeling.
They were truly threatened, because they were unable to make
choices for themselves.  The problem emerged because the vast amount of
differences that existed between the people, this was something that the
people could not really grasp, and this became a disaster for them.  They
tried to reduce the situation to one theory, their own theory, whereby
they started offending each other.  And of course, people who are very
short-tempered in nature, they brought to some situations that were really
unworthy of man.
Q.   You mentioned that the SDS party or some members accused the SDA
of falsifying the results.  Can you explain what you remember who made
these accusations and who were they directed against?
A.   I think that these complaints were mostly directed against Serbs.
Perhaps Serbs would disagree with me, but I have my own opinion because I
think that it is the Bosniaks and the Croats themselves that can bring
most problems to themselves.  And this is true for the Serbs as well, that
they work at their own expense.  The results of the elections actually
stirred Serbs.  It created a confusion among them, because they proceeded
based on their prejudice, that they were the majority, the Serbs were the
majority.  And thus, they forgot the fact that there were Bosniaks and
Croats who actually declared themselves as Yugoslavs.  And with the advent
of nationalism, this tension was heightened, and then Serbs started
explaining and lamenting that they were threatened.  But they were indeed
threatened, but by themselves, mostly.
Q.   Who was Nedzad Seric?
A.   Nedzad Seric was president of the Court in the Prijedor
municipality, and he was the one in charge of the elections in Prijedor.
He was subsequently accused of having rigged the elections, which was, of
course, not true because both Serbs and Croats were present there, and the
representatives of the international community, and they were there and
were able to check that the procedure was regular.  I don't think that
there were -- that there was any rigging.  I think everybody had a chance
of controlling the process of the elections.  Of course, the problem lied
in the dissatisfaction of the very results, and I can understand that.
Q.   What was the ethnicity of Nedzad Seric?
A.   He was a Yugoslav by his declaration, but his background was
probably Bosniak.  But he was known as being pro-Serb oriented.
Q.   What was his fate in the conflict?  Do you know?
A.   I only know what I heard, and I heard that he was killed in
Omarska.
Q.   Who accused him of rigging the election results, if you recall?
A.   The SDS, the Presidency of SDS.
Q.   Who was that at the time?
A.   Mr. Kovacevic, Dr. Srdjo Srdic.
Q.   After the elections in 1990 -- excuse me.  Let me withdraw that
and start over.  Prior to the elections in 1990, was there an agreement
among the three national parties, the SDA, the SDS, and the HDZ, in Bosnia
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
that to divide up positions in municipalities where together they
controlled the Municipal Assembly?
A.   Yes, there was an agreement both at the level of
Bosnia-Herzegovina and at the level of the municipality.  Agreements were
signed.
Q.   Do you know if negotiations took place in Prijedor after the
election regarding this division of positions?
A.   Yes.  I myself attended two or three meetings that were held in
Prijedor municipality where the division of power was being discussed, and
it was said that it should be done in percentages, according to the
results in the elections, and that some sort of a slower pace should be
given to the process.
Q.   Who was representing the SDS party in these negotiations?
A.   Srdjo Srdic, Stakic, Kovacevic was there.  The people from the
military, Arsic, from the police forces, and so on.
Q.   You mentioned Stakic.  Who are you referring to when you say
"Stakic"?
A.   He's the person who used to be the president of the SDS in
Prijedor municipality.
Q.   Can you tell us what you knew about Stakic prior to these
negotiations?
A.   I knew very little.  I heard from other people that he was
moderate.  He didn't seem to show that he was peculiar in character.  He
didn't show, display, any eccentricity or intolerance toward people.
Q.   After the elections the Municipal Assembly, do you know what Dr.
Stakic's position was?
A.   I think he was vice-president for a time, and then a president.
I'm not sure.  I know that there were changes.  I know that Dr. Mile
Radetic was also in the party.  Srdjo Srdic.  I know that Stakic was
there.
Q.   Do you know at these negotiations that you attended, do you
remember Dr. Stakic speaking at those negotiations, and can you tell us
what you recall about his input?
A.   Yes, but I would first like to go back and explain a bit further
that the mass media had an active role in creating hatred, and with each
new statement broadcast hatred increased, and everyone was really
threatened.
Q.   I'm sorry, Mr. Kapetanovic, but please try to answer the questions
and perhaps later we can come back to other issues.
What was -- the question is what was Dr. Stakic's input in these
negotiations?  If you were leading into that, then please continue, but
that's the question I'm interested in right now.
A.   Yes.  I wanted to say that the reasoning was conditioned by the
very situation, the reasoning that was followed.  Dr. Stakic said on
several occasions that the Serbs were being threatened, that genocide had
been committed, directed against them, that the Ustasha during World War
II committed crimes against Serbs.  This is something that I myself never
tried to deny, or to confirm.  The truth is being shown by historical
research, regardless of what individuals think.  Mr. Stakic said at the
time that Bosniaks were the ones who occupied all the leading positions,
Ustasha, Croats, that they, Serbs, would not allow for the repetition of
the crimes committed against the Serbs during World War II.
Q.   What was Dr. Stakic's stated position regarding who should be
allocated the leading positions in Prijedor?
A.   Well, their thesis was that Serbs were threatened and that
Prijedor was a Serbian town, and it is the Serbs who should have the most
responsible positions.
Q.   What was the result of these negotiations?  Was an agreement
reached?
A.   I said at the beginning that the agreement was reached -- well,
the results eventually were accepted.  Other elections would be held
anyway soon, so they managed to agree.  The results were abided by, as
long as we had an informal discussion.  But as soon as we had Mr. Stakic,
Kovacevic, and Srdjo Srdic, as far as I know, they would travel to Banja
Luka or Belgrade to get further instructions.  So whatever we did agree at
a table could not be implemented because probably, later on, they were
given different instructions, not accepting what had been agreed.
Obviously, Serbs could not implement things that they did not agree on.  I
even have an information that camps for Serbs were organised for those who
would not follow the official policies, the official activities, those who
would not follow them, they were also beaten and detained and so on.
I do not know what sort of an authority Stakic had or did not
have.  But in my opinion, he did not.
Q.   Did you see -- was there an agreement on the chief of police
through those negotiations, on who would be appointed the chief of police?
A.   Yes.  It was reached.  There were problems, however, in regulating
the issue, because to us, we found it more acceptable to have Mr.
Talundzic from Basic Husein, and there were people travelling to Sarajevo
to the headquarters, trying to persuade people there preferring one over
the other because apparently, this other one would be more acceptable to
Serbs.  And as far as I know, as regarded other issues, we never went to
Sarajevo to ask for their instructions.  We -- I always advocated the
practice of resolving problems in Prijedor and not going to ask for help
to Sarajevo, because we were in Prijedor and knew what the problems were,
and we were there to solve the problems and not to create them.
Q.   So if I understand what you're saying, you indicated that the SDS
representatives seemed to be changing their position after the
negotiations, after consultations with higher authorities.  Is that
correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   But Mr. Talundzic, who was appointed the chief -- he was appointed
the chief of police.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Was he a Bosniak?
A.   I think so.
Q.   Was he a professional policeman?
A.   No.  He was an engineer.  I think electrical engineer.
Q.   I want to go back for a moment.  You mentioned being a teacher.
As a teacher, did you come in contact with some individuals who were --
who would come to hold high positions in the SDS party?
A.   Yes.  The secretary of the centre for elementary education was
Mr. -- What's his name now?  I'm sorry.  He was in the police.  I think he
actually was -- he perished when he was being arrested in Prijedor.
Q.   Mr. Drljaca?
A.   Yes, yes.  Simo Drljaca.  He was the secretary for elementary
education.  He's unfortunately deceased now.  But I would really like to
hear what he would have to say about me being constantly transferred from
one school to another, and I think he was responsible for that.  And then
finally, I was proclaimed to be the technical surplus in the labour force,
and then I worked in the library.  I worked in Omarska.  I had to change,
of course, the job that I did, but I didn't find it very difficult.
I'm not the sort of person to bear a grudge on others.  I have --
I have gone through some temptations and testing, but I don't know what he
had in mind -- God knows that only, and he will be the one to judge our
deeds, what we have done in our lives.
Q.   So Mr. Drljaca was, by profession, an educator.  Is that correct?
A.   No.  He was a jurist.  He was a secretary for the centre for
elementary education in Prijedor.  This is an institute, an organ, that
covers all the elementary schools in Prijedor.
Q.   I want to concentrate for a few moments on your interactions with
Dr. Stakic.  Can you tell the Court first when you met in person first,
Dr. Stakic, if you recall.
A.   Of course, as soon as I started working, so it has been a long
time, for a long time.  By that time, I had already been working for 20
years.  And of course, I knew Simo Drljaca.  It means that I had known him
for a long time.  We didn't have high-level contacts.  We discussed the
problems at the schools, problems of teachers, as workers, whether we had
some entitlements or not.  And I didn't have any problems.  I think this
is something that bothered people, the large differences in people's
positions and views.
Q.   I'm not sure that we are understanding each other.  Are you
talking now about your interactions with Dr. Stakic or Mr. Drljaca?
A.   Drljaca.
Q.   Now I'd like you to tell us about your interactions with Dr.
Stakic.
A.   I knew Mr. Stakic only superficially up until the multiparty
elections, I don't think we ever spoke a word to each other.  But the last
time I did speak to him was when the Municipal Assembly had its session in
the theatre building and when there was an interruption and I was trying
to persuade him to continue the cooperation.  He was trying to persuade me
that the Serbs would be actually underrepresented.  I wasn't actually a
deputy in the assembly, but I allowed myself to go there, because I tried
to calm the situation down.  I also wanted to hear the other side, and I
wanted to settle the situation.  So I told them:  "Perhaps we do not agree
with what happens in Sarajevo, but we should try and reach an agreement
amongst ourselves and try and reach some sort of stability."
However, there was not enough will or trust on either sides to
achieve this, although I do think that the majority of people were really
interested in preventing what happened.
Q.   I think we need to explain a little bit about the circumstances
regarding the discussion you just mentioned.  You said that it happened at
one of the last meetings, or after one of the last meetings of the
Municipal Assembly.  Were you in attendance or were you able to follow
those -- that meeting from the radio or some other source?
A.   I live nearby.  I live close to the Catholic church and the
theatre where the Municipal Assembly was in session.  I was listening to
the radio.  And when I heard that there was an interruption, I ran out of
my house and went there.  The problem was that Bosniaks and Croats should
respect the JNA, the Yugoslav army.  Bosnia and Herzegovina were
recognised.  I understand that there were people who disagreed with it,
but if the United Nations were the ones who recognised something, then I
personally can, perhaps, disagree, but I can, through democratic means,
try to improve the situation.  This was the last drop in the cup, and the
Serbs said that they had enough, that they were constantly being outvoted.
And as a result, naturally, naturally in brackets, to do anything about
it, although there were people who thought that it would be able to reach
an agreement outside the assembly.  But however, it all came to an end.
Q.   I think you can still help us, if you tell us exactly what you saw
and heard that day.  You were listening to the radio, and you heard that
there was an interruption or a stoppage of work at the assembly.  Is that
correct?  Yes or no?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Then you went to the assembly building, and what did you see when
you went towards the theatre or the assembly?  What did you see?
A.   This is how it happened:  I was listening to the radio and there
was an argument going on concerning whether Croats should -- and Bosniaks
should go to fight war in Croatia or not.  So that was one problem.  The
other problem was the fact that the Serbs could not outvote them.  And
they believed to be outvoted.  Because their opinion, that that was the
right thing to do, was not respected.  So they no longer wanted to talk.
They said:  "We have nothing to discuss with those who have no respect for
Yugoslavia."  So having seen that a crisis had erupted, and this was all
broadcast over the radio, that this should stop, and I immediately went to
the theatre where the session was being held.  Whom did I find there?  I
found groups of people discussing amongst themselves, including, for
instance, Mirza, Cehajic, Stakic, Srdjo, and others from the SDS, all
members of the SDS were there.
So what was I supposed to do?  I tried to calm them down, all of
them, Stakic, Mirza, Srdjo.  I tried to reason to them.  I said:  "Just
calm down.  There must be an agreement that we can reach.  We must find an
agreement."  But the situation was such that nobody listened to anybody
any longer.  They all felt offended and humiliated.  No one listened to
anyone else any more, unfortunately.
Q.   If you recall, at that -- when you got to the theatre or outside,
who did you see Dr. Stakic with?
A.   He was talking to Mr. Mirza Cehajic [as interpreted].
Q.   I think the -- you said Mirza, and you said Cehajic.  Are those
two separate people?
A.   Yes, yes.  I said Mirza and Cehajic.  I was referring to the
professor Muhamed Cehajic and to Mirza Mujadzic.
Q.   And Muhamed Cehajic was the president of the assembly.  Is that
correct?
A.   Yes.  Mirza was only the president of the party, the SDA.
Q.   That's Mirza Mujadzic?
A.   Mujadzic.  You're correct, yes.
Q.   Just to make it clear for the record, if you can try, if you know
the last name, try to refer to people by their last name, family name.
Besides this occasion where you saw Dr. Stakic in front of the
assembly, and the negotiations where you met with him, did you meet with
him -- see him in person on any other occasions that you can recall?
A.   No, I did not.  There were other negotiations as well.  I know
that.  But I did not attend them, though people begged me to go.  But at
the time, I finally understood that these negotiations and talks were no
longer serious at all.  I didn't think that there was anything else that I
could do.  I know that the negotiations were attended by Muhamed Cehajic,
Mirza Mujadzic, Becir Medunjanin.
Q.   We'll come back to that.  Did you ever see Dr. Stakic -- you
mentioned a person by the name of Simo Drljaca.  Did you ever see Dr.
Stakic with Simo Drljaca?
A.   Yes.  I would often see them together downtown in cafes when they
went to meetings.  SDS held their own meetings; SDA, their own.
Q.   Did you -- sorry.
A.   They were preparing for the meetings of the municipal session, so
they would see each other for that purpose.  And I think that for a while,
their cooperation was correct.  The problem was with the percentages and
how to divide the power.
Q.   Now, do you know someone by the name of Colonel Arsic?  I believe
it's Vladimir Arsic.
A.   Yes.  I think he was the chief responsible for the Prijedor
barracks.  He attended several meetings at the municipality.  I know that
he also cooperated with them.
Q.   Did you ever see Dr. Stakic with Colonel Arsic?
A.   Of course.  It was a perfectly normal sight.  One could also see
me with Arsic at the time.  Those were the times of negotiations.  As for
the influence of Arsic on Stakic or of Stakic on Arsic, that is something
that I'm not able to tell you about.
Q.   You said Colonel Arsic was in charge of some military units in
Prijedor.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.  There was quite a big presence of the military in Prijedor,
especially after the withdrawal of the JNA and after they had -- that is,
after they had withdrawn from Slovenia and Croatia, they all came to
Prijedor prior to the outbreak of conflict in Prijedor, with a lot of
equipment.  There were many soldiers from Serbia proper, from Vojvodina,
for example, and one could tell by the way they spoke where they came
from, they came from southern Serbia, Belgrade, or someplace else.  There
were lots of soldiers around.  I know that some of my pupils, some of my
students, had Serb friends staying with them at the time.  We were
surprised to see many Serbs staying with them in barns, in their houses,
and elsewhere.
Q.   Do you know if these units had heavy weapons?  I'm talking about
the JNA that was later transformed into the VRS in Prijedor.
A.   Of course they did.  They had artillery pieces and tanks.  There
was a missile base at Karanovo [phoen] From where missiles went eventually
towards Kozarac and other places.
Q.   I want to ask you now about the events of the 30th of April, 1992.
Do you recall there being a takeover of power on that date?
A.   Yes, I do.  When I got up that morning, I didn't know what was
happening.  Later, I heard that Mirza, with two or three other members of
the party, had been to some negotiations, but that eventually Serbs
decided that they should take over power.  They established a Crisis Staff
for that purpose, and the first thing that I saw that morning when I got
up was a checkpoint which had been set up in the vicinity of my house.  I
turned on the radio to hear the news and I heard that the SDS had taken
over, that the SDA, the HDZ, the western world were working against Serbs,
and that they were threatening them and so on and so forth.
We could hear this on a daily basis over the radio.  Many posters
with such slogans had been put up all over town.  And I saw that things
were getting pretty serious.  Nevertheless, I went to work, and for a
period of time, maybe one or two days, I didn't have any major problems.
The checkpoint was manned by the military.  Prior to that, there had been
a Territorial Defence checkpoint with light weapons in Kozarac where I
worked at the time.  Later, it was the Serbs with weapons who were manning
this checkpoint as well.
Q.   In your answer, you mentioned again "Mirza" with two or three
other members of the party.  Are you referring to Mirza Mujadzic, the
president of the SDA party at that time?
A.   Yes, yes, Mirza.
Q.   You mentioned that there were announcements on the radio and
posters about the reasons for the takeover.  Was it -- were these
announcements or posters signed by anyone or was there any occasion of who
had taken power or what the governing body was?
A.   It was announced and written that the body was the Crisis Staff of
Prijedor.  Prior to that, a so-called Serbian municipality of Prijedor had
been established, so the entire municipality of Prijedor was this now
Serbian municipality.
Q.   Did you know who was the president of this separate Serbian
municipality of Prijedor?
A.   The president was Stakic, Mr. Stakic.
Q.   Do you know who the president was of the Crisis Staff that was
established after the takeover?
A.   Through an automatic procedure, I think it was Stakic.  I'm not a
hundred per cent sure, but I believe that it was him.
Q.   Can you tell us how life in Prijedor changed after the takeover on
the 30th of April?
A.   Despite claims of the SDS that the former government was only a
Bosniak government and only for Bosniaks, the reality was different, and
this can be proved with documents.  That authority was a multiethnic,
multinational authority.  I think that they would have gone on functioning
as best as they could.  Now, what happened after the SDS took over, I
think that up until the 28th of May, not more than 2 or 3 per cent of
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
Bosniaks or Croats remained at their work.  They had all been replaced. By
the 28th of May, all Bosniaks had been removed, and they complained about
having lost their jobs.  This is telling you quite a lot about what the
situation was.  As for various accusations which were constantly broadcast
over the radio and TV, this only instilled further hatred and
misunderstanding which was not to the benefit of anyone.
Q.   Did you ever hear Dr. Stakic on the radio?
A.   Yes, he was also one of those who kept repeating these claims and
announcements which we heard over the Prijedor radio on a daily basis.
And the presenter was a Bosniak lady who had to read this.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I don't know whether the Court wants to schedule
any break today.  Would you like to do that?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  In about 15 minutes.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you.
Q.   Can you tell us how your life changed after the takeover of the
municipality?
A.   During the takeover itself, I didn't have many major problems.
Problems occurred at the time of the so-called attack against Serbs and
the killings at Hambarine.  I have information that no Serb had ever been
killed.  Yes, one Serb was severely wounded and transferred to the Banja
Luka hospital, but his condition was not critical.  There was another Serb
who was wounded, but he was able to make a statement over the Prijedor
radio.  He declared that -- they ordered --
Q.   Mr. Kapetanovic, please try to answer the question that I ask, and
then we'll come to other matters later.  So the question was about your
own life and circumstances and how they changed, and you were explaining
that it started out not so bad, and then after the attack.  Can you
explain?
A.   Yes.  I wanted to link it up with the time when the situation
exacerbated, because Serbs later on told in the media that they had been
attacked by Bosniaks, which -- I mean, if Serbs had a Serbian
municipality, then of course the Bosniaks had their own municipality.  So
what were they doing on the Bosniak territory?  So the situation was only
getting worse.  So after this -- and I'm sure that there are witnesses who
would confirm that this was so, there were many Serbs at the time who were
coming back from the front line in Croatia.  Many of them had been killed
in Croatia, but later on they said that these people had been killed in
the area of Prijedor.  I don't know why they had to go there.  They were,
after all, the JNA, but what was this JNA doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina
if it had been internationally recognised?   But the problem was that
Bosnia had put up a -- yes, yes, I know.  I apologise.  I got carried
away. I know.
Q.   Okay.  The question is, let me rephrase it, after the takeover, at
some point did you stop going to work?
A.   Yes.  I went to work up until the 28th of May, but not after that.
Q.   And what prevented you from going to work, or why didn't you go to
work after the 28th of May?
A.   Because all Bosniaks and Croats had been sacked.
Q.   Did someone tell you that you were no longer employed?
A.   Yes.  Some people got their employment booklets back.  I didn't
dare go there to fetch mine.
Q.   After the takeover, was your apartment ever searched?
A.   After the attack, and that is why I started telling you about the
attack, before the attack, my house had not been searched.  At least, that
was the case with my place.
Q.   After the 30th of May, 1992, the date of the attack, was your
apartment searched?
A.   Yes.  They conducted altogether 16 searches.  Whatever I had which
belonged to the Merhamet organisation, including food, everything was
taken away.  I was beaten and eventually taken to the theatre where a part
of the Crisis Staff was located.  They probably had some information about
me, and finally I was told:  "you're lucky, you can go back."  But many of
my neighbours never came back.
Q.   Now, in this time -- we're talking now about the end of May or
June -- were you using your apartment to store the humanitarian goods that
belonged to Merhamet?
A.   It was not in my apartment.  It was not in the flat itself but in
the building where I lived, I had a space which was used for that purpose.
And one could enter the space, these premises, from the street.  And this
is where this humanitarian aid belonging to Merhamet was stored.  The aid
that had been given to us by this German organisation.  Part of this aid
was immediately distributed, but we needed some time, we needed to
reorganise ourselves and update the lists with the necessary statistical
data, so it all took a while, and I worked on those papers.  The papers,
the lists contained both Croats and Serbs.  Later on, I was able to show
this against the accusations that I had distributed this food to the army,
and I said:  "Look here, you can see the signatures of Croats and Serbs,
the numbers of their identity cards, of the people who had received the
food, including various other data such as the age of the children and so
on and so forth."
Q.   What kind of property was this that Merhamet -- that you were
storing for  Merhamet?
A.   Most of it was baby food and bottles for feeding babies.  Then we
had some children's clothes, some heating devices which used not fuel but
gas -- or actually petroleum, I think.  Then we also had some flour,
sugar.  I know that the food had been brought in two huge trailer trucks,
so the quantity was considerable.  I was surprised, because of the
prevailing crisis at the time and the problems we faced with transport.
So I thought that the best would be to distribute it as quickly as
possible to those who were in need.  I went to the municipality in
Prijedor.  I cooperated with them.  I actually had asked them for
assistance because they had already done that.  They had already
distributed humanitarian food on several occasions, so I wanted them to
help me to go about it.
Q.   In addition to the property of Merhamet, was any other property,
personal property, belonging to you taken during these 16 searches?
A.   Yes, of course.  As I said, my flat was searched on 16 occasions.
Eventually, I was left with no flour, sugar, and oil for about a month.
We had nothing except water.  And I didn't dare go out, because the
military and the police had told me that we were all under house arrest
and that we shall not receive any visits either, that we should not go
out.
Q.   Do you remember approximately when it was that you were told that
you should not leave your house, that you were detained at your house?
A.   The first day, sometime around the 30th of May.
Q.   During these searches, was anyone in your family mistreated?
A.   As I said, I was beaten and so were my children.
Q.   How old were your children that were beaten?
A.   My wife was not.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   15 and 16.
Q.   Sir, did you ever hear an order directed towards Bosniaks and
Croats regarding marking their houses in some way?
A.   Yes, I did.  I, too, had to mark my house.  I was told by the
police and the soldiers that I should put up some white sheets on the
windows and the door.  And we had to keep these out for a while.
Q.   You mentioned earlier in your testimony that there was a Catholic
church near your home.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.  80 metres away from my building.
Q.   Can you tell us -- by the way, what part of town are we talking
about, what part of Prijedor?
A.   The centre of the town.  The name of the street was Marsal Tito,
and it was a very big junction in the town where five major communications
meet.  The Catholic church was in the vicinity and so was the building of
the Jugobanka, a department house, the Prijedor Patria department house,
the Prijedor Hotel, both the railway and the bus station.  The PTT
building was maybe a hundred or 200 metres away.  The theatre, an
elementary school, a number of secondary schools, the town hall,
everything, that was located within a perimeter of 500 metres.
Q.   Do you know what happened to that Catholic church in 1992?
A.   People were euphoric.  I don't know exactly when that was, but I
remember that police and soldiers were on duty that night.  I saw them
roll up a barrel containing something, which I didn't know what it was,
but later I heard that it was gunpowder.  They were saying that allegedly
a sniper was located at the top of the Catholic church, at the roof, and
that they were about to take him out.  But it's interesting to point out
that the sniper -- this sniper never opened fire.  And at about 1.00 or
2.00 a.m., I didn't want to look out, but I could hear things.  It was
nighttime.  I could clearly hear what happened.  There was a very loud
explosion and a flash, and a piece of the structure flew by my house.
That night, the mosque in Donja Puharska was also blown up.
I also know that the Catholic priest was interrogated.  They
wanted to know who was there, if he knew anything.  He was an elderly man.
I don't think they beat him.  I didn't see them beat him, but after that,
he was very frightened.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I think it's appropriate to have a break now.
Let's resume at 12.50.  Thank you.
--- Recess taken at 12.30 p.m.
--- On resuming at 12.53 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please be seated, and let's start immediately,
please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Mr. Kapetanovic, you mentioned that you saw people going into the
church before the explosion.  Can you tell us more about what you saw and
what these people were wearing, what kind of clothing?
A.   I know that they had military and police uniforms.
Q.   Was it one or two people, or more?
A.   More.  I don't know the exact number.  I was unable to find out.
Q.   Did you actually see these people?  Could you actually see them
from your home?
A.   Yes.  I had it in full view.
Q.   Let's talk a little bit about your home that you were living in at
that time.  You said it was on the street called Marsal Tito, is that
correct, prior to the conflict?
A.   Yes, it was called Marsal Tito Street, and the other street, Latka
Marusica, which was actually running toward the Catholic church.  This is
a street that is about 100 metres long.
Q.   When you say this was your house, was this a house that had been
assigned to you because of your job?  Was it something that was in your
family?  Can you explain that to us.
A.   It was a family house where I lived with my mom, and my brother
was staying with us for a while.
Q.   So was this a home owned by your family?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you tell us, what was the style of the architecture?
A.   There were basically three units, two in front, one at the back.
We were living on the first floor, some 12 by 11 metres.
Q.   Was the style of the architecture typical of any particular group
or period?
A.   It was typically Bosnian architecture.  The roof faced four sides.
Q.   What happened to your house in 1992?
A.   In 1992, the house was still intact because I received visits by
the representatives of the international Red Cross, because as I said, I
was under a sort of a house arrest.  And then, according to the town plan
that was produced in November, my house was supposed to be pulled down
because some sort of a street or a lane was supposed to go through.  And I
was really surprised at this decision, because my house was just across
from the Catholic church.  And then I tried -- I asked the people,
representatives of the municipality who came, I asked them for an
explanation.  And this was something that happened after the takeover by
the Serbs.  My wife was then told that she should abide by this decision,
and that she would, in turn, get a Bosnian house, and we were given a
house in Donja Puharska.  We moved to this house.  And my house in
Prijedor was then destroyed.
Q.   How was it destroyed?
A.   By bulldozers.
Q.   Withdraw that.
A.   It was destroyed by bulldozers.
Q.   Was -- did you receive an order regarding your house being
demolished; and if so, who signed the order?
A.   I did not receive any document, or an order of such sort.  I
just -- there were people from the power distribution company who came and
said that we should have our power cut off and that we should move out.
We were told this by the police, the army, and that's when we moved out.
I was -- part of the building material of my house was used, and then they
transported it later to -- in Donja Puharska where I was able to actually
recognise the brick of which my house had been made in Urije.
Q.   Did anyone ever tell you on whose authority your house was
destroyed?
A.   I was told that this was a decision taken by the war presidency of
Prijedor municipality in order for some sort of a road to be built on this
site.  I received a piece of paper which contained signatures of certain
people whose names I cannot recall at this moment.  This, I received it
when we were moved into this other house.  In the meantime, we filed a
suit.  That was maybe one month earlier, because we did not receive a
paper, a decision, that our property would be returned.  This was a month
ago, sorry, we filed a suit, hoping for the return of the property.  And I
hope it will all be sorted out soon.
Q.   Are you saying that you filed the suit in year 2002?  Correct?
A.   Yes, yes.  Because I had been waiting for some sort of a document,
a decision, which we have not received so far.
Q.   Going back, concentrating on the events in 1992, as the president,
formal or informal, of Merhamet, was there any attempt by the authorities
of Merhamet in Prijedor to give aid to detainees in the Omarska, Keraterm,
and Trnopolje camps?
A.   At the time I was unable to go out because I was under house
arrest, but as far as I know, Adil Solo did bring some aid to Omarska, and
this was really a specified purpose mission.  We had a list of people.
But it created additional problems to us because citizens thought that we
were stealing goods and then giving aid to some people and not to others.
However, this was really specified by the international Red Cross, that
the aid was to be given to the people on the list.  That was something
taken care of by the international Red Cross.  So we had problems also
with Bosniaks.  They started accusing us of not giving them aid, of
speculating with the goods, and it was very difficult for us to explain it
to them.
Q.   Do you know if any aid ever reached people in Omarska, Keraterm,
or Trnopolje?
A.   Some aid did arrive in Trnopolje, yes, but I don't know if the
same is true for Omarska and Keraterm.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, I have an article I would like to have
marked as an exhibit next in order.  It is for the record, it comes from
Kozarski Vjesnik, it is dated the 28th of April, 1994.  And the ERN number
on the translation begins 00326342 and 343, in consecutive order.  And the
ERN on the B/C/S original, a photocopy, is 00326340 and 6341.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  This was former 65 ter Exhibit Number 423?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  What will be the new number for the exhibit,
please?
THE REGISTRAR:  The Exhibit Number will be Prosecution Exhibit
S47, A for the English version and B for the B/C/S version.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Sir, I don't know if you can see the newspaper article in front of
you.  Can you see it?
A.   I see the article, but I am unable to read, so I would kindly ask
the interpreters to read it out for me.
Q.   No problem.  What I'm going to do is I'm going to read it in
English, and you will be receiving the translation in B/C/S.  And then I
will ask you some questions about it.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry, this causes indeed some problems.  Can we
have any solution that it's read out in the original version, and then be
translated into English?  I know it causes problems, but to be as precise
as possible, it would be better the other way around.  Is there anybody
possible?  It's, of course, the right of the Defence to remain silent.
But if you could do us a favour, I think it will be also, to a certain
extent, to the advantage of your client if you could read it out.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  If I could suggest, I think the B/C/S booth could
read out the document while the English booth translates.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.  Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Is that possible?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Is it appropriate for the interpreters?  Okay,
thank you.  Could the B/C/S booth please start reading this article.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  The English and French booths translate.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  They translate.  And I see the B/C/S booth
nodding.  Could it additionally be put on the ELMO.
Can it be heard by the English and the French booth?  Okay.
THE INTERPRETER:  Mr. Koumjian, do you want the whole article?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.
THE INTERPRETER:  How Dr. Milomir Stakic, first chairman of the
Municipal Assembly of Prijedor, saw the events of 30th April and after.
SDA had a detailed plan for the liquidation of Serbs -- can you please
slow down -- making up uniforms with the lily symbols and building
strongholds in Kozara and the neighbouring districts.  When I was elected
chairman of the Serbian assembly in Prijedor, the then chairman of the
joint assembly Muhamed Cehajic congratulated me, but I knew what was
hiding behind his smile.
It had been two years ago this Saturday since the Serbian people
in this part of Potkozarje, with guns in their hands, succeeded to defend
themselves from Muslim and Croatian extremists.  This is an opportune
moment to remind ourselves once again of this, for the Serbian people,
very important date, and at the same time, to expose the infernal plan for
the liquidation of Serbs in Prijedor, concocted jointly by the Party of
Democratic Action and Croatian Democratic Union.  The choice of our
collocutor Milomir Stakic, one of the leaders of SDS and the first
chairman of the Serbian Municipal Assembly in Prijedor, was not
accidental. By nature unobtrusive, but a determined and tenacious man
Stakic, while still vice-president of the joint Municipal Assembly in
Prijedor, came to realise that the SDA and HDZ are contriving a plot to
get rid of Serbs, and he used every opportunity to counteract them.
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
This is what and why he said this at the start of our interview.
"What happened on the 30th of April, 1992, was only the final act of a
long-standing but, for the Serbs, perilous plan.  I often talked in
private with the leaders of the SDA and HDZ, and this is what convinced me
that they were concocting a terrible plan regarding Serbs.  They were
secretly arming themselves, sewing uniforms with the symbol of the lily,
building strongholds in Kozara and the neighbouring districts.  But we
were not sitting there with our hands in our laps.  When we saw what they
were doing" -- one part of the page is illegible.  "So they were secretly
arming themselves, sewing uniforms with the lily, building strongholds in
Kozara and the neighbouring districts.  But we were not just sitting there
with our hands in our laps.  When we saw what they were doing, we began to
arm ourselves and told the party members what they were planning to do to
us, and what had to be done to prevent 1941 happening all over again.
"On the direction of the central office of the SDS, we, on 7
January, 1992, formed the Serbian assembly of Prijedor, and I became its
president.  When I arrived to work the next day, the then chairman of the
joint assembly, Muhamed Cehajic, greeted me with the following words:
"Hello, colleague.  Now, we are both presidents, and I congratulate you
from all my heart and wish you success."  But in spite of his smile, I
knew what was behind these words and what they were planning to do to us.
In April, things started to happen in Sarajevo, Bosanska Krupa and other
places and this convinced we have to speed up the process of arming
ourselves.  All more so, as both Muslims and Croats on the 6th of May of
that same year called an all-party conference inviting managers of various
firms and prominent people and formed their government, appointed heads of
SUPs and army and other institutions.  I was informed through my own
channels that a decision had also been reached to take over power by
force.  We were lucky that Colonel Arsic was the commander of our
garrison, a good soldier, and a man with a lot of experience, and we
decided we must speed up the process of arming ourselves."
"An interesting thing happened on the 20th of May," Stakic
continued.  When travelling to work from Omarska, I saw in Prijedor at
Kozarac a checkpoint, armed Muslims with lilies on their sleeves.  I
noticed the same in Kozarusa, and I knew that the time for action had
come.  Two days later, our people were attacked in Hambarine, and the same
happened in Kozarac on 24th May.  We reacted by mounting guards,
checkpoints in certain spots in town, and prepared for defence.  We knew
they were armed mainly with light infantry weapons and Wasps, but we were
better armed and our lads were brave and bold.  But it has to be said once
again that we were not vigilant enough.
"That morning, when we were attacked, a light rain was falling.
We were only half awake; and therefore, in the first clash, 12 of our
people were killed.  Later, when we organised ourselves, the enemy was
soon forced to his knees.  When we took into custody the most hardened of
extremists," continued Mr. Stakic, "we gathered enough information to
conclude that the Muslims were very well organised and determined to
liquidate their fellow citizens, the Serbs.  Their armed, well-trained
groups were stationed in all the villages, all bearing the emblems of the
Muslim guerrilla, but lucky for us the delivery of heavy weapons had been
slightly delayed.  We thwarted their plans by stopping Agrokomerc lorries
carrying heavy weapons.
"From the interrogation records, we learned that they had intended
to simultaneously take over power and seize the barracks and with it, the
arms depot.  But worst of all, we found out that the Muslims had a
detailed plan for the liquidation of the Serbian population of Prijedor.
They knew exactly who, in which house will liquidate which Serb.  The
worker was given the task to liquidate his coworker, the neighbour his
neighbour, the friend his friend, but we stopped them and in doing so
prevented the repeat of the massacre of the Second World War."  At the
end, Dr. Stakic warned and rightly so that the war was not over yet. "And
although we are now some 50 kilometres from the nearest front line we
should never not for a moment forget that we are at war nor should we
relax and forget about the infernal plans of our false brothers.  Now is
the time," he said, "to perfect our combat readiness and to strengthen the
SDS, because the conditions are ripe to transform her from a national
movement into a party.  If SDS does not achieve that, who knows how she
will fare in the elections which will probably be held already in autumn
because the time for putting up posters and shouting slogans and blaming
communists for everything bad that happened is past.  We must identify our
own failings and eradicate them as we go along," concluded Dr. Milomir
Stakic.  Signed by O. Kesar.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you.  I thank the booths for that reading and
say that on behalf of all the lawyers who've worked at the Tribunal, it
was gratifying to hear the interpreter asked to slow down for once.
Q.   Sir, in the article, I want to ask you about a few parts of that
article.  It was indicated that Dr. Stakic was described as "an
unobtrusive, but determined and tenacious man."  Would you agree with that
characterisation?
A.   Yes.
Q.   The article goes on to talk about the leadup to the Serbian
takeover, the SDS takeover, on the 30th of April.  It talks about Muslims
secretly arming themselves and preparing lists of people for execution. Do
you have any comment to make regarding those statements by Dr. Stakic?
A.   First, I will like to comment on the process of arming themselves.
It was argued that Srdjo Srdic at one point, that he was arming Bosniaks.
There were a lot of Bosniaks who actually bought arms through him, and it
was not done by the SDA.  Furthermore, the gentleman himself said that the
Serbs were arming themselves.  The gentleman says that Bosniaks were
sewing the lily patches on the uniforms.  And I would like to remind the
gentleman that these were the official state symbols, this very symbol was
actually appended on the wall in the UN headquarters.  And he himself in
1994, did not recognise this as an official emblem?  And I would ask him
whose emblems that he saw on the uniform, his countries or some others?
Furthermore, he says that there were people in Kozarac who were
building dugouts.  This is true.  But why were they doing this?  Well, to
hide their women and children, because they witnessed what was
happening -- they were able to see what was happening in Croatia, in
Slovenia.  Could the gentleman please tell me, where was it that Bosniaks
and Croats attacked a Serbian village?  Were did they perform a massacre?
Did Bosniaks ever perform rapes or threaten Serbs; Bosniaks or Croats?
This has been fabricated in order for -- in order to increase the rage of
the Serbs, in order to increase the nationalist tension.
I think that this article really characterises the entire
psychology and tactics that they employed.  It is difficult for me to
comment on each and every line, because it's difficult for me to recall
the text that I heard.  But if you have any additional questions, I am
here to respond to them.
Q.   In the interview, Dr. Stakic indicates that the SDA party or the
Muslims were preparing lists of people for execution and preparing to take
over Prijedor.  Given what you have told us about the presence of the JNA
and later the VRS in Prijedor, was it feasible for Muslims to take over
power militarily in Prijedor?
A.   I said at the beginning that there was more than 100 tanks, and
the army that withdrew from Slovenia and Croatia, there was an entire
corps surrounding the town.  And in Banja Luka, it was only Bosniaks who
were so naive that could actually think that there would not be a war and
that they should have done something to prevent it.  I think that this
psychological approach really had an impact on the way people were
thinking at the time.  I think very few people could have resisted the --
this imposed situation.  I said at the beginning that we had a euphoria,
this psychological approach trying to heighten the feeling of being
threatened, the mass media and individual persons really contributed to
the formation of such an opinion, public opinion.
Q.   I'm going to quote one sentence out of the article, where Dr.
Stakic is quoted as saying:  "When we say what they were doing, we began
to arm ourselves and to tell the party members what they were planning to
do to us, and what has to be done to prevent 1941 happening all over
again."
A.   This is where the problem lay, because the Serbs had this feeling
that they were the ones who were the greatest victim of the Second World
War.  Bosniaks, but even the Serbian Djilas wrote that it was the Bosniaks
that were killed most in the Second World War.  But the Serbs were the
ones who were blaming Bosniaks and Croats for having committed most
massacres against the Serbs.  And this is really a vicious circle that
nobody really wanted to go out of.  In my opinion, this is what the
essential problem was.  People looking back at history, and not thinking
about the future.  I was using my powers, as many as I had, did my best to
prevent this, but it simply did not turn out that way.
Q.   When Dr. Stakic indicates that "we were arming ourselves," did you
have any evidence -- could you see whether that was true?  Was the SDS, or
the authorities of the SDS, arming the population?
A.   Mr. Stakic himself said that they did, and of course I knew this
because in the Serbian-dominated villages, they would put up crosses next
to their houses and helicopters would land.  I understand that Serbs were
afraid and that they armed themselves.  But what I cannot accept is that
they entered and attacked Bosniak and Croat villages and killed people.
If they -- if we were unable to agree immediately on issues, we could have
reached the agreement eventually.  In my opinion, a human being is a
sacred thing, it's a creature made by God.  As I said, our forefather --
we have Adam and Eve.  We are their descendants.  Such actions really
constitute the refusal to accept the will of God, that we are all the
same.  It is the refusal to abide by the ten commandments that was
conveyed to the people by Moses.  This is irrespect -- showing lack of
respect for any sciences.  The greatest problem lay in the fact that
people were allowed to act as if they were God, deities, and this is
something that I think was brought about by communism because in
communism, people had always one God, they Stalin, Lenin, Tito, Mao
Tse-tung.  Now they are left without these divinities, and now they turn
to religion, to the ethnicity.  And now they thought they were there to
perform the will of God as they saw it, and this was the major human
mistake.  This is, I think, a problem shared by the entire mankind.  It
constitutes a destruction of the mankind itself.
I would like to live in a country where we have Americans,
Japanese, and Serbs and Croats, and others.  I don't like to be in a
society that is narrow-minded, because of course this also leads to --
makes people dumb, and we have been made different for a purpose. However,
we came out of this communist system with this narrow-minded attitude, and
it was difficult for the people to absorb all of a sudden all the
differences, and this is why they behaved as they did.
Q.   Isn't it true, Mr. Kapetanovic, that the Crisis Staff was giving
orders to disarm people and conducting searches for weapons?  How can you
explain that this was done the same time that Dr. Stakic indicates that
they were arming the Serb population?
A.   Yes, of course the police and the military had all the necessary
information with respect to weapons, the number of the piece of weapon and
to whom it had been sold.  And it all used to belong to the JNA.  I
learned from other people, I mean, I didn't personally buy or sell any
weapons.  But I learned from other people that the person in charge was
Srdjo Srdic.  So they knew all this, including rifle numbers.  And this is
how it was done.  Well, once again, I understand that Serbs had reasons to
be concerned; what I do not understand is why they acted on such feelings
and why they eventually did what they did.  I respect their fear; I
respect fear of every individual.  But I also respect every individual's
opinions.  What I cannot respect are activities which are to the detriment
of others.  I cannot impose my opinions to other people, including my
children, let alone issue orders to other people.  But they used this
approach and misrepresented it as a protection of their interests.
It cannot be in the interest of Bosniaks to attack Serb villages.
Only madmen would do that, be they Croats or Bosniaks or Serbs.  I'm now
living in Prijedor again.  If I thought that it was not possible to live
with Serbs, I wouldn't be there today.  There were quite a few Serbs who
helped me in this very difficult situation.  They risked their own lives.
They risked losing the respect of the community.  As I told you, there
were camps for Serbs as well.  Whether Mr. Stakic was aware of this or
not, I don't know.  I don't have any example, nor did I hear from anyone,
that Mr. Stakic killed someone or did something really bad to anyone.
However, my major criticism of Mr. Stakic is that he failed to put some
additional effort and do something.  I think that Serbs, having conducted
themselves in this manner, lost more than they gained, as we all lost,
Croats and Muslims and Serbs alike.
Q.   In the article, Dr. Stakic --
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone for the counsel, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   In the article, Dr. Stakic is also quoted as saying:  "We thwarted
their plans by stopping Agrokomerc lorries carrying heavy weapons."  Can
you comment on that?
A.   I've heard the word "plan" several times here.  I cannot either
confirm or deny anything, but in cases of killings and rapes, this is
possible.  A plan is possible, but however, to my knowledge, there were no
such plans on the part of Bosniaks.  I would like to see such plans if
they existed and I would like to hear from people from the Bosniak
community who allegedly acted this way.  I think it was a very barbaric
thing to do, to represent things in this manner.
As for the Agrokomerc company, the idea is crazy in itself. We all
know on whose side Abdic was.  The food produced by this company was sold
in Prijedor.  I would need some very strong proof to believe this.  But of
course, the gentleman has the perfect freedom to express his opinion.  But
he said a number of times:  "They planned," "according to their plans,"
and so on and so forth.  If there were any plans, their intention was to
protect people, not to do anything against Serbs.  And I'm all in favour
of holding Bosniaks responsible if they had done anything against Serbs.
I consider Serbs to be my brother to this very date.
Q.   Was Agrokomerc controlled in 1992 by Fikret Abdic, a Muslim?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And can you briefly tell the Court who Fikret Abdic was and what
his relationship was with the Serbian authorities?
A.   They were negotiating with the purpose of resolving the problem of
Bosnian Krajina.  This is how we called this area where Croats, Bosniaks,
and Serbs lived.  He argued that a political solution should be found.
Q.   And did Fikret Abdic eventually reach a political agreement in
Belgrade with the authorities of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska and
actually join his forces against the Bosnian army?
A.   Yes.  What he wanted, and this is only my opinion, is to buy some
time for himself so that he would eventually become the president of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.  Those were probably his hopes.
Q.   I want to ask you about one more part of the interview.  Dr.
Stakic says, at the bottom of the first page in the English translation,
the very last sentence:  "We were lucky that Colonel Arsic was the
commander of our garrison, a good soldier, and a man with a lot of
experience, and we decided that we must speed up the process of arming
ourselves."
As an observer of the events in 1992, did you see indications of
cooperation between the SDS authorities and Dr. Stakic with the army that
was, before the May the 16th the JNA, and later the VRS?
A.   There's no need for too many words for that.  It was a military
discipline.  Those Serbs who helped Bosniaks or Croats were in jeopardy.
They had to help them in secret.  I received food from some Serbs, and I
think that Mr. Stakic is now going to be surprised.  I received help even
from some people who were members of his staff.  This is the first time
that I'm telling this to anyone, but I'm not going to give you any names
in order not to endanger security of these people.  There were people whom
I called "reasonable" people amongst Serbs and Croats and Bosniaks.  I
wouldn't be alive today if this was not the case.  I wouldn't be in
Prijedor today.  What I'm not clear about is to what extent Stakic had any
power, just as much as I didn't have much power to improve things,
generally speaking.  So I don't know what the situation was, with respect
of him.  I don't know whether what eventually happened was the result of
his desires and endeavours.  I know that some Serbs were killed and
detained, such as this gentleman that I mentioned, Pero, from Omarska.  I
was, I think, burnt alive, and his wife was killed.  So Serbs were also
under a lot of pressure.  But they were also under a lot of pressure as a
result of the overall situation in the former Yugoslavia and the events in
general.  It was not easy for them to cope with a situation of this kind.
Q.   My question, sir, Mr. Kapetanovic, was just directed towards the
role, the interaction between the army and the SDS authorities and whether
you saw any evidence of cooperation between the two of them.  Did you see
that, or were you not able to observe that?
A.   One could observe that, of course, because Arsic and Zeljaja could
be seen coming to the town hall, to the sessions, and to various other
places, in local communes, at the local barracks, and so on and so forth.
And as I already indicated, one could tell that things were very well
structured as far as the military's concerned.
Q.   In the negotiations regarding the division of power prior to the
takeover, can you tell us the names of some of the SDA and HDZ officials
that took part in those negotiations?
A.   Mr. Stakic, Srdo Srdic, Kovacevic for a period of time, Mirza
Mujadzic.
Q.   You mentioned some SDS officials, and I think you're now starting
with the SDA but I want to distinguish them.  Now, tell me first the SDA
officials that were involved in negotiations.  That's my question.
A.   I see, the SDS.  Mirza Mujadzic, Cehajic, Medunjanin, Ilijaz
Music.  As for the HDZ, Saric, and a couple of others whom I cannot
remember at the moment.
Q.   Did Dr. Rufad Suljanovic take part?
A.   Yes, yes, Rufad, Rufad Suljanovic.
Q.   Did Mr. Safet Ramadanovic take part?
A.   Yes.  Yes.
Q.   Mr. Mujadzic escaped from Prijedor and survived the conflict.  Is
that correct?
A.   Yes.  I don't know exactly, but as far as I heard, he went over to
Fikret Abdic.
Q.   Did the following people that you mentioned, Mr. Cehajic,
Mr. Seric, Ilijaz Music, Dr. Rufad Suljanovic, and Safet Ramadanovic, can
you tell me if you know what their fate was in the conflict in 1992?
A.   From what I learned subsequently, they were killed in Omarska.
The majority of these individuals who attended negotiations were killed.
Q.   Did Dr. Stakic personally meet with these people during the
negotiations who were subsequently killed in Omarska?
A.   Well, I'm sure he did.  He attended the meetings, so he must have
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
met them.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you.  I have no further questions on direct
examination.  I would move to have the exhibit admitted.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Yes.  I'm afraid --
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, Your Honour, please.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I'm afraid the last part of your last question
is not on the record.  Read at 13:42.  There is no question before.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I believe the question -- I don't know if Your
Honour wants to correct it.  I asked:  "Did Dr. Stakic subsequently meet
with these individuals who were killed?"
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Right.  And then it was your answer:  "Well, I'm
sure he did.  He attended the meetings, so he must have met them."
Is it a correct answer, Witness, to this question?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for this clarification.
We have one exhibit today, the former 65 ter Exhibit Number 423.
Objections from the Defence?
MR. LUKIC:  The same objections, Your Honour, as prior exhibits
like this; no authorisation, and we don't know whether it has been
composed by these papers.  We'll ask these questions of the witness so we
can afterwards see what's going on with this exhibit.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  But I think the same is true as we did it in the
past.  We take this sheet of paper as such, and we have an English
translation, some distinctions on the transcript.  And therefore, this is
the article from Kozarski Vjesnik from 18th of April is, in the English
version, admitted into evidence as S47A.  And the left-hand side of this
article from the 18th of April, 1994, only the left-hand side, is admitted
into evidence as S47B.
I don't believe it makes much sense to start with the
cross-examination for the last 10 minutes of this hearing.  I heard that
the parties are prepared to meet at a meeting at 3.30 in my office in
application of 65 ter (I) correspondingly dealing with administrative
matters only, and the results will be brought to the attention of the
public in our -- one of our next sessions, and minutes will be taken by
the registry.
I would kindly ask the witness, Mr. Kapetanovic, please come back
tomorrow to the hearing.  And first of all, I have to do what I didn't in
the beginning this morning, to apologise that you had to be here for such
a long period of time.  Unfortunately, it wasn't possible to proceed in
another way.  But we are really grateful for all the assistance you
provided and will provide tomorrow when we resume at 9.00.
[The witness stands down]
--- Whereupon the hearing adjourned at
1.47 p.m., to be reconvened on
Tuesday, the 14th day of May, 2002,
at 9.00 a.m.
