Monday,  24 September 2012
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
.34 a.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Good morning to everyone.
Madam Registrar, would you please call the case.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good morning, Your Honours.
This is the case IT-09-92-T, The Prosecutor versus Ratko Mladic.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
Is the Prosecution ready to call its next witness?
MR. GROOME:  Yes, Your Honour.  Good morning.  The witness is
RM051, and the witness will be led by Ms. Hochhauser.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Mr. Groome.
Could the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
Meanwhile, I'll deal with a few matters.
The first is about MFI D20; that is, the report of the NIOD.  The
Chamber was informed that there was disagreement on how much material
should be uploaded in relation to MFI D20.  Chamber's staff has requested
the parties to file their positions, and since this has not been done
yet, the Chamber instructs the parties to file their positions on this
document by Wednesday, the 26th of September of this year.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE ORIE:  Good morning, Witness.  Before you give evidence,
the Rules require that you make a solemn declaration.  The text is now
handed out to you.  May I invite you to make that solemn declaration.
Yes, and perhaps could the screens be pulled up.  Or is there --
while the witness is standing, perhaps face distortion might not be.  So
let's be cautious with the camera, that ...
Yes.  Please proceed.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will
speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
WITNESS:  RM051
[Witness answered through interpreter]
Examination by Ms. Hochhauser:
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.  Please be seated.
Witness RM051, protective measures are in place.  That means that
no one outside this courtroom sees your face and we'll not use your own
name but we'll call you "Witness 51" or "Witness RM051".  Please take
care that if there's any question which, by answering that question,
might reveal your identity, that you ask for private session so that we
can hear your testimony without your name being revealed to the public.
You'll first be examined by Ms. Hochhauser.  Ms. Hochhauser is
counsel for the Prosecution, and you'll find her to your right.
Ms. Hochhauser, please proceed.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Thank you.  And good morning, Your Honours.
Just before I begin, I would quickly like to list the adjudicated
facts that we're relying on this with this witness, which are 461, 462,
465, 470, 473, 483 and 485.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  If you would read those numbers more slowly,
our transcriber has an easier task.  Difficult task anyhow but easier.
Please proceed.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  I see on the transcript that despite the
challenge I presented, they got to correctly.
Q.   Good morning, Witness 051.
Can I ask the court usher to please put 65 ter number 28426, the
pseudonym sheet - not for broadcast, obviously - up on the monitor.
And, Witness, please take a look at what's on the monitor in
front of you.  Does it accurately reflect your name and your date of
birth?
A.   Yes, it is accurate.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  So I would ask that 65 ter number 28426 be
admitted into evidence under seal.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar, the number would be?
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28426 becomes Exhibit P213 under seal,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P213 is admitted under seal.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:
Q.   Witness 51, can the tell the Chamber, please, are you currently
working?
A.   I'm retired.
Q.   And where is it that you're living?
.
Q.   Now, you have testified in two proceedings, two prior proceedings
; is
that correct?
A.   That's correct.
Q.   And do you recall testifying in the case against Mico Stanisic
and Stojan Zupljanin on the 21st and 22nd of January, 2010?
A.   I recall that.
Q.   Did you have the opportunity over this past weekend to listen to
a B/C/S audio-recording of portions of your testimony in that case?
A.   Yes.  I listened to that on Saturday.  And yesterday we had
preparations, as it were.
Q.   Now, if you were asked the same questions today as you were in
that proceeding, would you give the same answers?
A.   The essence would be the same basically, no matter when questions
are being put about my stay and my work in Manjaca in 1992.
Q.   And when you say the essence would the same, do you mean that the
substance of the answers would be the same, even the language you chose
was slightly different?
A.   Perhaps the word order could be different or perhaps a different
word may be used because a person cannot fully repeat two statements if
they're given at different points in time.  But I repeat that the essence
would always be the same.
Q.   Now, having had the opportunity to review -- to listen to that
testimony, is there anything in it that you would wish to change or to
clarify?
A.   I have nothing to add or change in response to the questions that
had been put then to me, if they are to be put to me now, that is.
Q.   Now, having taken the oath as a witness, can you affirm that your
answers in that case were also both accurate and truthful?
A.   If I have to repeat the solemn declaration, then I shall do that
again.  I am telling you that it was truthful then, it will be truthful
today, and it will be truthful any other time.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honours, at this time the Prosecution
tenders 65 ter 28424, which are excerpts of the prior testimony of this
witness given in the Stanisic/Zupljanin case on the 21st and 22nd of
.  It does contain some private session testimony so I'm
asking that it be entered under seal.
JUDGE ORIE:  I see there are no objections from the Defence.
Madam Registrar.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 28424 becomes Exhibit P214,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence under seal.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honours, the Prosecution further tenders
the associated exhibits enumerated in the list provided to the Chamber
and Defence with the exception that, upon further consideration, the
Prosecution is not seeking to tender the video with the 65 ter number
22307 in reliance on the verbal description contained in the transcript
and adjudicated fact 463.
JUDGE ORIE:  Which means that what then remains is -- we go by it
one by one.  2567, no objections.
Madam Registrar, daily report, strictly confidential.
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 02567 becomes Exhibit P215,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P215 is admitted into evidence under seal.
02717.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P216, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted.
02848.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P217, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And admitted into evidence.
03057.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P218, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
03061 -- the previous one is admitted under seal.  That was P218.
Now, 03061.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P219, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Is admitted into evidence under seal.
03064.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P220 Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence under seal.
03077.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P221, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted under seal.
03082.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P222, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
03097.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P223, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted.  And that's a public document.
05989.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P224, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  And is admitted into evidence.
06940.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P225 Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
06953.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P226, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
06956.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P227, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
06958.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P228, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted as a public exhibit.
06960.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P229, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
06961.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P230, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted into evidence.
06968.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P231, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
06973.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P232, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P232 is admitted into evidence.
06989.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P233, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
06999.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P234, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
07000.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P235, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
07006.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P236, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted.
07010.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P237, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted under seal.
07012.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P238, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted.
18239.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P239, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted into evidence.
19980.
THE REGISTRAR:  Becomes Exhibit P240, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Admitted into evidence.
I think that's all, Ms. Hochhauser.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Your Honour, if we might go into private session, I would proceed
to read a summary of the witness's evidence.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, but in private session it doesn't make sense
because it's for the public.  If the public is unable to hear it, then it
makes no sense to do it.
Please consider it and move on for the time being.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Okay.  So if we could go into private session,
please.
JUDGE ORIE:  We move into private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
[Video-clip played]
JUDGE ORIE:  Ms. Hochhauser.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Thank you.
JUDGE ORIE:  Before you ask any questions, a transcript has been
uploaded into e-court, and if you want us to ignore the text, then I
think that should not be part of the evidence.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  We'll have it -- we'll remove it, Judge.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  That's understood.
Please proceed.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:
Q.   Sir, do you recognise the location as shown in that video?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   And --
A.   It was an area at Manjaca where the POWs were accommodated.
Q.   Does that clip accurately reflect the living conditions and
appearance at that camp?
A.   What we could see was real footage.  That is how things -- what
things looked like at Manjaca.  There's nothing to add or take away.
It's another question as to how the choice was made as to what to film.
But, yes, this footage originated from Manjaca.
Q.   And the people that were shown in the clip that were -- that we
saw, they were detainees at Manjaca camp?
A.   The people we saw in the footage were prisoners of war located at
Manjaca.  The person in uniform walking around was the commander of the
camp, Mr. Popovic.
Q.   And does that clip accurately reflect the physical conditions of
the people being held at Manjaca?
A.   Yes, it does.  You could see it well.  The people are positively
-- at Manjaca, this was filmed at Manjaca, and that is how things were at
the moment the footage was made.  As to when those people arrived and how
long they had been at Manjaca before the footage was made, that's
something I can't say.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honours, I'm offering this into evidence --
tendering this exhibit into evidence.
JUDGE ORIE:  Madam Registrar, the number would be?
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 22631A becomes Exhibit P243,
Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  P243 is admitted into evidence, but without any
attached transcript of text spoken.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Okay.  My understanding is it should already be
removed, or is in the process.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Once it is admitted, I think it's
Madam Registrar who's in control.  When it's not yet admitted, then the
parties still can change the content.  It's clear what should be in
evidence.
Please proceed.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  If I may just have one moment.
[Prosecution counsel confer]
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honours, thank you for your patience.  That
concludes my examination of this witness.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Ms. Hochhauser.
Mr. Stojanovic, is it you that will cross-examine the witness?
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Good morning, Your Honour.  That
is correct.  I am to lead this witness.
JUDGE ORIE:  Witness RM051, you will now be cross-examined by
Mr. Stojanovic.  Mr. Stojanovic is counsel for Mr. Mladic.
Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
Cross-examination by Mr. Stojanovic:
Q.   [Interpretation] Good morning, sir.  My name is
Miodrag Stojanovic, and together with my colleagues, I represent General
Ratko Mladic.  I'd like to go through some of your documents, and I have
a few questions for you.
A.   Good morning.
Q.   The first thing I wanted to ask you is this:  Do you recall
having given a statement to the Prosecutor's office here at the Tribunal
with regards to these events?
A.   Yes, I remember that.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Your Honours, by your leave,
could we provide a clean hard copy of the statement to the witness, and
I'd kindly ask that it be with him throughout the testimony because I
will have some questions.
Q.   Sir, we are in open session now.  I will put some questions to
you, and I would kindly ask you not to refer to your position at the time
in any way.
I'm interested in this:  As of the 4th of April, 1992, you were
in the area of Sarajevo as a member of the then-JNA; is that correct?
A.   It is not.  I was in the area of Sarajevo between -- as early as
the 2nd of December, 1991 when I was relocated there with my unit and the
command of the 5th Military District from Zagreb to Sarajevo.
Q.   And as of the 4th of April, 1992, you were deployed at the
forward command post at Pale; is that correct?
A.   Yes, that is completely correct.
Q.   You worked in the same body that you stayed with during your work
in the 1st Krajina Corps; is that correct?
A.   Yes.  I was with the same military organ in Zagreb and anywhere
else throughout.
Q.   On the 3rd of June, 1992, you were transferred to the 1st Krajina
Corps and were moved to Banja Luka; correct?
A.   That is completely correct.
Q.   During your stay in and around Sarajevo, were you ever in a
position to meet General Mladic?
A.   Yes, I was.  I met General Mladic in Crna Rijeka.  I believe it
.  We were there together until the 3rd of
June, when I was transferred to Banja Luka.
Q.   Would you mind sharing your experience and your view with the
Court about General Mladic at the time and his position.  What kind of
officer was he?
A.   It is not fully appropriate for a junior officer to address a
senior officer, but now that you ask the question before this Tribunal, I
can tell you this:
In Crna Rijeka, I was only there for a few days with General
Mladic, and I wasn't in his immediate environment though and I did not
receive tasks from him because I was General Tolimir's subordinate.  What
I could observe, though, in the course of those few days was that he was
way too busy.  Every morning at 7.00 a.m., he flew by helicopter from
Crna Rijeka to close to Sarajevo to negotiate the release of cadets from
Sarajevo.  That was his main preoccupation while I was there.
Q.   On the 15th of June, 1992, you assumed your duties at Manjaca,
pursuant to an order of the commander of the 1st Krajina Corps.  Is the
date correct?
A.   Yes, around the 15th.  That is when I assumed my duties at
Manjaca.
Q.   I would like us to have a look together --
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Your Honour, before that, just a
brief instruction, if I may, and it may be useful to move into private
session for that reason.  I have to be cautious.
JUDGE ORIE:  We move into private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
First, the transcript of prior testimony of Witness Vulliamy.
The prior testimony of Witness Vulliamy was MFI'd as P199 due to the fact
that there's no B/C/S translation available.  The Defence also asked for
further guidance on providing B/C/S translations for prior testimony.
Where no B/C/S transcription or translation of transcripts of prior
testimony is available, the Defence has been provided with B/C/S
audio-visual recordings instead as part of the Prosecution's disclosure
under Rule 66(A)(ii).
Under those circumstances, the Chamber does not require that
transcripts of prior testimony are transcribed or translated into B/C/S.
P199 is admitted into evidence.
[The witness takes the stand]
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, you tell us whether we have to
return into private session or whether we can hear the evidence in open
session.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] I think we can go back into open
session, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  We are in open session at this moment, so we'll
remain in open session.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Sir, we left it off at the moment when you confirmed that on the
15th of June, 1992 you assumed duties at Manjaca.  And now I would kindly
ask you to look at paragraph 10 of your statement that you have in front
of you.
In that paragraph, you say, inter alia, that you did not belong
to the camp management.  You were not in a decision-making position.  All
you could do was to make suggestions and proposals.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, before the witness answers this
question, I invited you to have the statement on our screens so that we
could do without a hard copy, but I have not heard any instruction to
have the statement on our screens, although not to be broadcasted to the
public.
Could you give the number to Madam Registrar?
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone for the counsel, please.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] I would like to call up 1D269,
which should not be publicly broadcast.  Let us look at paragraph 10,
please.  Your Honours, I believe that we can proceed now.
Q.   In this paragraph, you say:  "I was not part of the command of
the camp.  I could not make decisions.  I could only make suggestions."
Please clarify, for the benefit of the Court, what does it mean
when you say that you did not belong to the command of the camp?
A.   I apologise.  Are we in private session?
Q.   We are in open session, so be cautious, please.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  What we see on our screen now is not broadcast
to the public.  But, please, if you think that your answer would
identify -- would reveal your identity, then please ask for private
session.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I believe that my answer will
necessitate that.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Your Honours, bearing that in
mind, I would kindly ask the Chamber to move into private session.
JUDGE ORIE:  We move into private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you, Madam Registrar.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   Sir, let's look at paragraph 18 in your statement where you say
that the Manjaca camp was well organised.
What did you mean by that?  What did you mean when you said that
the Manjaca camp was well organised?
A.   Well, my claim may be subjective, admittedly.  However, if one
could assess the regularity of all the camps in Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Manjaca would occupy a very high first place.  Some people don't like
that, or cannot understand that, because of the reports in the media.
However, what I saw, what I knew, and what we did at Manjaca, I would say
.
I could corroborate that by the way people were received in the
camp, by the attitude towards the detainees, the frequent visits of
international organisations, the daily visits of journalists, the
International Red Cross.  There was a nutritionist who paid visits to the
camp every day from 9.00 to 5.00 in the afternoon.  These are the claims
that I stand by.  What I said then I still adhere by, and I will always
maintain the same position.
I had the good fortune to witness that my efforts were adopted by
Commander Popovic and my subordinates, and we tried our best to be as
humane towards those people, because we truly believed that those -- all
those people had to leave the camp on their two feet, healthy and alive.
Q.   Thank you.  And now can we pay attention to paragraph 19, as well
as to paragraph 20 in your statement.  And let's provide some
clarification about the attitude of the civilian police who brought
detainees to Manjaca and the relationship between the civilian police and
yourselves who had a duty to take the prisoners over.
Let's take things one at a time.  From what moment did you, as a
professional, believe that a detainee started to become a custodian of
the Manjaca camp command?
JUDGE MOLOTO:  The question, as interpreted, was:  "From what
moment did you, as a professional, believe that a detainee started to
become a custodian of the Manjaca camp command."  I don't understand the
question.  That's how you were interpreted.  I don't understand how a
detainee becomes a custodian of a camp.
THE INTERPRETER:  Interpreter's correction:  From which moment
did the camp become the custodian of any particular detainee?
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Your Honours, the question is
the result of paragraph 20 in the witness's statement.  It says:  "We
would not consider these prisoners as our own prisoners until they went
through the admission procedure and until the moment they were entered
into the ledgers."  This is the sentence authored by the witness.
Q.   My question was this:  You were a professional.  What did you
base your conclusion on?  And what did you imply by that sentence?
Could you provide some sort of an explanation for the benefit of
the Trial Chamber?  Thank you.
A.   We adopted a normal logic, according to which a detainee became a
detainee at Manjaca once he was officially admitted.  We had a commission
that admitted prisoners into Manjaca.  That commission comprised two
military police officers, a doctor who was also a detainee, and one of my
men.
After a complete checkup and after the registration in medical
books and in the ledgers, groups of ten detainees would be taken into
their future accommodation.  And from that moment on, they would be
considered as detainees at Manjaca.
Q.   Thank you.  Before that moment, before they were registered and
physically taken over, in whose custody were those future detainees, in
terms of their physical security and the safety of their person and their
property?
A.   As you may have seen, Manjaca camp is on a mountain.  It's quite
isolated, and people were mostly brought over by trucks or buses.  MUP
members were in charge of bringing them in, if they were transferred from
other collection centres.  In principle, those were MUP members until the
moment when they handed them over to us.  Those people were in the
custody of MUP members, i.e., of the MUP.
Q.   Thank you.  There will be more about that in the documents that I
intend to show you.
You have already spoken about something that I wish to ask you
next.  If it occurred that one of the future detainees came into harm's
way during the transport and if you learnt about that, I'm asking you
this:  As a soldier, what would have been your duty?  What were you
supposed to do in such a case?
A.   We admitted only living people into the camp.  If one of them
died during the transport, obviously we did not admit such people.  We
did not have a service that would be in charge of burials.  We would
return those dead people to be transported, and we -- we had them
transported back, and they were escorted by the same people who had
brought them in.
Q.   Through your regular activities in the form of daily reports, you
recorded such personal knowledge about this possible commission of
crimes.  You did report that to your superiors.  Am I correct in saying
that?
A.   By all means, that would be the most important thing that would
happen on that day, and, of course, I'd include that in my daily report
and make my superior aware of that, and he probably reported up the chain
of command, all the way to the top.
Q.   Will you agree with me that, according to regulations from 1992,
dealing with members of the police or paramilitaries was within the
civilian judiciary, not the military judiciary, in Republika Srpska?
A.   That's right.  We've clarified that several times here before
this Court.  That's the way it was.  If a member of the MUP would be
outside the army, then his misdeeds would be dealt with by a civilian
court.
Q.   Thank you.  You personally, in view of the position that you held
- and we're not going to mention it - had no way of knowing of whether
information about such misdeeds committed during transportation were
provided to the Main Staff of the Army of Republika Srpska through
reports.  You don't have any knowledge about that.  Would you agree?
A.   I don't have any such information.  However, it would be logical,
and I think that my department and my immediate superior did that,
nevertheless.
Q.   Will we agree that, according to the system of subordination, the
superior of your superior, whose name you mentioned here, was
Mr. Stevilovic, the security organ in the 1st Krajina Corps; is that
correct?
A.   I immediately moved onto this other person because Stevilovic was
killed on the 5th of July.
Q.   Then this would be the right moment to ask you about this.  You
said that he was killed on the 5th of July.  Would it be correct to say
that he was killed in the territory that was under the control of the
Army of Republika Srpska, in the depth of the territory of the
Republika Srpska?  Would that be correct?
,
near Kotor Varos.  He was ambushed there by a roadblock by the HVO, and
Stevilovic was killed on that occasion.  Also Markovic and another
soldier who was in the vehicle.  Practically, they were killed.
Q.   In the Manjaca camp, as you've testified in relation to these
events, all the way up to its disbandment, two detainees, Filipovic and
Bender, saw their tragic deaths; is that correct?
A.   Yes, that is correct.  And, in a way, I was astounded by that,
surprised by it, saddened by it, because I thought that that kind of
thing could not happen in view of the organisation that we had there.  It
did happen.  It was explained in a way within half an hour.  The
perpetrators were identified.  An on-site investigation was carried out
by the MUP authorities and the court authorities.  The pathologist did
his job.  And it was a bit late, but, nevertheless, the perpetrators were
prosecuted, and they were sentenced to very serious time in prison; 14
years, I believe.
Q.   That's the next question I'm going to put to you.  We're also
going to use a document.  However, now that you've opened the subject,
these persons were
prosecuted, and they were convicted.  We are talking about several
persons; right?
A.   That's right.  It is four men, and three of them were sentenced
to long-term prison sentences.
Q.   Within the scope of your own authority, when you found out about
this crime, you did everything that was your duty on the basis of the
rules of service, based on the Geneva Conventions, and you informed all
the relevant authorities about this; is that correct?
A.   Everything was done.  We did whatever this kind of thing merits.
That is to say, an on-site investigation team arrived, a pathologist
arrived.  The bodies were handed over.  We thought that the case had been
resolved, as far as we were concerned, and then other services dealt with
the funeral arrangements and the prosecution and everything else.
However, we, at Manjaca, did whatever we could at that very first moment.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC:  [Interpretation] I'd now like to ask that we
look at document 65 ter 08779.  08779.
While it is being brought up in e-court, Your Honours, may I say
that this is a daily report.  I would just like to ask -- very well.  It
.
Q.   Sir, in the direct examination, there were questions as to
whether criminal proceedings were instituted against the persons who were
in the Manjaca centre.  I would like to ask you to focus on paragraph 4
of this report in which it says, inter alia:  "All prisoners have been
processed in the Bosanska Dubica public security station and criminal
reports have been submitted to the basic public prosecutor's office in
Bosanska Dubica.  They were brought to the Manjaca camp only for
accommodation and guarding purposes."
Do you see that?
A.   Yes.
Q.   My question is:  Could you please tell the Court what this means,
from a procedural point of view, that criminal reports were filed against
certain persons?
A.   When a criminal report is filed against someone, that means, from
a procedural point of view, that this criminal report provides all the
evidence, for and against, in terms of this person having committed a
certain crime, and that would be it.
Q.   Would you agree with me that there is a pre-criminal proceeding
that takes place before a criminal report is filed?  A suspect interview
is conducted, evidence is collected, and all of this is provided along
with the criminal report, stating that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that a crime had been committed.
A.   I fully agree with your statement.
Let me just add something.  The Prosecutor asked me whether I
knew of any case when these persons who were in Manjaca were prosecuted
before a court of law, and my answer was, I don't know.  However, these
are pre-criminal or pre-trial proceedings.  So your question is quite
different in relation to that, and my answer is that I agree with you.
Q.   Thank you.  That would be the essence of my question.
So the Law on Criminal Procedure that was in force in that year,
in 1992, stated that we had an investigative judge and investigative
proceedings, and then pre-criminal/pre-trial proceedings would involve
operative work, collecting evidence, and the basic suspicion that would
be contained in the report.  And then it is up to the investigative judge
and the prosecutor to file for an investigation to take place; is that
correct?
A.   Since I was studying criminalistics and criminology at the time,
that is exactly how things were, as you stated them.  So I fully agree
with what you said.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, could I seek some clarification.
Earlier, you were asked about any criminal proceedings.  It even
included any type of action taken against any of these people who were
suspected of criminal action.
I did understand that question and your answers to be in relation
to those who you investigated, either on the basis of the material that
was provided to you, but where you took an active part in the
investigation of crimes committed by the detainees.
Was that correctly understood?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I understood Madam Prosecutor's
question to pertain to all the people who were in Manjaca.  I understood
the question to be whether I know whether anybody had been prosecuted for
what they did before they came to Manjaca.  However -- and my answer was
that there were no court proceedings that I had been aware of.  Court
proceedings.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Now I do understand that the document that
we're looking at at this moment is about persons for which your role was
limited to keep them in detention, and that others had investigated
potential crimes and others were responsible for reporting and taking
action.
Is that correctly understood?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That's right.  In this document, it
says that criminal reports were filed against these persons by the MUP
organs from Bosanska Dubica and that there's nothing for us to do there.
Or, rather, that they were there in order to be kept there, and to be
there until they're called by a court of law or someone.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  So we had two categories of prisoners:  Those
who you investigated, where you were responsible for investigating any
suspicions against them, and others for which you just provided
accommodation, not being involved in any way in the investigations
conducted against them.
Is that correctly understood?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That's right.  You understood it as
I meant it.  That was my experience, and that's how it was.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.
Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
Yes, Judge Moloto has one or more questions for you.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  You indicated a little earlier, sir, at page 35,
lines 18 to 23, that these people who came to Manjaca and about whom your
answer to the Prosecutor was that you were not aware of any court
proceedings, is that people who had been investigated before they came to
you.
My question to you is:  Of those that were investigated by you,
were there any court proceedings instituted as a result of any or all of
them?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] We filed criminal reports for about
ten people from Manjaca.  These were active-duty military officers of the
JNA who had deserted and joined the enemy force.  They were taken
prisoner, and they were brought there.  And then we filed criminal
.
On several occasions, we also took them to this military
investigative prison.  However, an indictment was never issued.  There
was no judgement ultimately, so they were brought back to Manjaca.
Let me just explain this a bit.  This is exactly the way it was.
This was in the case of some ten persons who were former JNA officers who
had deserted from the JNA, who joined the enemy force, who were taken
prisoner, and then they were brought to Manjaca, and then we filed these
criminal reports against them.  And several times they were taken to this
, but they were returned.  And
I don't know -- actually, to be more specific, I don't know whether an
indictment was issued.  However, I know that there was no judgement that
was passed, and I know that they went to third countries, together with
all the other detainees.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  Thank you so much.
With regard to those who were prisoners of war - in other words,
who came from what you may have regarded as enemy army, not those who
deserted - were there any that were charged or against whom court
proceedings were instituted as a result of your investigations?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  [Previous translation continues] ... thank you so
much.
Yes, thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.  I have one more
question regarding this document.
Q.   Sir, do you know that at that time, in June 1992, whether, as a
matter of fact, Bosanska Dubica did or did not have a prison the size
which could accommodate such numbers of people?
A.   I don't know that.  But if I try to reason logically, and based
on overall information, I suppose they did not have a prison of that
size.
Q.   Thank you.  Let me conclude this topic with this question:  While
working there, save for the ten you mentioned, were there -- did you send
any other criminal reports to the competent judicial bodies?
A.   In relation to Manjaca?
Q.   Yes.
A.   Save for about a dozen reports for the active military personnel,
I did not submit any other criminal reports.  I submitted Official Notes,
though, and the statements taken from the people we interviewed.  That
material was then sent for further assessment and potential processing.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Could we please have in e-court
65 ter 03057.
Your Honour, while waiting for it, I wanted to say that --
THE REGISTRAR:  [Previous translation continues] ...
Your Honours.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] This is --
JUDGE ORIE:  Just a moment.
Since the previous translation continued, Madam Registrar, you
told us, may I take it, that this document was admitted as P218.
THE REGISTRAR:  Yes, Your Honours.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.
Please proceed.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  Which document, Madam Registrar?  I'm sorry.  Is
it 08779?
THE REGISTRAR:  Document 030507, that was called now and is on
our screens, is admitted as P218, Your Honours.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  And should not be broadcasted.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.  Perhaps
I may continue now with the document.
Q.   In paragraph 1, Witness, please have a look.  It reads that 29
people from the villages of Velagici and Pudin Han were processed in
Kljuc municipality.  "Light was shed on the role of certain persons in
the organisation and the launching of an attack on the police patrol held
check-point as well as on the military column in the Busije location."
Can you see that?
A.   I can.
Q.   It continues:  "The circle is widening and our processing is
adjusting accordingly."
My question is this:  What kind of information did you obtain in
your operative work concerning the events in Velagici and Pudin Han that
are referred to in this daily report?
A.   It was about an attack on a military column at Busije.  It was
returning from Knin.  I think they were mostly young soldiers.  The event
took place before I arrived from Crna Rijeka.  It was still being cleared
by way of interviews with people at Manjaca.
During the attack on the military column, five soldiers were
killed.  It was most probably done by the people from the villages of
Velagici and Pudin Han near Kljuc.  They set up an ambush at Busije, and
when the column arrived, they opened fire at the vehicles, killing five
soldiers.  I don't know many details about it since I wasn't there at the
time, but things were being slowly cleared up.
Q.   Does it also refer to the part of paragraph 1 where there is a
mention of light being shed on the role of certain persons in the
organisation and the launching of an attack on a check-point manned by a
police patrol?
A.   Yes.
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, please.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Let us go to paragraph 4 of the report, then, which reads:  "On
order of Colonel Anicic, prisoners Ahmet Hodzic and Ismet Focak from
Sanski Most, who had been of considerable help to the military organs
during the confiscation of weapons, have been released."
The first question:  Please tell the Court who is Colonel Anicic?
A.   I don't know him personally, but Colonel Anicic was either
commander or the assistant commander for morale of the Sanska Brigade.
He intervened asking that the two men be released from Manjaca.
Irrespective of the fact they were brought there, they had significantly
assisted the soldiers and military organs in Sanski Most.  Thus, he
believed that they should be released, and it was done.
Q.   Was this an exception or are you familiar with more examples of
that nature?
A.   I wouldn't say it was an exception, but it didn't happen often.
There were a few cases of similar nature while the camp at Manjaca
existed.  Some officers intervened, asking that this or that person be
released as they had been captured or imprisoned by mistake.  Perhaps
people from the police asked for it or something of the kind.  There
weren't many such cases.  Perhaps another two or three.
Q.   Let me ask you this:  Concerning the system of control over the
camp or centre, since it seems we have a semantic problem, up to whom was
it to determine who would be released in such cases, from Manjaca?
A.   That's a good question for my sake, too, because I was neither
outside nor above the system of command.  This document is phrased in
such a way that one may conclude it was up to me to decide.
This intervention by Anicic and the release of the two people
went through the regular command channel.  I believe the assistant
commander for morale, Colonel Vukelic, requested that personally.  He was
from the command of the 1st Krajina Corps.  He ordered, in a way, to see
whether we had any additional information on the people and to release
them.  And this wasn't done by me.  I told you I was not part of the
command system or the decision-making system.  The camp commander put it
all in writing and made a decision to have them released.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, could I seek clarification about the
word "release".
When you say people were released, and earlier we looked at a
document - perhaps you remember - you said some people were considered to
be extremists by those who brought them to Manjaca but you thought could
be released.
Now, if we're talking about "release," were then people released
and free to go home again, or were they led to another place and not free
to choose their own destination, when, as you said it, released?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] In the case of those people who
were released from the camp and then went onto third countries, they were
simply released as part of the procedure.  They were released and it
could be interpreted in a different way, as if they only went outside the
parameter.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  What I'd like to know is whether they were
told, What do you want?  To go home or to go to a third country?  What do
you want to do?  Or were they just released, to be transferred to a third
country?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] The International Committee of the
Red Cross interviewed everyone, and they had their statements about
whether they wanted to leave, and where, which third countries.  As
regards -- that -- that is regarding the group departure via Karlovac.
In the case of these two -- perhaps I misunderstood.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  The large number of people, as you said, that
were released, were they ever given an opportunity just to return home,
to their own homes, where they came from?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Regarding the group departure of
the 700 people?  Is that what you're asking me about?
The International Committee of the Red Cross took them to third
countries.  Their first station, though, was in Karlovac, and there they
could decide whether they would go on to another country or return home,
but we don't know that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Did you give them an opportunity to go home?  We
have seen in your report that you said that many of them were no
combatants, had no arms, were not in uniform.  Apparently in this report
you state clearly that there's no reasonable suspicion of them being
criminals or having committed crimes.
Did you offer them to go home before they were put in the hands
of the Red Cross to be brought wherever?  Did you say, You're innocent.
What do you want?  Do you want to go home?  Then please, if I could say
so, take the next bus home.  Of course, there were no buses.  I am aware
of that.  But did you offer them to go wherever they wanted to go before
the Red Cross took care of them?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] It mostly happened with the cases
of people who were selected and were younger than 18 or older than 65.
But, still, we didn't release them just like that.  It was a state of
war.  You cannot just leave them around Manjaca in an isolated area.
There was a procedure in place to hand them over.  We usually handed them
over to the Merhamet, the Muslim humanitarian organisation, and they took
them away, the people we had released.
JUDGE ORIE:  So you say that happened with the ones below the age
of 18 and the elderly but not for the rest?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] And the sick.  Some 90 of them were
for treatment.  So the young, the old, and
the sick.
JUDGE ORIE:  But the able-bodied men who had not been combatants,
who had not worn a uniform, who had no arms, were not given an
opportunity to just return to their homes through whatever procedure but
were given in the hands of the Red Cross.
Did I understand you well?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That is how it was, yes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.
Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
By the way, Mr. Stojanovic, you earlier indicated - and I thought
I'd wait for a second - when you talked about the persons which were
responsible for the death of Filipovic and --
MR. STOJANOVIC:  Bender.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, Bender.  You said:  "We're also going to use a
document."
Is that still to come?  Because I've not -- or is one of the
documents you've used, until now, related to that?
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] No, Your Honour.  We are yet to
come to that document.  It's one of the daily reports, and I will advise
you of the particular document, as I will have a number of questions.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Then I will be patient.
But I think we first should take a break.
If the curtains are down, the witness can be escorted out of the
courtroom, and we take a break of 20 minutes.
Mr. Stojanovic, could you, meanwhile, tell us how much time you
would still need?
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] In keeping with what I had
announced, I believe I will take two and a half hours in total.  Thus, I
believe I can conclude before the end of hearing today.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  We'll take a break, and we'll resume at
quarter past 12.00.
.54 a.m.
.23 p.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could the witness be escorted into the courtroom.
Meanwhile, I address the accused briefly.  We are now re-starting
with a delay of eight to nine minutes.  The Chamber was informed that
this is due to you visiting the toilet, Mr. Mladic.
You are advised to go to the toilet at the beginning of the
break.  We scheduled the breaks early at the request of the Defence --
the short breaks at the request of the Defence.  If the same would happen
again, and if you have not used the opportunity to go to the toilet at
the beginning of the break, then the Chamber will just start and proceed.
Although we have considered whether or not to deduce the time now from
time from cross-examination, we have decided not to do that yet.  This is
what I wanted to convey to you.
We'll wait for the witness to enter the courtroom.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you very much.  Just a
moment.  Lukic.
[Defence counsel confer]
[The witness takes the stand]
JUDGE ORIE:  Can the curtains be pulled up again.
Mr. Stojanovic, you may proceed.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.
I would like to call up P215.  This is another daily report
.
Q.   Sir, let's look at the last paragraph together.  In it, it says
that a certain number of detainees --
JUDGE ORIE:  Just a moment, Mr. Stojanovic.  The document is
admitted under seal.  You should have --
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Yes, Your Honour.  I don't think
that my questions arising from that document would comprise the identity
of the witness.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, the document should not have been
broadcasted if it is under seal, and you should have mentioned it when
calling the document.  I'm not saying that you should go into private
session but that you should have given notice of that fact when calling
the document.
Please proceed.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] I understand, Your Honour.
Q.   In this document, it says a certain number of detainees would
like to volunteer to go to the front line to prove their mettle.  "It is
still difficult to ascertain the exact number but this could be
ascertained on the spot and if called up by the organ for morale."
What is this about?  Could you tell the Trial Chamber?  Was this
idea ever implemented on the ground?
A.   Our operative intelligence were bored in the camp.  According to
our operative intelligence, the detainees were bored in the camp.  That's
why we wanted to go to the front line to escape the enclosed space.  We
didn't know what their number was, and I can't see it in the document.
This was forwarded to the organ for moral guidance.  This never came to
fruition.  Nobody was ever sent to the front line from the camp.  This
was just an initiative of sorts which never came to fruition.
Q.   What was your impression?  Was it really the will of those people
or was it forced upon them?
A.   I really don't know what to say.  I don't have a position on
that.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC:  Let us look at P219.  It's another document
under seal.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could I seek one clarification.
What were they supposed to do at the battle-fields?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Your Honour, this would be my
interpretation of the document and of what I can remember:  Those people
were loyal to the Serb forces.  There were ten Serbs up there in Manjaca
camp.  Five of them volunteered to go to the battle-field, and I suppose
that this can be interpreted as some Muslims also wanting to go to the
battle-field, as any other combatant.
That's how I interpret things.
JUDGE ORIE:  And then to fight the Muslim forces?  Is that your
interpretation?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You know who the warring parties
:  Muslims against the Serbs, the Muslims
against the Serbs and Croats, Croats against the Serbs, and Muslims
against the Muslims.  So everybody fought everybody else.  They would be
part of our forces.  And then whether they would have been used against
the Muslims or the Croats, I really can't tell you.  I don't know.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Let's look at the following document.  This is a daily report
.
In paragraph 1, it says:  "... a group of 268 prisoners of
war" --
THE REGISTRAR:  I believe it's P227.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] P215.  And I have the right
document on the screen, both in B/C/S as well as in English.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  Document 219, Mr. Stojanovic, not 215.  215, you
are now done with.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] I apologise.  P219.  I
apologise.  P219.  The document on the screen is P219.  I apologise, and
I thank you, Your Honours.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  This is also under seal.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  The previous one, it could have been unclear
on the record.  To that extent, I -- although it is listed as under seal,
it does not appear on the record, although I may have said that it was
under seal.  This one certainly was under seal.
Now, Ms. Hochhauser, in your description of the document of 219,
P219, you say it's dated the 5th of June.  This document, however, bears
a different date.  Is that your mistake or is there anything else?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honour, actually, that is my mistake in the
description because I can see that the ERN numbers match.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  So, therefore, it should be 5th of July.
Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Just briefly, sir, in the first paragraph, you say that a group
of prisoners from Sanski Most has been completely processed.  Official
records have been made.  The statements have been taken, which is
sufficient paperwork to submit criminal reports against the individuals
who merit to have criminal reports against them issued, which shall be
done by the authorised officials from the SJB Sanski Most.
My question:  Within the system that you were part of at the
time, who was the one who was supposed to look at your Official Notes and
issue a criminal report and send it to the authorised prosecutor's
office?
A.   If you are referring specifically to this paragraph here, it is
absolutely clear that criminal reports would be submitted by the
individuals from the SJB Sanski Most.  And if you're asking me in general
terms, as to who issued criminal reports against people at Manjaca, if we
conducted interviews and if we took statements and collected evidence,
then it would be us who would have done that.
So what is your specific question?
Q.   My question should be worded in the following way to be more
clear:  It arises from this report, if my understanding of it is proper,
that criminal reports will be submitted, drafted and submitted, by the
authorised officials from the Sanski Most SJB; right?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And then in the following paragraph that I would like to draw
your attention to, you say, while mentioning persons between the ages of
60 and 80 [as interpreted], that they should possibly be returned to
their original places of residence?
Can you see that?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What was the idea of the author of this report?  Where were these
people supposed to return to when they left the Manjaca centre?
A.   They should have been taken over by the Sanski Most SJB if they
were from Sanski Most, which I see that they were.  So they would be
taken over by the officials and returned to their homes, people aged over
60 and people under 18.  Those people are not subject to military
obligation, if there is no evidence that they had committed a crime, for
example, if they had -- had not killed a member of the army.
Q.   Thank you.  Does that mean that those people who had undergone
triage and it was established that they did not commit any crimes, were
they allowed, or would they have been allowed to choose their place of
residence in the future?  Would they have been allowed to return to their
original place of residence?
A.   Yes.  Those persons did not merit to be treated as prisoners of
war, according to our assessments and according to the information
available to us.  That's why we suggested that the Sanski Most MUP should
have come to pick them up and return them to their homes.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] And now let's look at P227.
Again, under seal.
Q.   I would kindly ask you to pay attention to paragraph 2 in this
.
In this document, it is stated that during transport from Sanski
Most to Manjaca, 24 prisoners died and that the probable cause was lack
of oxygen; that such conduct was extremely inhumane and unprofessional;
and that the people who died were not admitted and they would not be
considered as ever having been prisoners of war.
Is this the confirmation of your previous words when you spoke
about those whom you considered as prisoners of war admitted to the
Manjaca camp?
A.   Yes, quite.  This is very clearly spelled out in this document,
and that's how things were.
Q.   In all that, when we're talking about the army and trying to
defend the army, before you admitted such a person whom somebody had
brought over from Sanski Most, Kljuc, Prijedor, or Kotor Varos, did you
have any idea as to whether such a person met with the Geneva Conventions
standards when it comes to him being treated or being considered as a
prisoner of war?
A.   I must say that when they first presented themselves, we admitted
them through the work of our commission in all the cases.  If that person
came with a note or a document, that note or that document would be
studied in order to create a picture about the person.  If there are no
such documents, we interviewed our future detainees, and it depended on
the skill of the interviewee how much they would be able to get from --
from the interview, how much they would be able to get from the
interviewee.
But, in my view, it was not important what crime they committed.
If they were brought over to the camp, if they were alive and well, they
would be admitted.  Nobody was turned out -- turned down.  Nobody was
refused admission.  Everybody was admitted.  Then we interviewed them, we
processed them later, and then we would see how things transpired.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, could I ask one clarifying question.
If I look at the description of, as it is said, "the large
majority of prisoners having no weapons, nor having actively participated
in the organisation or the implementation of the armed rebellion,"
doesn't that just simply make them civilians?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You know what?  People would say
that they did not carry arms, that they did not participate in fighting,
that they were taken from their fields, but that did not necessarily have
to be the case.  It was very difficult for me up there, if we're talking
about me or anybody else from the camp, it was very difficult for us to
guess whether people were involved or not.  It was a camp where people
were guarded, pending a decision of a higher command or the president
himself.
JUDGE ORIE:  But that's not what the documents says.  The
document does not say it is characteristic that they told us that they
had no weapons.  No.  The document says it is characteristic, as was the
case with previously processed prisoners.  So that it is similar to those
already processed, that a large majority of prisoners brought to the
Manjaca camp had no weapons, nor have they actively participated in the
organisation or implementation of the armed rebellion.  This fact makes
it difficult to collect and compile documentation on criminal acts
necessary for functioning of illegal activities.
I read this as they are not combatants.  They are not involved in
any crimes.  That makes it difficult to have any documentation on illegal
activities.
Now, if you say, Well, it was uncertain.  It still could be.
What do you need to make someone a prisoner of war, for him to be a
combatant?  Or would you say even if they are civilians, if it has not
sufficiently been established, we will nevertheless treat them as
prisoners of war, although our information tells us that they had not
actively participated in the armed rebellion, they had no weapons, and
they were not wearing any uniforms.
Is that sufficient to make someone a prisoner of war?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is my report, and that was the
impression I had.  It doesn't have to be correct.  But my report was sent
to someone else to decide on these matters.
Do you understand what I'm saying?
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I do not see any suggestion here to
immediately release these persons because there's no reason to consider
them prisoners of war.  I do not see any such suggestion in your report.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Maybe not in this one, but in some
reports you will come across such a situation, especially for younger
persons and persons over the age of 60.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes, we discussed that.
Do you have any report in which you suggest that able-bodied men,
not being sick, between the age of 18 and 60, should be immediately
released and returned to their homes?  Because they were not involved in
armed rebellion; they were not having any arms.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I think there are no such reports.
JUDGE ORIE:  Thank you.
Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   What I asked you previously, now I'm going to put the question to
you in this other form:  When you admit a person at a given point in
time, in the centre Manjaca, you do not know and you have no way of
knowing whether he meets the standards of prisoners of war, according to
Geneva Conventions; is that right?
A.   That's right.
Q.   Only after you check his initial statement through your own
intelligence, when you collect other evidence, it's only then that you
can conclude whether what he is saying is correct or is not correct.
That is the job of any investigator.  Am I right?
A.   That's right.
Q.   Thank you.  And now please take a look at this, paragraph 4 of
this statement, where it says that:  "The presidents of the municipal and
arrived, as well as prosecutors and the
military legal officer of the 1st Krajina Corps.  They inspected the
conditions in which the prisoners are accommodated and discussed the
issue of possible judicial proceedings for the acts they have committed."
This is my question:  Did the people from the judiciary give you
any instructions in terms of how these persons should be dealt with,
those who are suspected of having committed serious crimes?
A.   I don't remember that there were such instructions, such
documents, coming from these organs.
Q.   Thank you.  I'll just ask you a very specific question here.
Who was it that brought these people from the direction of Sanski
Most, when 24 detainees fell victim during the transportation?  Do you
know these people?  Not personally, but do you know which structures they
belonged to?
A.   I don't know them personally, but it was members of the MUP, of
the civilian police.  They brought prisoners from Sanski Most.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Now I'd like to ask for document
P220.  I would like to note that this document is under seal as well.  It
.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  May I put a question to the witness before you
deal with the next document, Mr. Stojanovic.
Witness, you were asked by Mr. Stojanovic about the procedure to
find out if a detainee was an active combatant before his detention.
Mr. Stojanovic put to you, and I quote, page 55, line 4:
"Only after you check his initial statement through your own
intelligence, when you collect other evidence, it's only then that you
can conclude whether what he is saying is correct or is not correct."
How did you manage to do that with 23 detainees who were admitted
into the camp per day?  You told us approximately 23 such initial
investigations you had to carry out.  How was it possible to gain this
additional information in that short period of time?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I've already said that we managed
to interview 20 to 30 persons per day.  It's not that 20 to 30 persons
were brought into the camp per day.  So we managed to interview that many
people per day, my service did.  So if there were two or three or four of
us, that is how many people we could deal with per day.  Again, that
meant that we could not actually talk to all the prisoners who were in
the camp.
What you are asking, how I could do this in such a short period
of time, that is a consequence - how should I put this? - of having
people brought in who had already been processed.  You already heard that
some people had been processed in Dubica, Sanski Most, Velagici and other
places where they had been taken prisoner.  So they were detained there.
They were dealt with there.  Interviewed, interrogated, statements were
taken.  So I didn't really have anything to do in such cases.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I understand.  Did you have these files from
other places you just mentioned at your disposal when
interviewing/interrogating these detainees after their arrival?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That was one of the problems that I
pointed out in many of my reports.  Perhaps 10 or 20 of them.  I pointed
that out, that people were brought in.  And it says that they had been
dealt with and that there's no documentation.  So we would have to ask
for it subsequently and then these people from the public security
stations would ultimately send these documents in some cases; in others,
they didn't.  How do I put this?  It was done in a very sloppy way, if I
can put it that way.  This is a problem that we had to deal with up
there.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Sir, please let us look at the document in front of you.
Could you please focus on paragraph 3, and it says there, in this
:  "Tomorrow, we will receive a
visit from the representative of the Muslim humanity association
Merhamet, who we are going to hand over our select prisoners, those older
than 60 years of age and younger than 18, as well as those who are
seriously sick."
My question is:  How often did Merhamet come to Manjaca camp?
, headed by
Mr. Medic, came once or twice a week.  But, as a rule, it was once a
week.  He would bring humanitarian aid with him.  It would be food and
clothing.  Various supplies for washing as well.  This was approved by
the corps command.  We did not decide on this at all.  It was the command
of the corps that decided on the basis of his request, and then they
would grant it.  And then we would know exactly when he would be coming
and then he'd ask to see certain persons, or he would give this to the
command, asking that this be distributed to everyone.
This happened during the first stage of the existence of the
camp, that is to say, June and July.  After that, the International
Committee of the Red Cross started coming, and then Merhamet stopped
coming.
Q.   Did they have any restrictions in terms of the distribution of
humanitarian aid and such-like?
A.   I've already explained that.  They would agree with the corps
command, and then they would come and distribute this aid.  Perhaps they
did have some problems of their own, but I did not observe any.  People
freely distributed this aid that had been brought in.
Q.   Further on, you say that you are going to hand over to them
select prisoners.  I'm going to ask you now whether that is what the
situation actually was; and were these select prisoners, indeed, handed
over to Merhamet?
A.   Our assessment was that the most expedient thing to do was to
hand over to Merhamet those who were younger than 18 and older than 60.
, we'd
hand them over to them, and then they would take them to their homes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could I again ask you about the categories.
I do see that it's the intention to select those older than 60
and those younger than 18 and allow them to return home through the
intervention of Merhamet.  But earlier in this report, it states that new
prisoners are being brought in massively and in large quantities that no
selection has been made.  "They are bringing in those who shouldn't be
treated as prisoners of war because they have been picked up from their
homes and off their fields," and then you add that there are also those
above 60 and younger than 18.
.  Nevertheless,
they were further detained in this prisoners-of-war camp.  Is that
correctly understood?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.  Your understanding is
correct.  That's the way it was.  That is what I wrote and that's the way
it was.  That is the truth.
Perhaps -- I tried to point this out, and perhaps I exaggerated a
bit so that the people that I was reporting to would really act on this.
It's very close to the truth anyway.  What you said, that when they were
brought again, there were people who were younger than 18 and over the
age of 60.  That is because Manjaca was like a river, as it were.  People
were being brought in non-stop in groups and exchanged, and they left.
JUDGE ORIE:  Let me stop you there again.  I focussed my question
exclusively on the people not belonging to these categories of the
youngest ones or the elderly, but you treat them as separate categories
as well.  Those who should not be treated as prisoners of war, because
having been picked up from their homes and their fields, and those older
than 60 and younger than 18.
So a large quantity are just not prisoners of war and,
nevertheless, you detained them in the camp of prisoners of war.  That
is, then, I do understand, correctly understood and I am ignoring at this
moment the elderly and the younger ones.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I understand what you are saying.
This category that merits the status of prisoners of war, in
terms of their age, but in my estimate they should not be prisoners of
war because they were collected from their fields and homes, et cetera.
I said that for many of them I did not have any documentation because it
hadn't arrived yet.  So I tried to speed things up through my own
superior, so this organ would send that documentation.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Now, you are not complaining here about
lacking documentation.  You are saying, "They are bringing in those who
have been picked up from their homes and off their fields."  So
apparently you are aware of that having happened.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I have no comment.  It's written
there, and that's it.
JUDGE ORIE:  Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Sir, at the moment when you admit these people who are brought in
from Sanski Most, Prijedor, Kljuc, and, as you say, you don't know what
their status is, and once they've spent a certain amount of time there at
the Manjaca centre, and once you've received certain information and
accompanying documentation, and when you assess that a particular person
should not enjoy the status of a prisoner of war, according to the
Geneva Conventions, what do you do then?  What measures do you take?  Do
help us with this.
A.   I can only share with you what it is that we were doing.  Now, as
to what should be done, that would entail a much longer answer.
So, we did not release any such people from there because we sent
our reports to our superior command and awaited their orders.  We were
part of the command system and did not act on our own initiative.  We
simply carried out orders.
Q.   Can we agree that all of them at some point in time, irrespective
of whether you believed they should be accorded the status of prisoners
of war, as organised by the ICRC, and provided that they signed a
statement given freely, that they were allowed to leave Manjaca as it,
indeed, happened in February 1992.  Am I correct?
A.   That is correct.  With the assistance of the ICRC, it was,
indeed, done.  Several groups left in November and December, and
afterwards the camp was disbanded.
Q.   So all of them were allowed to leave the centre at Manjaca; is
that correct?
A.   All of them, yes.  So, 4.403 prisoners left the camp and went
onto third countries, depending on their country of choice.
Q.   Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  May I ask, just for a moment.  When did that
happen?  When was the camp disbanded?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] The first group of prisoners left
; the second group, on the 14th of December,
; and the last group,
, whereupon the camp was closed, when its
key was symbolically handed over to this -- I don't know the name
anymore.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] We will see that document,
Your Honour, and we will rely on it in some future examination.
Let us look at P229 next.  I'd like to remind you that this
document, too, is under seal.  Let us have a look at it together, please.
Q.   The first paragraph, which refers to a visit of the ICRC from
to the centre at Manjaca.  Inter alia, it reads that the head of
the team thanked for the visit that was enabled to them and the access to
every individual prisoner without the presence of any witnesses.
I'd like to ask you about your recollection.  Were ICRC
representatives allowed to enter any part of the camp at Manjaca?  Was it
possible for them to do so?
A.   Members of the ICRC, as approved by the authorities in Pale and
by the Main Staff of the VRS, were allowed to visit the camp and enter
any facility, as well as to talk to any inmate.  They have been doing --
they did that as of their first visit and during each subsequent visit.
Their nutritionist was also present daily in the camp between 9.00 and
5.00 p.m.
Q.   How frequently did the ICRC visit?
A.   I believe I said they came by once a week.  And their forces
.  And
that, too, was a type of visit.  So it was more frequent.  In other
directly to Manjaca.
Q.   Thank you.  Let's go to page 2 of this report, the second part of
the third paragraph, where you say that, in conversation with a number of
prisoners, ICRC representatives learned of four people for whom there are
reasonable grounds to believe that they were liquidated.
Can you recall this?  And who were the people in question?  What
was the status of the four people in question?
A.   Those people had been treated before, either by the military
court or another institution.  They were supposed to have been in the
but they did not have any
room and so they were transferred to our camp.  They were not considered
POWs; they were simply accommodated there.
The camp commander decided to put them aside so that they
wouldn't be registered together with the other prisoners.  Through their
own sources, members of the ICRC found out that information and they
wanted to see them, and, indeed, they were shown to them.  It's not in
dispute in any way.  They were alive.
Q.   In the last paragraph, it says that there was a proposal that the
four sentenced men, as it says here and we have their names here, should
.
Is that a question that was put to you by the ICRC as well?
A.   Yes, precisely.  That is what it says, and that's how it was.  We
intervened that they be transferred to a facility where they rightfully
should have been.
Q.   Another question relating to paragraph 4.  There is mention that
ICRC representatives stated that the nutrition was poor, as well as
hygiene, and Colonel Vukelic reacted to any such statements which were
unfounded, as well as Colonel Popovic.  Following that, the speaker of
the ICRC team calmed down, and they were promised that conditions will be
improved, as well as the treatment of prisoners.
Can you tell us what kind of conversation was this, and why did
it provoke Vukelic and Popovic into reacting?
A.   I'm afraid I can't say anything other than what is stated here,
because I wasn't present at the meeting.  I was away, although I no
longer remember why.  However, once I returned, I was informed about it
and that there were some unfounded accusations, as well as that they were
discussed.
I also heard that the ICRC representatives did correct some of
their position but a report to that effect never -- was never sent, which
would serve to corroborate that in writing.
Q.   Perhaps this is an opportunity for you to tell the Chamber how
food was organised for such large numbers of people, the provision of
food.
A.   The Manjaca camp, as an organisational unit of the 1st Krajina
Corps, was supplied by the corps.  In other words, the logistics of the
1st Krajina Corps supplied the camp, too.
1992 was a war year.  The corridor was cut off, and there were
many other issues.  The Manjaca camp simply shared the same fate suffered
by the rest of the population and the fighters of the corps.  In other
words, there was a shortage of everything.  Much as the fighters at the
front lines were short of supply, in terms of specific food types, the
inmates at the camp were in the same situation.  The number of people
increased, whereas the amount of food decreased.  That is why we approved
that Merhamet should help and we also asked for the assistance of the
ICRC, et cetera.
Once all of that was set in motion, things were fine.  That was
the main problem, and it was an objective problem.  We all felt it.  I
didn't eat any better food than the prisoners.  I ate what they ate.
Q.   I wanted to ask you to clarify something about the corridor.
Banja Luka
, due to intensive
fighting in the rear and the inability to provide supplies to the entire
.  Is this statement of mine correct?
A.   Yes, it is.  It was at that time that the 12 babies died due to
.
Q.   Some reference is made to the hygienic needs, or needs of
hygiene, for the prisoners.  How was that organised in Manjaca?
A.   The possibilities were very narrow.  What we could provide as the
army were the ABH supplies, which would enable people to wash up at least
once a week in field conditions under a tent.  We could warm up water for
them.  They had field toilets.  And the conditions in general were
adjusted to the overall situation and the number of people.  I must say
that hygiene was modest or at a low level.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, I'm looking at the clock.  If this
would be a suitable time.  And I expect you to conclude your
examination-in-chief -- cross-examination during the next session.  But
also would there be any time left for the Prosecution to put some further
questions to the witness?
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] I understand your point,
Your Honour.  I'll reorganise my examination.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could the witness be escorted out of the courtroom.
Curtains down first.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  We take a break, and we'll resume at 18 minutes
to 2.00.
.22 p.m.
.42 p.m.
JUDGE ORIE:  Could the witness be escorted into the courtroom
once the curtains are down.
Meanwhile, I'll use the time and address especially the Defence.
Last week, Mr. Ivetic was unaware of the practice of providing
transcripts of videos to the interpreters before playing such videos in
court.  The Registry has circulated the Trial Management Meeting paper
which sets out the ground rules for these proceedings.  However,
irrespective of this, CLSS has informed the Chamber that it has always
been standard CLSS practice that, in relation to videos, that the parties
provide both transcription of the original and its translation as the
speed and sound quality makes it impossible to provide simultaneous
interpretation of intercepts and videos, and the parties are invited to
follow that practice.
[The witness takes the stand]
JUDGE ORIE:  Curtains can be up again.
Mr. Stojanovic, you may proceed.
I would like to inform the parties that the Defence still has to
respond to the procedure suggested in relation to the next witness to
appear, and I would reserve the last ten minutes for that purpose today.
Please proceed, Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Witness, let me conclude this topic before moving on to the next
document.
I wanted to ask you about your knowledge concerning health care
for prisoners in the Manjaca centre?
A.   As regards the health care of prisoners in the POW camp in
Manjaca, the primary health care was provided on the premises.  We had
two medical doctors at our disposal who were prisoners themselves.  We
also had our medical technician, a paramedic from the medical centre in
, who was there round the clock.
The first medical checkup took place at intake, and their health
status was recorded in the medical log-book for each person individually.
Each prisoner had their status recorded as to whether there were
injuries, et cetera.  Further medical care was provided in the camp, and
, the
, and further afield, if necessary.  That
was the short description of the health care provided.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Could we have a look at P222,
which is also under seal.  It is a daily report of the 29th of July,
1992.
Q.   Sir, the deaths of Filipovic and Bender, the two prisoners, are
referred to here.  I hope can you find that.
My first question is this:  Following the death of these two
people, the appropriate judicial and investigative bodies were informed;
is that correct?
JUDGE ORIE:  You asked that before, I think, or at least the
witness testified about it.  And it is also in the transcript already, so
please move on, Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   The report states that possible perpetrators of the crime were
identified; is that correct?
A.   That is correct.  They were identified within the first half an
hour, one hour.
Q.   I have a question regarding that in paragraph 4, around the
middle of the paragraph, which reads -- there's a remark that the
military police patrol worked independently of their own volition and
that no such conduct was ordered, nor did they ask anyone.
Today, having all the information, the knowledge you do, and
particularly because you told us that the -- these people were tried and
sentenced and received high sentences, do you believe this was an
independent act of theirs which had nothing to do with any military
orders?
A.   It was utter willfulness, which came about as a surprise to us
all up there.  We dealt with it, and we asked that they be removed
immediately from the camp, that they be relieved of their duties.
Q.   Was that done?  Were they, indeed, removed from Manjaca?
A.   On that same day, they were suspended.  They were removed.
Q.   In the last sentence in paragraph 4, it says:  "We tried to find
out whether their murder was commissioned and who did that."
What you did mean by that?  Was any information obtained through
operative work?  Did you find out that somebody had ordered their
killings?
A.   When it comes to Omer Filipovic, there was information that he
had participated in organising and carrying out certain combat activities
in his settlement.  And his neighbours, Serbs, who were either members of
the military police or the civilian police, and they provided security
for the camp, were suspected to harbour hatred against Filipovic.
That's why we thought that somebody had told one of those Serbs
at Manjaca, You are up there.  If you can, kill that person.  We also
considered that possibility.  We investigated that possibility as well,
but after our investigation, we did not come to such a conclusion.
Q.   What happened with the mortal remains of those two prisoners?
A.   Filipovic's body and Bender's body as well, there were
post mortems were carried out, and their bodies were handed over to the
persons in charge at the cemetery, for burial.  I don't know whether
their bodies were exhumed or not.  I don't know.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] And now let's look at 07052.
This is a 65 ter document.  I believe this is another document under
.
Q.   Sir, this is one of the daily reports which refers to the
procedure aimed at disbanding the Manjaca centre, after which all the
detainees left the Manjaca camp.
What I would like to ask you can be found in paragraph 1, where
it says:  "After the efficient work on the lineup and after each
individual signed a statement as to whether they wanted to be taken away
by the International Committee of the Red Cross, around 9.00, we started
putting them on the buses."
My question is about the statements.  What kind of statements
were those?  Were they written statements?  I'll take things one at a
time.
JUDGE ORIE:  Before we do so, it seems that the translation is
incomplete, if only because the date is not translated.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE ORIE:  14th of December, 1992.  Could you send it for
review, Mr. Stojanovic, so that we have a complete and reliable
translation.  Or the Prosecution, if the Prosecution has presented it
with this translation.  I see Ms. Stewart is nodding yes.  So could the
Prosecution have the translation reviewed.
JUDGE MOLOTO:  And could we zoom in to the English, please.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation]
Q.   I would kindly ask you to look at line 5 in the text, where it
says:  "Following the successful roll-call, and after each individual
signed a statement as to whether they wished to go with the ICRC, the
boarding of the buses started at around 0900 hours."
Tell the Trial Chamber about the statements.  What kind of
statements were those, according to what you know?
A.   Those were written statements that all the prisoners of war were
supposed to sign if they agreed to be transferred to third countries.
And the wording of the statement was, I accept to voluntarily go to a
third country in the organisation of the ICRC.  I am quoting from memory.
I'm paraphrasing.  And each of them had to sign that statement.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, I would like to ask a clarifying
question.
You said:  "Each of the prisoners of war," but earlier I think we
dealt extensively with the question of whether they were prisoners of
war.  And, as you said, many of them should not be treated as prisoners
of war.  At the same time, you also told us that from that category,
able-bodied men between 18 and 60, that it was never suggested that they
would be released, apart from this mass release.
So if you say, "Every prisoner of war," do you mean every
detainee, or do you really want to say that they all were rightly treated
as prisoners of war?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] In order to clarify, I can say that
everybody who was at Manjaca signed that statement and left to a third
country.  I don't know what other distinction to make between them.
JUDGE ORIE:  That was not my question.
My question was whether you were talking about all people
detained, or whether you considered them all rightly to be treated as
prisoners of war, despite the various documents we looked through
earlier, that many of them were not involved in armed rebellion, did not
take up arms, et cetera, and were just sent to Manjaca irrespective of
whether they really could be rightly treated as prisoners of war.
Would those persons still be detained and be part of this number
of detainees being given to the ICRC, or had anything happened meanwhile
which made a clear distinction between prisoners of war and those which
were unjustifiably treated as such?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] They all left with the ICRC.
The ICRC was the body that had drafted that statement.  They were
all treated in the same manner when it came to their release.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  I would have preferred if you would have
answered my question, but since you apparently do not intend to do so,
Mr. Stojanovic, you're invited to proceed.
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Actually, Your Honour, if I could just interrupt
for one moment.
At page 70 of the transcript, line 11, it records Mr. Stojanovic
as drawing up document 5702.  I don't think that that correctly captures
the 65 ter number of the document that's currently being addressed, so
perhaps he could clarify that.
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Yes, Your Honour.  The document
that I called up was 65 ter 07052, and that document is, indeed, on the
screen before us.
JUDGE ORIE:  I think he has clarified the matter.  Please proceed
for another knew minutes, because, as I said, I would like to reserve the
last ten minutes for the Defence.
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Just a few more questions about this document, sir.
Bearing in mind the entire process, when it comes to the Army of
Republika Srpska, was it possible for each of the individuals to perhaps
choose not to go to a third country but to stay in the region of
?  From the point of view of the Army of Republika Srpska.
A.   As far as we were concerned, they could opt for that.  They could
or from Sanski Most.  But, by and
large, almost 100 per cent of them chose to go to a third country.  They
were transported to Karlovac, and from Karlovac, they were then
transported to third countries.  From Karlovac, they returned home.  From
Karlovac, some of them rejoined their units.  Some of them rejoined
either the Muslim army or the Croatian army, and they were recaptured.
We had several cases of recapture, when the same individuals were, again,
taken prisoner.
Q.   Thank you.  Let me finish with the following question:  Before
, while the JNA still
existed in 1991, what body was the camp in Manjaca connected to, in terms
of establishment lines?
A.   The Manjaca camp was an organisational unit of the command of the
1st Krajina Corps, i.e., it was connected to the army, i.e., to the 1st
Krajina Corps, and that line of command went up to the Main Staff.
Q.   And in 1991, when the JNA still existed and when the 1st Krajina
Corps had still not been established, who was the Manjaca camp attached
to?  Which body?
A.   If you're asking me about what Manjaca was, what the facilities
at Manjaca served, Manjaca was an agricultural farm, i.e., the military
institution called Karadjordjevic used to use those facilities.  Maybe I
did not understand you well the first time.
Q.   Was it part of the then-2nd Military District?
A.   That was part of the 2nd Military District.  Originally, it was
part of the 1st Military District and then the 2nd Military District in
, up to the point when the JNA unit had to leave
.
Q.   Thank you very much.  Let me finish my cross-examination.
You hail from the region, as far as I can understand.  I'm being
very cautious when I put this question to you.  Do you agree with me that
that place, that centre Manjaca, had been a working agricultural farm and
that it had previously been used as a prison for the prisoners of war
?
A.   Manjaca was a military agricultural farm.  It was a cattle farm,
where horses and cows were bred, as well as wheat and potatoes, barley.
It was a working military agricultural farm.
When the war started in 1991, those facilities were used for the
accommodation of imprisoned Ustashas who fled before the Serbian forces.
they closed the bridge in Hrvatska Kostajnica.  There were
some 370 of them when they were captured.  They were brought up there for
processing, and from then on, that area or those facilities started being
used for prisoners of war.  That use started in September 1991.  When
those prisoners were interviewed, it was disbanded as a camp and then
it -- it started being reused in 1992.
Q.   And in December 1992, it was again disbanded as a prisoner of war
camp; right?
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Stojanovic, I said I would reserve ten minutes
for the Defence.  You've taken some of that.
We apparently are unable to conclude your testimony today,
Witness RM051.  We'd like to see you back tomorrow morning at 9.30.  It
will not take very long, I take it.
And I would like to instruct you that you should not speak with
anyone about your testimony, whether that is the testimony you've given
today or whether that is testimony still to be given tomorrow.
You may follow the usher, but only after the curtains are down.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you very much.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE ORIE:  Mr. Lukic, meanwhile, I'd like to ask you whether
you're ready to make the submissions on the suggested procedure for
document charts for the next witness.
MR. LUKIC:  Yes, Your Honour, we are.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then could the curtains be drawn up again, and ...
Mr. Lukic, please proceed.
MR. LUKIC:  I have to ask you first, are we talking about this
documents for review chart we have to discuss today?
JUDGE ORIE:  Well, the Chamber was not involved in any discussion
yesterday.  But I think the Prosecution announced that it would start
preparing the next witness and use a chart on which he would give his
comments, and that you had an opportunity to comment on the suggested
proceedings.  So not the content of it but the proceedings, as suggested
by the Prosecution.
MR. GROOME:  Your Honour, I can see the document from here, and
it is, in fact, a document that we are scheduled to discuss today.
MR. LUKIC:  Okay.  Then since the Prosecution emphasised that it
is a unique situation, so we understand that it is only for this witness,
and we don't have objection to continue with this witness with this
chart.
JUDGE ORIE:  Do I understand, then, Mr. Groome that this is the
only witness with which you would like to follow this procedure?
MR. GROOME:  Well, Your Honour, it's the only witness so far.
Now, it may be in the future that we'd have a similarly situated witness
that we might seek the same relief, but I certainly wouldn't proceed
without requesting to do so, bringing it to the attention of the Defence
and the Chamber.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then I see that one of my colleagues has,
apparently, a copy in his hand.  I have not seen it yet.  We will look at
it.  The parties, apparently, do not disagree on this procedure to be
used with the next witness.  And in the future, we will see.  But it will
not be standard procedure, Mr. Groome.
MR. GROOME:  I'm not advocating, at this stage, for that, Your
Honour.
I would note, Your Honour, that the witness is upstairs now
finalizing and reviewing that, so can we proceed on the basis that I will
distribute that once it's finalised, and it will be decided, prior to the
witness giving evidence, on how to proceed?
JUDGE ORIE:  If the Chamber would have major objections in
relation to this witness because it's limited to that now, we'll let you
know as soon as possible.
MR. GROOME:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE ORIE:  Then, if there's nothing else, Mr. Stojanovic, could
you tell us how much more time you would need tomorrow?
MR. STOJANOVIC: [Interpretation] I will be expecting answers to
just two more questions, Your Honours.  So it will be very brief.
JUDGE ORIE:  And as matters stand now, Ms. Hochhauser?
MS. HOCHHAUSER:  Your Honour, I would anticipate about 15
minutes.
JUDGE ORIE:  Yes.  Then we'll adjourn for the day, and we'll
resume tomorrow, Tuesday, the 25th of September, at 9.30 in the morning,
in this same courtroom, I.
,
to be reconvened on Tuesday, the 25th day of
.30 a.m.
