Friday, 12 March  2010
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
.24 p.m.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Good afternoon to everybody.
Our apologies for the late start.  The courtroom was occupied.
I think we don't need the Registrar to call the case again and we
don't need the appearances, but perhaps now because it's the first time
we see you, we would be delighted for the appearances.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Good afternoon to
you, Your Honours, Mr. Tolimir, Mr. Gajic, Mr. Kunijevic.  My name is
Kweku Vanderpuye.  Good afternoon.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.
First of all, I would like to indicate that the management of the
Tribunal was quite successful to move the hearing of our Chamber on the
29th of March to the afternoon.  Probably it will be in the afternoon in
this courtroom -- no, in Courtroom II, that day in Courtroom II.  I think
that was on the request of Mr. Tolimir.
Are there any things to raise?  That seems not to be the case.
Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  I'd like
to greet everybody present and may there be God's peace in this house.  I
wanted to thank you for that, that is, for allowing me to attend the
Easter liturgy because it's a ceremony that takes place once a year and
it's an exceptional opportunity.  So I thank you very, very much for
that.  I thank the Registry for meeting my request, and I thank you too.
Secondly, I wanted to say something with respect to the
compilation that the Prosecution wants to present here in the courtroom.
, received a summary of what
the Prosecution wants to show, and the Defence is opposed to the
Prosecutor's proposal for the following reasons.  First, the Prosecution
needs to send an official draft in keeping with the Trial Chamber's
guide-lines and provided to all parties, to the Prosecution and to
Defence.  As far as I know, they haven't done that yet.
Secondly, finally, Mr. Thayer has informed us that it is a
compilation which is identical to the one that the Prosecution presented
in the Popovic trial.  So we have that compilation, we've had it for a
long time.  And it was only at 7.30 last night -- p.m. last night, what
the entire contents of the video compilation was and we don't know what
footage the Prosecution intends to show in the courtroom.
Now, talking to my advisor, Mr. Aleksandar Gajic, and he
consulted Mr. McCloskey and understood that the Prosecution would be
adding a segment, when one of the officers -- showing one of the
officers, Serbian officers eating fish.  Now, if anything is added to the
initial compilation, the Defence will consider it to be a new
compilation.  And it is a video compilation composed by the Prosecutor.
Now, an element of that compilation is found in the 65 ter and
bis Rules, and I think that the Trial Chamber has already had occasion to
look at that video footage.  However, the introduction into evidence and
showing this video footage that I consider to be a compilation is a very
serious matter.  Parts of that compilation or video footage and the
segments which comprise it will certainly have to be shown to some of the
witnesses which will come in in the course of this trial, and displaying
the footage without the presence of a witness and without having certain
matters clarified with a witness would just be a waste of time.  And in
the opening statement made by the Prosecution, the Prosecutors showed
some photographs and some video-clips as well.  The Prosecution has
presented its version of the events already, and if now it were to play
the video compilation, it would be an additional opening statement on the
part of the Prosecutor, which, as opposed to what they've already said,
would be admitted into evidence and would become an exhibit, upon which
the Trial Chamber will ultimately have to base its judgement.
So this whole question of compilation, that is to say, something
made up of excerpts from a number of video-clips, has been cut to suit
the Prosecutor's suit and is not commensurate to these proceedings.  And
for those reasons, the request made by the Prosecutor should be rejected,
in the Defence's opinion.
Thank you.  That's what I wanted to say as far as the video
footage is concerned.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you, Mr. Tolimir.
Mr. McCloskey.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Yes, Mr. President, good afternoon.  Good
afternoon, Your Honours.  This is a very simple situation.  This
compilation video has a 65 ter number; it always has.  It's been in the
possession of the accused for many, many months, and it -- there's no
mystery to it.  It's largely made up of VRS combat camera shooting
General Mladic and the VRS as they come into Srebrenica.  There is some
, and there is footage
from Serb television shot in Potocari.  And then there's footage from the
Hotel Fontana that was shot by the VRS.  It's my position that this
material speaks for itself and that its admissibility will be seen from
its authenticity and the people and the time.  It does not need a witness
-- witnesses to authenticate, though there will be witnesses that will
recognise people in it and will be able to explain to you who they are
and more about it as we go along.
But this is a video that will be on Mr. Ruez's exhibit list and
he will be testifying.  He's going -- in the next two or three weeks he
will be on that Thursday-Friday-Monday segment that we have, and it will
come in at that point.  I thought -- as Mr. Ruez -- his testimony took
three days in total last time, but part of that was three or four hours
of this video where he doesn't really need to say much because it speaks
for itself.  So I was thinking we could play the video for you during
potential lag periods as opposed to making a possible witness wait a
whole week, and that perhaps this would allow us to finish Mr. Ruez in
the three days that are allotted because we will have saved whatever
hours of that video.
This video comes with an index of the various shots and where we
got the material.  It's -- it -- I don't understand what the objection is
on this video.  It's very important historical material shot by the
participants themselves.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Could you perhaps explain why this video should
be shown during the testimony of the next witness.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  That -- my -- what I was thinking is - and maybe
I'm a bit ahead of myself - but with -- we don't wish to play it for this
next witness, but we think since he's a 92 ter witness, Mr. Vanderpuye
shouldn't take more than, I think, 30 to 40 minutes in direct.  We can't
imagine a cross-examination going for the rest of the day, and if we had
an extra hour, we would show you this historical footage that will help
you learn about the case because these -- as you've already heard,
they're talking about Srebrenica and the -- what was happening on these
days, which is depicted in the video.  You see parts of the column
getting together and going to Susnjari, that sort of thing.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  If I'm not mistaken, you would like to have the
witness first and after the testimony of this witness you intend to show
this video?
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Yes, Mr. President, should there be time enough
to do it.  If we only have 20 minutes, it may not be worth a 20-minute
section.  But of course that's -- that is completely up to you, of
course.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.  And the objection of Mr. Tolimir, the
Chamber will consider that at a later stage.
Then we should have the first witness, please.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  And, Mr. President, I just -- just so you know, I
will endeavour to be in the courtroom during each day of the trial just
as consistency and so that there's someone that sees everything that
you're saying.  But I hopefully won't be speaking too much if -- unless
there's a policy decision or you need to speak to me.  Thank you very
much.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
Could the witness be brought in, please.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I'm sorry, Mr. President, there is another
preliminary issue that I would think it's important to raise before the
witness.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Yes, Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you very much.  Thank you, Mr. President.
The preliminary issue that I wanted to address, I think it's
important in light of the fact that this witness is the first 92 ter
witness to be heard in these proceedings, it has to do with the scope of
the admissibility of the exhibits relative to the 92 ter statement.  In
its -- sorry.
, Mr. President, the
Trial Chamber admitted these exhibits, that is, exhibits that were
admitted as a result of the prior testimony as necessary and integral to
the Trial Chamber to fully comprehend the transcripts, the written
evidence in question.  It's a bit unclear at the moment whether or not
those exhibits are admitted solely for the purpose of placing in context
that written evidence or whether or not they're admitted for substantive
purposes in addition to the testimony that is proffered under 92 ter.
And what we would like to know, because I think it affects the additional
evidence that may be led with respect to these witnesses in the future,
is what the Court's position might be with respect to those -- to the
scope of those exhibits.
In our motion, our 92 ter motion, we asked for the admission of
these exhibits to place in context and in order to facilitate the
evaluation of the proffered written evidence, and it appears that that
is -- that was honoured or that was ordered by the Trial Chamber.  But it
seems also at the same time that there are oftentimes, as you might
imagine, parts of those exhibits -- in the particular instance with
respect to this witness, there are statements that were exhibits relative
to the 92 ter testimony.  And there are parts of those statements or
exhibits that were not addressed specifically by the witness during the
context of his prior testimony, which we may seek to lead in addition to
the 92 ter statement in order to help further place it in context and
with respect to new issues that may have arisen since the prior
testimony, of course on notice to the accused through proofing note or
discussions or otherwise.  But it would be helpful to know what the
Court's position is with respect to that so that we can better organise
how we will lead this evidence.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
Mr. Tolimir, do you want to add something?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.  I have nothing further
to add and I thank the gentleman for the information provided.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, I'm sorry, if I may just add one
other thing.  With respect to a number of the 92 ter witnesses in this
case, the underlying statement is their testimony in the prior case of
Popovic et al.  In that case, in some instances the exhibits were
admitted for only limited purposes.  For example, if a witness were
impeached by a prior statement, that statement, although admitted, might
have been limited only for the -- from the purposes of impeachment.
Therefore, it wasn't admitted as substantive evidence with respect to any
other matter that's discussed in the statement.  That's the reason why I
raise the issue, because even though it was admitted in connection or as
a result of the 92 ter statement, it might not have been admitted for all
purposes.  And in that context, it would be helpful to know whether or
not it can be relied on in these proceedings for their substance.
Now, I hope that's a little bit more helpful than my previous
submission.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
[Trial Chamber and Legal Officer confer]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It is ...
[Trial Chamber and Registrar confer]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Excuse me, Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  I would
like to request, if possible, for Mr. Vanderpuye to provide us with the
page on which those legal matters were discussed at the session so that
the Defence can become acquainted with that, which would be essential for
examinations and so on.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think that might be done in a direct contact
between Defence and Prosecution at a later stage.
For the problem raised by the Prosecution, the Chamber's of the
view that we are not part of the Popovic case.  We are trying this
accused.  We are dealing with the matters independently, and therefore
the Trial Chamber would like to confirm the decision of the
3rd of November, 2009.  A package of transcripts, statement, and exhibits
from another case can be a problem in the future, and therefore we would
like to have them separately so that we can decide from document to
document if we receive it as an exhibit or not.  And therefore, please
comply with this decision of November in future.
For today I think because we didn't get any objection by the
Defence, the Defence is aware of all these documents for this witness,
and therefore we will accept this -- this way of handling the problems
for today.  But please try to comply with our decision from
3rd of November.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes, Mr. President.  We have actually submitted
an exhibit list or provided the Defence with a copy of the exhibits that
are related to the testimony.  The more salient issue is with respect to
this witness, for example, it's my intention to lead additional evidence
relative to the 92 ter testimony.  With respect to that evidence that I
would like to lead, some of the evidence is, in fact, contained in the
exhibits that are provisionally admitted in relation to that testimony.
So the larger question for me particularly is whether or not the
Trial Chamber will entertain my leading the witness on matters that are
contained in exhibits that are part of the 92 ter testimony that were not
specifically led during the course of that testimony, that is, on issues
that weren't specifically led during the course of the testimony.  And if
the answer is that it's unnecessary because those matters are already
contained in exhibits that are admitted in relation to the testimony,
then I don't think there's really much need for me to lead on those
matters.
On the other hand, if the Trial Chamber's view is that that --
those exhibits relating to the testimony are provisionally admitted in
this case only for the purpose, for the limited purpose, of placing in
context and being integral to understanding the testimony as it was
provided, then I think it's incumbent upon me to apply to lead the
witness on those extraneous issues even though they're part of a
statement relative to that testimony, because otherwise it won't be
before the Trial Chamber on a substantive basis.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  The Chamber is still of the view we are really in
a new case and we would like to have every document that the Prosecution
moves for the admission of every document separately and not as a
package.  But I think it -- we spent a lot of time with this issue.  If
there are any other ideas for the future to make it more practically, we
can discuss it again.  But I think we should start with this witness now.
Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I think we can
proceed and we'll see how it goes.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Good afternoon, sir.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Good afternoon.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Would you please read aloud the solemn
declaration on the card which is shown to you now.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will
speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
WITNESS:  WITNESS PW-073
[Witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.  Please be seated.
Mr. Vanderpuye from the Prosecution has some questions for you.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Examination by Mr. Vanderpuye:
Q.   Good afternoon to you, sir.
A.   Good afternoon.
Q.   As you know, my name is Kweku Vanderpuye.  On behalf of the
Prosecution I'm going to put some questions to you in relation to your
evidence today.  Before we get started I just wanted to remind you that
try and keep your voice up and to speak a little bit slowly so that the
interpreters will have an opportunity to translate accurately what you
say to everyone.  And if there's anything I ask you during the course of
your evidence that's unclear, please let me know so that I can try and
rephrase it in a way that we can better understand one another.
A.   Yes.
Q.   The first thing I want to show you in relation to your evidence
today is 65 ter 6189, and if you would please take a look at that.
Without telling us what it says, can you confirm that you are the person
named on the sheet?
A.   Yes, yes, yes.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  May we go into
private session for just a moment.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Private.
[Private session]
Page 605 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honours.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
The witness is a survivor of the mass execution of Branjevo
Military Farm of over a thousand Muslim men and boys in mid-July 1995.
In July 1995, the witness and his family lived in Srebrenica
town.  The witness testified that at that time the conditions of life in
the enclave were difficult.  Sporadic humanitarian aid resulted in severe
food shortages, and people were often forced to travel on foot as far as
Zepa in order to obtain basic sustenance.
The witness recalled that following the start of the VRS
offensive in Srebrenica, the town was subject to shelling attacks.  The
witness personally saw victims of these attacks, including a mother and
, out of fear that
they would be killed as a result of the constant shelling, the witness,
his wife, and grandchildren fled Srebrenica, together with the rest of
the Muslim population to seek the protection of UNPROFOR in Potocari.
The witness's sons did not follow him to Potocari.  Instead, they
fled through the forest.  However, they did not survive.  In 2005, the
witness buried one son, whose remains were found in a mass grave.  At the
time of his testimony, the remains of another son had not yet been
identified.
The witness estimated that as many as 30.000 people were gathered
July 1995.  Some were sheltered in factories, which
quickly filled to capacity.  Others, including the witness and his
family, had to spend the night in the open.
On 12 July, the witness heard a Serb soldier announce over a
loud-speaker that the people gathered would be checked for weapons.  Serb
forces with German shepherd dogs then walked among the crowd.  The
Witness recalled VRS soldiers being filmed providing bread to Muslim
refugees.  In reality, only some 1 to 200 loaves were provided for the
thousands of people that were gathered there.
The witness recalled how frightened people were that night.  As
he lay out in the open, he could hear screaming, moaning, and shouting as
Serb forces took people away one by one.  He could hear the sounds of
people being beaten and silenced by bursts of gun-fire.  And he described
the experience as "hell on earth."
On 13 July, the witness, together with other Muslim men and boys,
was forced through two Serb check-points in Potocari.  At the second
check-point, soldiers in camouflage uniforms separated the men and boys
from the women and children.  It was here that the witness was separated
from his family.  He was then led together with other men to a two-storey
house close to the main road.
The witness was detained in this house for about an hour together
with 40 or 50 other men, crammed into a ground floor room.  The witness
could not estimate how many other men were on the first floor of the
house.  During the witness's detention, no one was interviewed by the VRS
soldiers or even asked their names.  Instead, the soldiers asked the
prisoners to turn over what money they had, and later told the men that
.  After the house was
full, the men were removed.  They were placed aboard two buses and driven
to Bratunac.
Upon his arrival in Bratunac, the witness was taken to a school.
Although the witness did not know the name of the school then, he was
told by others at the time that it was called the Vuk Karadzic school.
There were many Serb soldiers in camouflage uniforms around the school
when the witness -- when the men arrived.  They forced the Muslim
prisoners to leave their belongings, some of which contained food, in
front of the school, which they were never allowed to retrieve.
Inside the school, the witness was packed into an overcrowded
room containing approximately 200 men and boys.  Little water and no food
were provided.  Shortly after the prisoners entered the school a
policeman followed and severely beat a prisoner near the doorway.  An
hour later, that prisoner was taken away and never seen again.  Every few
hours uniformed Serb soldiers took men out of the room.  The witness
could hear screaming followed by bursts of machine-gun fire and then
silence.  The witness saw six or seven men removed in this way.  None of
them returned.  The witness never saw medical treatment or medication of
any kind being provided to the prisoners.
After one or two nights at the school, Serb soldiers told the
.  In fact, the men were
Pilica, passing
Serbia.  Close to or near the entrance to Pilica village, a
Muslim man who had died on the bus that the witness was on was taken out
by other prisoners to be laid on the roadside.  As this occurred, one
prisoner tried to escape and was shot dead.  After the incident, the bus
remained at the location for about an hour before continuing on.  When
the bus arrived at its final destination, the men were offloaded and were
placed in a school.  The witness kept his head down as the men entered
the two-storey building and proceeded upstairs to the first floor.
The witness was placed in an overcrowded room barely three and a
half by five metres in size with men as old as 80, as well as boys of
15 or 16 years of age.  At one point, a soldier called for 15- and
16-years-old to stand up.  They were lined up, taken out of the room, and
never seen again.  The witness was also aware of other prisoners who were
taken out of the building and beaten.  He could hear screaming, moaning,
and the sounds of gun-fire.  None of the prisoners dared to look outside
the windows to see what was going on out of fear that the soldiers would
direct their fire towards them.  Although the witness could not recall
exactly how many nights he spent at the school, he testified that he was
possibly there for two nights.
On the morning of the executions, Serb soldiers brought two long
sheets into the witness's room which were torn into strips and used to
bind the prisoners' hands.  As this was done, the prisoners were led out
of the building to waiting buses.  On the way out, the witness saw a dead
prisoners lying in a pool of blood at the bottom of the stairs.  He then
waited with other men to board one of the buses, each of which was
escorted by one or two soldiers.
The witness boarded a bus which drove a short while to the
execution site at the Branjevo Military Farm, about 2 and a half
kilometres away.  As the bus climbed a hill close to the execution site,
the witness could hear gun-fire.  He could see the other buses stopped
and prisoners taken out by a group of soldiers waiting to offload them.
The soldiers cursed and abused the prisoners as they led them down a path
into a glen where they were cut down by bursts of gun-fire.
When his turn came, about eight VRS soldiers led the witness off
the bus together with a small group of prisoners and marched them down to
an incline where many others were already lying dead.  They ordered the
prisoners to turn their backs and to lie down.  However, before they
could comply, the soldiers opened fire.  The witness immediately fell to
the ground.  Realising that he was uninjured, the witness lay still among
the dead and the dying as he saw seven other columns of men brought to
the glen and executed.  The witness could hear Serb soldiers calling out
for anyone who had survived.  Two survivors who answered the call were
finished off with bullets to the head.
After some time, the witness managed to free his hands and
managed to get to some nearby shrubbery around nightfall.  Together with
four other men, the witness escaped the killing fields, finding refuge in
a forest.  However, the witness was unable to keep up with the four
others and after a time found himself alone.
The witness spent that first night in the forest where he eluded
an ambush.  In the morning he reached a meadow where he was able to rest.
The following day, just before dusk, he reached a tarmac road, which he
noticed was blood-stained.  As he crossed the road intending to take
cover in the woods on the opposite side, a truck filled with dead bodies
approached.  From the truck the witness heard someone shout out that the
witness was an escapee from the previous day's execution.  The witness
decided to continue walking along the road in order to avoid suspicion.
He crossed the bridge and continued walking as he was followed.
Eventually the truck stopped following him and the witness was able to
take cover and hide until dark.
If we could just go into private session for one second,
Mr. President.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Private.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honour.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.
In Karakaj, the witness was placed on a tarpaulin truck along
with 27 other Muslim prisoners who had also been caught in the forest and
was registered by the ICRC.
In late July 1995, the witness was taken to the Batkovic prison
camp, where he remained until he was exchanged in December 1995.  On
July 2005, the witness buried his brother.  On
another brother.  Their remains, like that of the witness's son, were
found in Srebrenica-related mass graves.
That concludes my summary, Mr. President.  And I do have I think
about half an hour or so of questions I'd like to put to the witness, if
I may proceed.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Carry on, please.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.
If we can go into private session for just a moment.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Go back to private session.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honour.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.
Q.   Witness, we're now in open session, so I'll ask you not to
mention any specific names of towns or villages where you might have
been.  But I'd like to ask you, can you tell us approximately when it was
that you moved from your town or your village to Srebrenica town?
A.   Well, I was there during the war for a year.  I stayed in the
village for a year while the Serb army attacked -- of the Serb republic,
attacked, you
couldn't defend yourself from the tanks and shells and everything else.
And that's when we went down to Srebrenica because the -- they were
shelling houses.  They would target your house just to destroy it.  And
so when we left they would loot the houses and take away what was in
them.  And then five or six days later they would come back and torch the
houses.  One of my houses was set on fire.  The other one was a new one
and built of brick so they couldn't set that one on fire.  But they used
mines and so on.  And I went down to Srebrenica in the spring because
Riverand that's
Serbiaattacked, and had
Bosnian Serbs certainly wouldn't have begun anything.  They wouldn't dare
begin anything, because they had the same weapons that we had.  So they
Serbia
preparing for war.
Q.   At the time that you left your village, was there any possibility
for you to remain there?
A.   Well, there was the possibility, but only for them to all be
killed; that's what the possibility was, for them to all lie underground
and not up in the air.  Nothing else.  Because when they caught anybody
they came across and nobody was left alive, they would just stay for that
length of time, civilians, people, and the Serbs -- well, the Serbs were
exchanged for others that they had taken and the extra Muslims -- they
said, "Well, let's catch them."  And then they killed them and there
wasn't anybody left.
Q.   Can you describe for the Trial Chamber what the conditions were
like when you arrived in Srebrenica town.
A.   Well, the conditions were like this.  The Serb army was in the
hills around Srebrenica and we were there in Srebrenica.  And first of
all they -- the planes released passages [as interpreted] of food, they
dropped from the air, they dropped food because we didn't have any.  You
couldn't leave.  And so they fed us that way with the help of planes for
a time.  And then later on, when the convoy was allowed to go through
carrying food, the convoy from Bratunac, then the airplanes stopped
flying and the trucks came in.  Sometimes there were 12, sometimes eight,
but usually 12 of them arrived with a certain quantity of food that
was -- well, first of all they stopped off in Bratunac so -- and they
took what they needed, whereas all that food was actually prepared and
intended for Srebrenica.  But they took what they needed in Bratunac and
left us the rest.
And as there wasn't enough, then our people would go to Zepa, up
there to Zepa.  They would go on foot and they had to walk for 11 hours.
That's what people told me, and then they would bring in flour from Zepa,
and oil and sugar.  There wasn't any salt at the time.  But they did what
they could to feed their families.  They would carry loads of 30,
40 kilos, people dragging all this in.  And then there would be ambushes
along the way and many people lost their lives carrying flour home to
feed their children.  A lot of people were killed that way too.  They
would go off to cut the grass, to dig the fields for wheat or for
whatever, and then shells would come in from their positions.  They would
target them and kill them.
It was a camp, Srebrenica camp, that's what it was.  Suffering,
that's what it was.  And I don't know how to tell you actually, but after
all that terrible suffering and hardship they said, "Well, let's kill
everybody left," and there were those women and small children.  But why
did they kill people up to the age of 80?  They were civilians.
Everybody knows that somebody of 80 was a civilian.  But why children of
15 and 16, why did they do that to the children?  They were like young
plants, flowers, roses.  So how dare they do that.  Where was their soul?
What soul did they have if they could do things like that?  That's what
I'd like to know.  I couldn't ever believe that there were people like
that in our parts with souls like that --
Q.   Mr. Witness --
A.   -- without any understanding for anything.  When they attacked
Srebrenica, on the one hand -- they would attack Srebrenica on the one
side and then put up ambushes on the other and kill the Muslims.  On the
one hand, we're going to leave people there, and on the other, we're
going to kill them.  So what kind of soul did they have, I ask you.
Q.   Mr. Witness, at the time that you fled Srebrenica on 11 July
1995, did you feel that there was any possibility that you could have
stayed there if you wanted?
A.   In my village or in Srebrenica?
Q.   In Srebrenica town, I'm sorry.
A.   Well, whoever stayed didn't survive and nobody stayed because we
know -- we all knew what they were doing and how they were going about
things.  So nobody stayed.  If somebody was ill and happened to stay, if
people couldn't pull them out, but anybody who stayed was killed.  That
was the end of them.
Q.   All right.
A.   And today when I look at how many people were killed and who the
people were who were killed, well, there's the monument there, that says
it all.  Whoever does not believe it can look at that and see.  There's
nothing there, nothing left.  The people left, the men left, the elder
children -- older children left and, what, women?  Well, the women, it
was as if they were killed too.  She had to leave and she had to look
after her small children, but thanks to some good people, there were good
people who helped so that the children were fed and they grew up.  And
all we can do is thank the good people for that and Allah for that.  But
as for these evil people, evil-doers, what kind of soul did they have?  I
don't know.  I had two sons, now I don't have a single one.  I had two
brothers, now --
Q.   Mr. Witness, we'll get to some of those issues in just a little
bit.
A.   Yes.  Go ahead.
Q.   Do you feel all right to continue at this moment or do you think
maybe you would like to take a small break?
A.   I feel all right.  It's just my nerves when I'm upset.  When I
think about everything that was done and all that injustice, I become
very upset.  Today I have no sons, no brothers.  Two of my
daughter-in-laws died, killed from a plane, from a plane.  The planes who
set off -- flew off from Bratunac.  They had bombs and threw them on the
villages and they threw a bomb in my own field and killed my cow as well,
and my sister-in-law and my cousin's wife too, my nephew's wife.  And
anybody from those parts can testify to that if you need to hear it from
someone else.  But I'm here to tell you and that's the truth of it.  And
everything that you read out in the statement, that's how it was.  No
other way.  That's how it was.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, it seems to me that the witness
is a bit agitated, and I know we're a little bit before our break.  I was
wondering if I can pause a little early and I can pick it up -- I leave
it to you to --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Well, if we need to.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think the witness understood your question and
is prepared to continue.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes, we can.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Sir -- yes.  There will be some other questions
for you, sir.
MR. VANDERPUYE:
Q.   Thank you, Mr. Witness.  In relation to your evidence, I'd like
to clarify a couple of points concerning the Vuk Karadzic school.  Now,
yesterday when we --
A.   Yes.
Q.   We spoke yesterday, as you recall, and you mentioned that you
were taken to two buildings in Bratunac.  Do you remember that?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   I'd like you to take a look at a map, an aerial image, and see if
you can indicate for the Trial Chamber what those buildings are.  Okay?
We're going to get that up on the screen for you in just a moment.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  And I think he might be able to mark it
electronically.
Q.   But I'd just like you to take a look at this and see if you're
able to do it.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  It's 65 ter 6187, please.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Would the Court Officer please assist the
witness.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  This will need to be blown up, more towards the
centre.  Yeah.  More.  All right.  Now, you'll see on the top left --
that's right, exactly where the cursor is, below that area, please.  If
you could -- no.  It's at the bottom centre of the screen now.  If you
could move it to the middle and blow it up, that would be great.  Yes.  A
little bit to the left.  More.  And if you -- you'll see -- that's right.
Now in the centre of the screen you'll see a series of buildings right in
the middle, if you could blow that up that would be helpful.  Yeah, a
little to the -- that's pretty good.
Okay, if you could move it a little -- move the screen a little
bit over to the left so it's centered, it would be, I think, easier to --
a little bit more.  That's perfect.
Q.   Mr. Witness, are you able to see, first of all, what's on the
screen in front of you?  We can blow it up a little bit more if you need.
A.   As far as I can see -- this here.
Q.   It seems to have shifted a little bit.
You can sit down and we'll blow it up a little bit so you can see
it a little bit better.  And if you aren't able to orient yourself, just
let me know.  Okay.
A.   That's the Vuk Karadzic school and the primary school there next
to each other.
Q.   I'm just going to ask you to mark the buildings that you were
taken to.
A.   Well, it seems to me that this looks similar, this would be it
here.
Q.   All right.  Okay.  That's fine.  And could you mark the second
building, if you can see it there.
A.   And the other one could be this one here.
Q.   Okay.
A.   That's it.
Q.   Thank you very much, Witness.
A.   That's the Vuk Karadzic school and the other one's the primary
school.
Q.   I'm going to ask you to describe them in a just a minute --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  But I'm not sure if the procedure requires him
to date it and mark it?  It does not.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you very much, Witness.  I think we're done with
this witness, then.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  You want to have it as an exhibit?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes, please.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It will be received.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P50.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
Please continue.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   Now, Witness, with respect to these schools --
A.   Yes.
Q.   -- can you describe which one you were taken to first, the
interior of it, if you can remember.
A.   Well, they took us to the primary school, but they left our coats
and bags in front of the school.  I left my coat, others didn't, but
everybody had to leave their bags behind.  And then we went inside.  We
stayed there for about an hour, and then they took us out and into the
Vuk Karadzic school.  They took us in there.  And we spent two nights in
the Vuk Karadzic school, and they would take people out, all day, all
night, people would be killed.  People screamed.  Some were outside.  I
was inside myself.
Q.   Mr. Witness, I just want if it's possible - and I don't mean to
cut you off because I know that you have a lot to say - but if it's
possible could you just describe for the Trial Chamber what you remember
about the inside of the school, how it looked, that is, that you were in
for about an hour.
A.   Well, inside it was all dusty.  It was an old school and had been
abandoned.  Now it's been refurbished.  But at the time there were no
windows, no doors.  Everything was a general mess.  I don't know whether
the roof was still standing or not, or part of it was or not.  We had to
bend our head down when we walked in a column.  You weren't allowed to
look to the left or the right.  You had to bend your head down, so you
couldn't really see much.  You would just go inside that way, sit down,
and look at all the horror around you and everything that was going on.
And you wondered what would happen to people with their lives and to your
own life.
Q.   Did that building have a floor?
A.   Yes, it did.  And -- two floors, the Vuk Karadzic school, two
storeys.
Q.   Now, the building you were in first, did that building have a
floor?
A.   Well, I don't know.  I can't really say.  Anyway, it was so dusty
and all the -- no doors, no windows, everything in a mess.  And I was
there -- well, whether the building had an upper storey or not and
whether it had a room or -- roof or not, I really don't know.  We spent
an hour there and then they transferred us to the Vuk Karadzic school.
And we went up onto the first floor.  And then a policeman arrived and
that -- you'll find that in the statement.  He beat up one man, he beat
him a lot.  And the man was bloody, he was bleeding from his head.  He
beat him with his automatic rifle.  He had a blue uniform and a white
belt and halter.  What kind of policeman he was, I don't know, whether
military or some sort of civilian police, and the man was all bloody.
And then they came back again, they left and they came back again, and
took the man out and he screamed outside and cried and groaned and
shouted.  Sometimes you would hear a burst of gun-fire, other times not,
and you would hear the cries become quieter and quieter until they
disappeared all together.
Q.   I'd like to ask you about Pilica, if I could at this point.  All
right.  Once again, I apologise, I don't mean to cut you off.  And --
A.   All right.  You can ask me anything you want.  Feel free to ask
anything you want from my statement.  In Pilica --
Q.   Thank you, Mr. Witness.  Now, first do you remember how -- the
route that you took from Bratunac to Pilica in the bus that you were on?
," but I saw us
going in the opposite direction.  We went to Zvornik, then crossed into
Serbiaand went to Loznica, and in Loznica we crossed over into
again towards Zepka [phoen] and then towards Pilica.  And when we
arrived -- came to a house there, we stopped.  There was seven buses,
seven busloads.
Q.   I'd like to ask you about the building that you were taken to
there.  I'd like to clarify a few issues.  You refer to this building as
a school or as a cultural centre.  Do you remember saying that?
A.   Yes, I remember it well.  I remember everything very well and
anything you need to know, please ask me.
Q.   Okay.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Can we go into private session for a moment,
Mr. President.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  We go into private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  We are already back in public session.
Mr. Vanderpuye, please continue.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   Good afternoon to you, Mr. Witness.  I just have two more
questions about the building in Pilica that you were taken to.
First is, can you --
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  The first is, can you describe, if you can remember,
the colour of the walls in the building?
A.   Well, inside it was -- the walls were tiled, actually some were
broken off and some were still attached, and the colour was whitish,
off-white, yellowish, that sort of colour.
Q.   Okay.  And if you could, can you describe what the windows in the
building were like, that is, how high they were from the floor and so on.
A.   Well, they were about normal, like regular windows, that high.
Perhaps up to 1 metre.
Q.   All right.  Thank you for that.  I want to ask you -- I want to
ask you about the four men that you encountered during your escape from
the execution site.  Roughly how old were they?
A.   Well, they were about 25 years old or so, but they did not
surrender in Potocari; rather, they were captured while they were going
through the woods and then they were mixed with us.  But those who were
captured in Potocari, they were all older men, 70, 80 years old, and
children under 18 years of age.  They surrendered because we thought,
well, we were older people, we weren't guilty of anything, we weren't
really expecting this.  That really was a surprise, but you could read --
well, as I said in my statement, it was like that, nothing else.  And the
mass graves confirmed that, in all those mass graves that were found in
the woods.
Q.   Let me just focus you in on these four individuals specifically
with whom you escaped from the farm, from the execution site.  Do you
remember them?
A.   Yes, I do.  One of them had trousers stained in blood.  I don't
know if he was wounded or if the blood was somebody else's, someone whose
body was next to him.  Well, four of them walked out and so did I, and
then we started on our journey together.  It was -- there was some
moonshine.  We went to the woods.  They were younger than I was and they
left.  I couldn't follow them, so I stayed behind all by myself.  And
then some ten -- five to ten minutes later after they left, I heard a
burst of gun-fire because there were ambushes all around.  So then I
headed in the opposite direction.  And then as I stumbled around I heard
that -- from one person that they found where the shots had been fired
and that those three were also captured somewhere and then taken to
Zvornik.  And then when we asked in Zvornik where and who took them away,
nobody could tell us.  So they've just disappeared.  Whether they crossed
over or not or were shot dead, we don't know, but they're missing.  All
the four are missing.  Because people were killed en masse.  There were
mass killings there.
Q.   Did you learn anything about where they were from?
A.   Well, I asked one of them only where he was from and he said he
was from Jagonja.  I didn't ask their names.  He said he was from Jagonja
village.  I didn't ask the other three, but it would appear that one of
them was from Srebrenica, apparently from the investigations that were
later conducted, that he was somebody's son.  And then there was a man
from Konjevic Polje.  And where the third man was from I really don't
know, but I'm basing this on the investigations that were later
conducted.
Q.   All right.  I want to ask you about a few people and I'm just
going to ask you about -- I'm just going to give you their names and you
can let us know if you know of them.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  If we could just go into private session for a
moment, Mr. President.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Private.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're now in open session, Your Honours.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  If we could just go back into private session
for one moment, please?
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think there's a problem.  Private again.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Yes, Mr. President, just for a second.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in open session, Your Honour.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.
Q.   Witness, I just want to ask you about a couple other names.  So
we're in open session so if there's any association between you and those
individuals that you think may reveal your identity, please let me know.
Are you familiar with the name Hajrudin Begic?
A.   Hajrudin Begic was from Srebrenica.  He lived there near the
town.  I knew him and when I went to Srebrenica we were introduced.
Hajrudin Begic and Hakija Begic are brothers, and I saw them also on this
route from Srebrenica to Pilica.  They were questioned and then taken
back, but they too disappeared.  They were taken out and they never came
back.  So that's how it was.
Q.   Are you familiar with the name Behaija Malkic?
A.   Behaija Malkic, yes, I know him well.  I knew him from childhood
because we lived -- he lived nearby so that we knew each other very well.
He died right next to me.  He was killed right next to me.  And there was
another person, Nemis from Klotivci, he too had been in Pilica but he too
was missing.  Whoever was in Pilica were killed, perhaps one, two, or
three people including myself escaped, but all the others were killed and
their remains are still in mass graves.
Q.   And Malkic died right next to you where?
A.   In Pilica at Bradanj [as interpreted] where the execution site
was.  We all had our hands tied.  We hadn't eaten for four days.  We were
half dead.  We couldn't resist even if we wanted to, unarmed as we were
and with our hands tied.
Q.   The record reflects the name -- it's -- well, the record reflects
"Pilica at Bradanj."  Could you just repeat so the record is clear where
Malkic was killed?
A.   In Pilica at Branjevo farm, the one-time farm at Branjevo, that's
where the executions were and that's where I escaped from.
Q.   Thank you, Witness.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President, that concludes my direct
examination.  I have no further questions.
Q.   Thank you very much, Mr. Witness.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Vanderpuye.
Witness, now the accused has the possibility, these are the
rules, to put some questions --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  -- to you during the cross-examination.
Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.  I would
appeal to you to tell the Prosecution that this is a 92 ter testimony and
that the statements that were provided in the -- and testimony in the
Popovic case should not be repeated here.  But if they want to take my
statement, or rather, what we heard now, then perhaps they should just
either put away this 92 ter statement or -- and use the testimony that we
heard here today or else just accept the 92 ter and then follow those
procedures.  But in this manner, the way it's been done, and then we go
from closed into open session and the other way around all the time, this
makes my job much more difficult.
And secondly, I would now like to put the question to the
witness.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just to clarify, the Prosecution has -- must have
the opportunity to put additional questions to a witness during the
examination-in-chief.  And now it's up to you to put questions to the
witness.  Please proceed.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
I apologise.  I just have to switch channels.  Thank you.  I've
just turned my mike closer.
I will address the witness as "sir," because he's under
protective measures.
Cross-examination by Mr. Tolimir:
Q.   [Interpretation] And I thank you, Witness, in advance, and I will
only ask you about things not so that you would change your statement,
but just to clarify what your testimony here actually related to.  So I
would appreciate it if you listen carefully to my questions because then
you will understand that it is not my intention in any way to question
your testimony.
A.   Well, there is no need for that.  I can repeat the same thing
five times.  I will always say the same things, and what's been written
down, that's how it was.
Q.   I will not put any questions to you about what you said in the
Popovic case, but rather, I will put a few questions to you in keeping
with the guide-lines provided by the Trial Chamber, and I will just
confront you with what you said in the Popovic case and the things that
you have to say here.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Could we now show the witness
1D00006.  Do we have it before us on the monitors?
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   This is your statement to the Prosecution on the 25th of May,
1996.  On page 2, in the third paragraph of your statement to the
Prosecutor you said:
"We were expecting air raids ..."
A.   Yes, we did.
Q.   "After we tried to resist, our army fled through the woods ..."
A.   Yes.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just a moment.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I just wanted to make
sure we were not broadcasting --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  We are not broadcasting --
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  -- outside this -- the screen will not be
broadcasted outside of the courtroom.  I want -- just wanted to state
that so that everybody can be sure nobody outside of this courtroom can
see the personal details.  Thank you very much.
Please carry on.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I apologise.  I did not hear the
President's words because my headset was off.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just carry on.  It's fine.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   You said in that statement:
"We expected some air-raids after the attempts of our army to
mount resistance."
Now, my question to you is:  Did you expect air-raids as help to
the Muslim armed forces and who was it who told you that there would be
an intervention?  Who was spreading those rumours?
A.   You're asking me?  I heard that from UNPROFOR and for -- had
there been air-raids, that would have been better both for you and for us
because all these people wouldn't have been killed and maybe you too, in
that case, wouldn't have been here before this court, and we would all
have been happier.
Q.   Thank you.  I would also like to ask you this.  You said that
your army fled through the woods; correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Was it realistic to have the army in the Srebrenica area because
that was a protected area, yes or no?
A.   Well, yes.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   Well, the foreigners couldn't do anything.  There weren't enough
of them, so we had at least to stand guard.  How was it possible that
they should reach the mountaintop from Sase to -- at Vidikovac?  So we
had to have some guards posted, we had to have some security there.  And
still they managed to kill a woman and a horse, and they laid mines where
people from Srebrenica would walk.  And had they not found those mines
there would be many more people killed, but there were mine experts who
removed those land-mines.
Everything was -- everything came out.  The truth came out.
Nothing can be hidden.  And we have to find every single person who was
Bosniaand buried.  We will find.  It's -- a person will be
found.  All these people will be found someday, and yet they can't find
Mladic who is walking around and appearing in various towns, whereas on
the other hand it is possible to find dead people who are hidden and
under ground --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I'm very sorry to interrupt you, but I have to
stop you here.  The question was answered and please listen to the next
question.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   I would really like to ask you, sir, to answer my questions
without going into in-depth explanations.
Were your sons members of the 28th Division of the BH army?
A.   Yes, certainly they were.  You had to defend your people, your
mother, father, children.  If nothing else, he did not have a rifle.  I
know -- I want to tell you that.  He wasn't issued a rifle, but he had to
pull out a wounded -- and even if he had a rifle, he was there defending
to attack anybody,
Serbiacame to
Bosnia, the Muslims.  So where's the justice there and who allowed that
to happen?  What kind of law was it that allowed that to happen?  If I
were a criminal like you -- but God forbid that I have your souls, I
would just say, "Here I am, I'm guilty."  That's what I'd say.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Sir, I must interrupt you.  Please focus on the
question and try not to be too emotional.  Of course everybody
understands you, but just focus on the question and then you will be able
to answer the question.  Thank you very much.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Very well.  I'll do that.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   I'm not going to ask you anymore, then, about your sons, although
I did need to ask you that because of my next questions.  But as you
expounded, I won't ask you that anymore.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I'm sorry to interrupt Mr. Tolimir.  I just
wanted to be sure if we are in private session; and if we're not, if we
could go into private session for a moment.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Is there a need for that because of this
question?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I think so.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Yes.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] There's no need.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  For the sake of this procedure, I think we should
go to private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We're in public session, Your Honours.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
Mr. Tolimir, please carry on.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
The witness is right.  He said 11 hours.  It was me who said
11 kilometres.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   So thank you for putting me right on that score.  Now, since it's
a journey of 11 hours, tell me what kind of road it is, what the terrain
is like between Zepa and Srebrenica.  Thank you.
A.   Well, the terrain is a difficult terrain.  You can walk that
way -- some people rode on a horse.  Now, since it's a long way off, they
set up an ambush along the way and several -- and people were killed
en route.  Some were taken prisoner because they would set out and lose
their way and wander off into the Serb republic, and then they would be
captured there.  So that's what happened too.  So it was difficult
walking along this terrain and gorge.
Q.   Thank you.  I'm satisfied with your answer.  Now, can you tell me
whether everybody going from Srebrenica to Zepa, did they need to receive
a permit from the BH army since the BH army forbade people to leave
Srebrenica?  Thank you.
A.   Well, no.  If you had to go and fetch food, you had to go.  You
couldn't ask permission for every single little thing.  You had to go,
you had to leave.  Now, they prohibited this to prevent people fleeing to
Tuzlafurther on, to the shelters there.  They didn't give permission for
that, but people didn't ask for permission.  Those who could went.
Q.   Thank you.  You also said here that one of your sons dug trenches
over there?
A.   Yes, that's right.
Q.   Was that a condition, that they had to dig trenches in order to
be given food; or did he do that on some other grounds, basis?
A.   Well, he dug for food.  He would get 5 or 6 kilos of flour,
that's what they were giving out, and he was a BH army member there.  And
he used it for food and the trenches needed to be dug, so that's what
happened.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, in Srebrenica was it the practice that if you
carried out certain military activities you would be given food in
return?
A.   I don't know that.  I can't say.  People did what they could, as
best they could.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   We wouldn't have any salt for two months.  How can you eat the
beans without any salt?  Or how could you make soup without a grain of
salt?
Q.   Thank you.  I'm satisfied with that answer.  Now, could you tell
us about the humanitarian aid.  You told us that the humanitarian aid
which went to Srebrenica was stopped at Bratunac and that the Serbs took
what they needed and didn't give you the aid.  What grounds do you have
for saying that and do you have proof and evidence for that?
A.   Yes, because they would come and say, "12 trucks have arrived,
12 trucks arrived in Bratunac."  And then you took a look and it was only
eight trucks, or ten trucks, or six trucks, which means that they stopped
them down there, took what they wanted and what they needed and the more
important things, and the rest they'd send on, what they didn't need.
And of course they needed flour and they needed salt.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, these trucks, was it an international
organisation who drove them and transported the goods and did they tell
you that or did people from the BH army tell you that?
A.   They were Russian trucks that brought in the food, sometimes some
other ones, but mostly Russian, depending on what organisation was
transporting the food.
Q.   Thank you.  I'm asking you that because the person
transporting -- carrying food will not allow anybody else to take the
food.  If it is some military equipment, it can be returned.  So that's
why I'm asking you whether you explained about that or whether what you
say is something you assume.
A.   Well, you know that they didn't allow the convoy to pass and come
to Srebrenica for a long time.  You know that, don't you?  That's why
they made air-drops and so on.  You know about that.
Q.   Thank you.  I think that the parachute operation was used because
other military equipment was needed and they couldn't do that by road.
So there were these parachute operations dropping military equipment too,
but that's not relevant for the moment.
A.   Military equipment, well, there was military equipment in the
pallets, so -- but there wasn't any of that.  You would say, "Well,
there's no weapons."  Well, there were weapons.  They say there were
weapons.  No, there were no weapons.  You needed to reinforce your
stomach -- for -- that's what you needed reinforcements.  Flour and salt,
that's the kind of reinforcement you needed, not weapons.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   And the fact that we went hungry over there, that didn't matter,
did it?
Q.   Well, we'll deal with the number of weapons and amount of weapons
with another witness.  I'm satisfied with your answer.  I'd now like to
move on to another area and ask you the following.  In your statement
here today you said that you were able to defend the attacks launched
joined in the
attack.  Could you explain to us in what way and how can you prove and
Serbiabecame involved in these attacks on Srebrenica because
in all the trials and
A.   Well, you've heard of Seselj.  You know him very well.  You know
him better than I do, I'm sure, and you know Arkan as well.  Well, I was
in Zvornik, in Karakaj.  Arkan's men, the Red Berets, are they Arkan's
men?  Yes, they are.  So how come Momcilo Perisic was there?  Means he
Serbiato kill the Muslims in
on one point.  The politics and policy pursued by Milosevic and Karadzic,
it didn't bring any good to the Serbs either, and you are well aware of
that.  He didn't bring any good to the Muslims or the Serbs or Croats,
but not the Serbs either.  They didn't reap any benefit from that.
Q.   Thank you.  I think you've answered my question.  Let me ask you
this:  Do you know that Milosevic, since you broached the subject, that
, and if
Bosnia
would never have broken out?
A.   Yes, he wanted them to remain and he wanted it to be a
Serbia, but there would have been a war anyway because there was
a Greater Serbia with Kosovo, and look at what happened in Kosovo.  They
expelled everybody, killed everybody, how come they did that?  And the
Bosnia.  Round up the Muslims, round up the Serbs
Bosniaand let's all go to
Sloveniaand hit on
Q.   Thank you.  The first part of your answer suffices and I'm
was asked to stay
within the FRY.
as a country
" --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I'm very sorry, I have to interrupt you both.
This is not the place for political debates about history, but please
focus on this witness and you should put questions related to this
witness.  And please take into consideration you should pause between
question and answer because of the -- for the benefit of the interpreters
and the record.  Thank you.  Please carry on.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, you're quite right.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  I was
just following on from what the witness gave as his answer.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   And now I'd like to move on to another area.  The witness said
here that he saw the bombing of certain places, I don't want to mention
the locations and names because he's a protected witness, but in
Srebrenica he spoke about some victims too.  Now, what I'm interested in
is this, was the attack -- did the attack come after the attack that the
Muslims launched against the surrounding villages, the villages in the
general area around Srebrenica; or, as in the case of Krajici [as
interpreted] when, on Christmas day, they killed thousands of men --
Krasnica [as interpreted], where the Muslims killed the Serbs.  So did he
know about these operations carried out by the Bosnian -- by the BH army,
which is what UNPROFOR knew about?
A.   There were Muslim villages and Serbian villages.  Where there
were Serbs, they shelled us and we shelled them, and the Serbs would come
in from the forests and kill people in the fields.  Why?  We didn't want
war.  We wanted to avoid war if at all possible.  Why was that?  Because
we'd been looted and pilfered during peace time.  All those weapons were
Bosniaand taken to
they were preparing a war.  And when the war broke out, the Serbs had the
weapons and were going to give you more weapons, and the Muslims don't
have any weapons to defend themselves.  How can they defend themselves?
Q.   Thank you.  I'm satisfied with your answer.  This is a different
trial.  It's not the Milosevic trial, so could you restrict your answers
to the military matters that I asked you about.  Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just a moment.
Yes, Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I just wanted to
point out that the record reflected that the question previously put to
the witness concerned, I believe, Kravica.  It's recorded inaccurately in
transcript at page 53, lines 22 and 23.  So maybe Mr. Tolimir wants to
make that clear that that's what the answer concerned and that's what the
question concerned so that it's clear on the record.  That's all.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
Mr. Tolimir, carry on, please.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.  I don't know what it
says in the transcript.
But on the 7th of January, when it was Orthodox Christmas,
70 people were killed there.  If you're satisfied, that would be my
answer.  Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  You must not give answers.  You are in the
position to put questions to the witness, Mr. Tolimir.  Please carry on
answering -- putting questions to the witness.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   I was asking the witness whether there was an attack on the zone
after that so many people were killed in Kravica.  I didn't ask him
whether he knew that they had been killed, but whether following the
killing of those people on the 7th of January, which was Christmas,
whether he knew about the attack that followed.
A.   Well, let me tell you I know something about that, not much.
Yes, it was on the 7th of January.  Is that right, was it Christmas day,
the 7th of January, Orthodox Christmas?
Q.   Yes, that's right.
A.   And how many people were killed?  I don't think it was that many.
I would say there were about 50.  That was the figure that was bandied
.  He was there.  He was
now.  But
yes, it did happen and Naser was there.  Naser was at the Tribunal too.
Q.   Thank you.  I'm satisfied with your answer and the information
you gave me.  Now, you can see whether Naser was found guilty or not.
That's not up to me to say.  You can check that out.
A.   He was for a time, but -- he was imprisoned for a time but not
for a long time.
Q.   I'm sure you'll understand why I'm withholding any comment on
that subject --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I'm sorry --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] If you look at Naser, well --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I must stop you here.  I'm not sure if it is
appropriate to mention this name.  Could there be a problem,
Mr. Vanderpuye?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.  There doesn't appear
to be a problem.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Okay.
Then please carry on, Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  It
wasn't my intention to name him.  It was the witness who mentioned it.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   Now I'd like to tackle a different area, not to deal with the
conflict in Srebrenica, but let me ask him this.  Can he remember on what
day it was that he was taken in a truck to Batkovic with the other
people, as he said, and I'll remind him of his statement and the place he
says that.
A.   So you want some information, do you, about the Batkovic camp.  I
didn't complain about anybody.
Q.   I don't need any information.  Thank you very much.  All the
information I need is the information that the Tribunal needs and this
Trial Chamber needs for these proceedings.  I don't want to change your
statement in any way.  I'm not going to ask you for any particular
information.  All I want to know is:  What day was it when you left the
general region - and you said that on page 6 of your statement, lines 23
to 30 - you said that you went from Karakaj towards Batkovici and that
you were exchanged later on.
A.   It was the 26th, if you want to know.
Q.   Thank you.  And now I'm interested in knowing -- well, I'm
interested in knowing the date.  And did you capture the same -- did the
same Serb forces capture you, as in Srebrenica and Potocari, or was it a
different army, other soldiers?
A.   Well, there were different armies there, Bosnian, Serbian, and so
on.  I didn't go around looking at who was who and which armies these
were, but I know that the -- that Arkan's men were in Karakaj.  They had
those red berets and camouflage uniforms.
Q.   Thank you.  Did they take you to Batkovici?
A.   No, not them.  I don't know.  There was a truck, a 1-tonne truck
and there was the Red Cross there.  We were registered.  I was in
Batkovici and I can't really claim that I was beaten there.  I wasn't
beaten there.  What I would like to say is I was there, I wasn't beaten,
my bones and my soul remained whole.
Q.   Thank you.  I just wanted this information because you mentioned
that you saw different uniforms there, but this answer suffices.
Now tell me, please, were you -- when you were in Batkovici, were
you there put up in the same quarters where the other people who were
brought on the trucks from Srebrenica or some other place?  Were you in
the same rooms?
A.   We were in the same room.  We were all there.  It was a big farm,
a stable, where we were accommodated.  And all of us who were still
around were there.  There were also people who had been captured some six
months before that, and the others were killed.  They were all killed in
Branjevo.
Q.   Thank you.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I have no further questions for
this witness.
MR. TOLIMIR: [Interpretation]
Q.   I thank you, Witness, for your answers.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] And I thank the Trial Chamber for
allowing me to put these questions.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.
Mr. Vanderpuye, is there re-examination?
MR. VANDERPUYE:  No, Mr. President, there is no re-examination.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
The Hague
again, that you were able to answer the questions of the parties, and you
are now free to return to your normal activities.  The Court Officer will
assist you and show you out, and thank you again on behalf of the whole
Chamber.  Thank you very much.  And we wish you all the best for the
future.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I thank you for inviting me to
testify here, and whenever you need me in the future, as long as my
health -- as long as I'm in good health, I will try and fight for justice
and for the truth.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.  Best wishes for you.
[The witness withdrew]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Vanderpuye, we have -- I think today we don't
need to have the second break.  If you want to use the time until
five minutes past 6.00, you can do that.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Yes, Mr. President.  That would be -- I would be
the one managing the playing of the video, which we would offer to do
now.  It is 65 ter 1406, and the index of the videos used to compile it
is 1407.  It's -- sorry, that's the transcript that goes along with the
video.  No translation is necessary.  I believe most of it is subtitled
and it is in the Serbian language mostly.  And I think it speaks for
itself.  I can sometimes -- if there's anything that comes up about
identifying a person in it, I can, of course, offer what the evidence
will prove or a very simple explanation.  But I think it would just be
good for the Court just to see this.  This is video footage shot by the
people involved and compiled as the most relevant material that the
Prosecution thought to tell part of the story that you have been hearing
about.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  You said the people involved.  Can you clarify
this a little bit.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Yes.  The -- it begins with the military approach
by the VRS from the south of the enclave in an area called Zeleni Jadar,
moving down the road, going towards Srebrenica.  The video was shot by
VRS cameramen or journalists that were with them, as you can tell from
the close-up shots.  You will see pictures of General Mladic; the
commander of the Zvornik Brigade, Vinko Pandurevic; others who you will
some come to know very well.  And then it goes into Srebrenica, where
general -- well, we see some Muslim footage, where a Muslim is shooting
from his house and we see the many people in the street and the situation
going on with the Muslims, where there's a Muslim mortar position that's
firing back towards the Serb positions.  And then on the 11th, it shows
General Mladic and his officers marching through Srebrenica --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Excuse me, Mr. McCloskey.  You must not explain
the whole footage now.  I just wanted to know something about the source,
where it comes from, and of course, we are interested to know if you are
going to move for receiving this footage as evidence.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Absolutely, yes.  The timing of that is -- can be
done at any time.  It doesn't need to come in now.  There will be many
people that talk about it, and -- but again, it's a self-explanatory
historical footage that -- the source of the videos are in 65 ter 1451.
It will have a list of VRS, Serb TV, or combat camera, or Muslim footage,
and -- in the record of witnesses and from the 65 ter list and briefs,
that material is in there and will provide more than an adequate
authentication and foundation for this to come into evidence.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  This would be very helpful.  We have only
three-quarters of an hour left.  Is that enough?
MR. McCLOSKEY:  I think it is.  The first -- there is a first
segment that is 36 minutes.  I believe it's mostly July 10th and 11th.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Let's start with that.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  If you
allow this footage to be shown here, in view of what I said yesterday,
there is no need, then, for Mr. McCloskey to provide his comments,
precisely for the reasons that I mentioned yesterday.  I don't want to go
into that again and waste our time here.  Let the footage speak for
itself.  We don't need Mr. McCloskey's comments, especially as he said
that there would be witnesses who would testify to this.  Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you for that, Mr. Tolimir.  You realise
that I stopped Mr. McCloskey to explain the whole footage.  To see this
footage doesn't mean that we have already decided about the value and if
it will be received as an exhibit; that will be done later.
Just a moment.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  We start with the first footage of 36 minutes.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  To make it very clear, this is not a decision
about admission as an exhibit.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Mr. President --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Vanderpuye.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  I just wanted to ask your leave if I may be
excused at this moment.  I need to follow up on some other matters, with
the leave of the Court if that's all right.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Yes.
MR. VANDERPUYE:  Thank you, Mr. President.
[Video-clip played]
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Mr. President, I think that's probably a good
place to stop.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.  I think there's nothing to
discuss at the moment.
That's it for today.  We have to adjourn, and we will resume next
week on Thursday in the morning, 9.00, in this courtroom.
We adjourn.
.57 p.m.,
to be reconvened on Thursday, the 18th day of
.00 a.m.
