25 April 2002
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
--- Upon commencing at 2.22 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good afternoon.  The case be called, please.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good afternoon, Your Honours.  This is Case Number
IT-97-24-T, the Prosecutor versus Milomir Stakic.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  And the appearances, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Nicholas Koumjian with Ruth Karper, case manager,
for the Prosecution.  Good afternoon.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  For the Defence?
MR. LUKIC:  Good afternoon, Your Honours.  Branko Lukic and Mr.
John Ostojic for the Defence.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you, Dr. Lukic.  Before we turn today to
the testimony of our witness, I have to address some administrative
matters.  Unfortunately, and I have to apologise for this, there are
issues to be resolved with priority tomorrow in the morning.  And
therefore, we have to come back to that what was planned, to have the
hearing in the afternoon but in order to have the necessary time, if you
don't have severe objections, I would like to start at half past 1.00, and
then proceed until 5.00.  I can't see any objections at this point.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Just to put the Trial Chamber on notice, the second
witness -- actually both the witness today and the one we anticipate for
tomorrow have told us that they have severe problems staying next week, so
we hope to complete them both in the next two days.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I do the same.  And as I understood, the
decision on the admission of parts of our so-called SK document are not
yet right and not yet finished.  So in order to not let the witnesses wait
too long, we should continue with Dr. Donia next Wednesday.  Right?  No
problem.  Fine.
And this brings me to another serious question, and I think it's
better to address it frankly in the courtroom.  This is an International
Tribunal, and of course we all are socialised with and under different
rules. For example, one Defence counsel normally would never address a
judge ex parte, and the other one would be called a bad Defence counsel in
his own country having not a good contact to the Judges.  Therefore, we
have to find a kind of balance, and this balance will be the following:
That it's on the record that for the expeditiousness of the proceedings,
and when it's really necessary and urgent, the participants of this trial
can, of course, contact me directly by phone or coming to my office.
There should be no problem at all.  I will set the other party on notice
of what has happened immediately.  This is how things stand.  And of
course, we need the -- we all need the assistance of legal officers, and
therefore it shouldn't be any problem that the legal officers contact the
one and the other party separately.  I think the main issue is all the
parties are informed immediately about what's happened and to avoid any
kind of misunderstanding that there is a discussion with one party not
with the other and so on.  But this should be clear from the beginning.
Having said this, I want to inform, especially the Defence, that I
got a phone call from Mr. Cayley this morning telling me that for urgent
reasons, he would not be able to attend the hearing this afternoon.  And
he made the suggestion I brought to you to continue with Dr. Donia next
witness.
Are there any objections to proceed in this way also in the
future?  I can see this is not the case.
In order to prepare for the next days, I had a look on the list
given to us from the Office of the Prosecutor yesterday on the envisaged
witnesses.  The first and main concern is there is a new witness on the
list, and number 88 under 65 ter.  During the pretrial, we didn't have
this witness, and therefore I'm wondering whether this witness can really
have a 65 ter number.  But this is more a technical question.  We know all
about -- yeah, we can say -- we can address the name in public?  Do you
want to have it --
MR. KOUMJIAN:  If no one objects I prefer in private session.  To
be honest, I'm not quite sure about some matters regarding that, and I
think it would be safer in private session.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Objections?
MR. LUKIC:  We have no objections.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then we continue in private session.
[Private session]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
Pages 2190-2203 – redacted – private session.
[redacted]
[Open session]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Do you need some time for the preparation of
this technical equipment?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I believe it's done already, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then the witness may be called in.
Just before the witness comes in, pseudonym was requested.  Then
the witness should be addressed:  "Witness B."
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I would have -- early in the testimony, have asked
the witness a few details regarding his current whereabouts and
information such as his date of birth.  We could begin in private session,
if the Court wants, and I can go through those details.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Objections?  No objections.
When the witness is brought in, immediately after the declaration,
we'll go in private session.  The witness can be brought in.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good afternoon, Witness.  Can you hear me?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  First of all, sorry, but I have to address you
in this impolite manner as Witness B only, but this is a protective
measure in your interest.  And therefore, please understand this.
Could the solemn declaration be taken now.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will speak
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  Please be seated.
WITNESS: WITNESS B
[Witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  We start in private session.
[Private session]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[Open session]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  It is confirmed.  You may proceed.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Sir, can you tell us what your ethnicity is?
A.   I'm a Bosniak.
Q.   Do you practice a religion now?
A.   No, no.
Q.   Do you consider yourself a Muslim?
A.   Yes.
Q.   In 1991, what was your occupation?
A.   I was a car-body mechanic.
Q.   Were you active in politics or a member of any political party?
A.   No.  I was a member of the League of Communists at that time,
until, maybe, 1994 approximately.
Q.   Did you as part of your youth perform military service and were
you in 1991 a member of the reserve police?
A.   I served my military term in 1983, and after the army, I was a
member of the police reserves in Prijedor.
Q.   Do you recall the date of the 30th of April, 1992?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What do you remember about that day?  Tell us what you recall.
A.   I remember the 30th of April, Serb forces -- how shall I say it --
took power forcibly in Prijedor, and they took control of the police, the
municipal bodies, and so on.
Q.   Please tell us what your own experience was that day.  What do you
remember happening, seeing, and hearing?
A.   I didn't see anything in particular, simply because my house is
quite close to the town.  In the morning, I was woken up first by my
father.  And when we went out, he was in a panic, so when we went outside
and looked, I saw, because there's a hotel close to my house, I saw that
there were Serb flags already flying at the hotel.  Then, we turned on the
radio, the Radio Prijedor station, and that's when we found out exactly
what happened.
Q.   After you heard that announcement, did you see that day, or in
subsequent days, men in uniforms, armed men in uniforms, on the streets of
Prijedor?
A.   From that day on, Prijedor was full of armed people.
Q.   Were there any checkpoints near your house?
A.   The closest checkpoint was on the bridge.
Q.   And would that bridge be a bridge between your neighbourhood and
the town of Prijedor?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, I would like to ask you some questions about what life was
like after the takeover.  Did the takeover affect your ability to go and
move around the city of Prijedor?
A.   Yes, yes, it did.
Q.   Can you describe what it was that made you reluctant to move
around Prijedor, or unable to.
A.   The first step was that we had to show our ID when we crossed the
bridge, when we wanted to go into town.  That was the only way to get into
town for us.
Q.   Did you hear announcements on the radio giving orders during this
time after the takeover?
A.   Yes.  We heard them.  There were plenty of them, and yes, we did
hear them.
Q.   Can you describe what kind of orders were given to the population
over the radio.
A.   First of all, that day, we heard an announcement.  It was a decree
by the new authorities that they had taken over because the old
authorities were not functioning.  It couldn't go on any more like that.
And more or less, the proclamation was something to that effect, that they
had taken over power in order to have a better life in our municipality.
Q.   When you say "they had taken over power", was it identified who
was now the power in Prijedor?
A.   Yes.  Yes.  It was the Serb authorities.
Q.   Was it clear in these orders who among the -- when you say the
Serb authorities, was there an institution or body that was named as the
supreme authority?
A.   Yes, at that time there was already talk about a Crisis Staff.  I
know that the Crisis Staff took power.  That's what they started to call
themselves.
Q.   Was there a curfew ordered?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you hear any orders for the surrender of weapons?
A.   Yes, we did hear about that.  But I don't know when.  In any case,
it was after the 30th of April when the proclamation started.  And one of
those proclamations was to surrender the weapons.  But I don't know how
long it was after this event.
Q.   Do you recall these orders for the surrender of weapons?  Were
they directed to all the citizens of Prijedor or were they directed to
particular citizens or particular areas?
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
A.   It basically was for all citizens of Prijedor, non-Serb citizens,
meaning Muslims, Croats, and others.
Q.   Were the orders for surrender directed to the entire municipality,
or were they directed to particular neighbourhoods, over the course of
various periods of time?
A.   In the beginning -- well, this applied to the territory of the
entire municipality.  Later, the proclamations applied to certain parts or
certain areas of the town and various units.
Q.   Did you hear anything on the media, the radio- or I don't know if
you were able to watch TV or not- anything regarding that you considered
propaganda?
A.   From that day on, everything was propaganda, both on the radio and
on television.
Q.   Can you give the Judges some examples of things you recall hearing
that you considered were inflammatory?
A.   Yes.  In any case, for example, they used terms such as
"mujahedin," "Ustashas," and other derogative names.  They didn't call us
any more by our proper names; they called us Green Berets and so on and so
forth.
Q.   By the way, what did you do?  Did you have a weapon as a member of
the reserve police?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What did you do with your weapon?
A.   I returned it to the police station.
Q.   If you were a Serb at that time living in Prijedor and listening
to go the media that was going on at that time, how would you have felt
about your non-Serb neighbours?
A.   Well, after all that I had seen on TV before and after the camp,
at that time I wasn't able to watch television and listen to the radio.
After all of my troubles, perhaps if I had been a Serb and had seen a
Croat or a Muslim on the street, I would have shot him, too.  I don't
know.
Q.   You're saying that based upon the propaganda that was on the media
at that time -- that was in the media?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you recall the 30th of May, 1992?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Were you home that morning, and if so, can you tell us what you
remember?
A.   On the 30th of May, people used different names to describe it,
but it was the Muslim attack on Prijedor, a group of armed Muslims and
Croats on that day attacked Prijedor.
Q.   What was your experience?  What did you see, hear, and experience?
A.   I was woken up very early in the morning by blasts, explosions. We
got up.  And I saw that the explosions were coming from the direction of
the town.  And close to the hotel, I could see that after the explosion, I
could see black smoke rising.
Q.   Did you hear shooting for some period of time that morning?
A.   Yes, you could hear shooting.
Q.   From where you lived, were you able to see Stari Grad?
A.   Yes.  It was right across the River Sana, and I could see it very
well.
Q.   After the attack was over, did you hear any announcements on the
radio regarding anyone marking their house?
A.   Yes.  That day, since the only sort of -- source of information,
the only way we could find out approximately what was going on was to
listen to Radio Prijedor, because we couldn't listen to anything else.  So
that day, in the course of that day, there was an order that all non-Serbs
had to put up white flags on their houses.  And this is what I also did.
Q.   Was it explained where you got a white flag?  What did people use
for a white flag?
A.   Anything white from the house, a sheet, any fabric, any object
from the house.
Q.   Did life change after the Muslim attack?
A.   Yes, yes, drastically.
Q.   Can you describe what life was like living in Prijedor, after that
day?
A.   That day, the concentration camps were opened.  Already on that
day, certain parts of town had all the men -- all the male population from
those parts of town transferred to the Omarska camp.  My wife's brother
also was taken away.  So after that day, there were daily arrests and
people were being taken to camps.
Q.   Did you see Stari Grad?  You mentioned you can see Stari Grad from
your house.  Did you see any damage to Stari Grad after that day?
A.   That same day, I saw one of the first buildings to burn, the one
that you could see most clearly.  And that was the old mosque in the Stari
Grad, in the old part of town.
Q.   Now, we're going to come to some of your experiences in the camps.
Did you return, though, to your house near Stari Grad before leaving
Prijedor?
A.   Yes, I was released from the camp, and I went home.
Q.   Was that in August of 1992?
A.   Yes.
Q.   At that time, did you see Stari Grad, in August of 1992?
A.   I saw the area where Stari Grad was, because Stari Grad wasn't
there any more.  It was the site of it, but now it was a green -- a grassy
area, completely cleared, no buildings.  And in the middle, there was only
one restaurant which was there before the war.  It was called Lovac, "the
hunter," and it was the property of the hunters' association, hunting
society, in Prijedor.  And then a little bit further away from the Lovac,
there was one small house.  So these were the only two buildings standing
in the Stari Grad.
Q.   Do you know who was living in that house in August of 1992, the
ethnicity of that person?
A.   Until August 1992, it was the property of a Muslim man, that house
that remained.
Q.   And then what happened?
A.   Not far from that house, there was another house, and I think that
that was the only Serb who was living in Stari Grad.  And I heard -- I
didn't see it myself -- that he wouldn't let them demolish that house
because he demolished his own house because this other house was in a
better condition.  So he moved into that other house.
Q.   You mentioned people being arrested and taken to Omarska and
Keraterm.  When do you recall first hearing about the Omarska and Keraterm
camps?
A.   Practically that same day.  We heard about it very quickly, that
people were taken away.  We heard that on that same day.  And then shortly
after we found out where they were, at which location.
Q.   Do you recall an incident that happened at Hambarine?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Hambarine.  What did you recall hearing on the radio about the
incident at Hambarine?
A.   I heard that there was an incident at Hambarine at a checkpoint
and that three or four Serb soldiers were killed there.  And after that,
again, we heard an ultimatum over Radio Prijedor that the population of
Hambarine had to hand over a certain person because of that incident, as
the main culprit for that incident.
Q.   Now, at that time did you go to an area near Hambarine, another
village in the area?
A.   Yes.  The next day, I went to Rizvanovici, which is more or less
in the same position.  It's a village close to Hambarine.
Q.   Did Rizvanovici and Hambarine constitute two of about four Muslim
villages that were known in this general area as the "Brdo" area?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   When you were in Rizvanovici, what did you hear after going there?
What happened?
A.   I heard -- I'm sorry, you mean did I hear how the incident came
about or...?
Q.   Well, let's go -- were you aware of an attack?  Tell us about the
attack.
A.   When I went up there, I heard from the local population how this
incident happened.  There was a checkpoint set up there by Muslims.  Since
the Prijedor-Ljubija Road passed through Hambarine, so there were always
unfamiliar armed people in vehicles passing through.  And since they
simply felt that this wasn't all right, they began to check the vehicles
that were passing through there.  And at one such check, they say that
there were -- they said that there were five armed Serb soldiers in one
vehicle.  And when they wanted to check their IDs, the Serbs wouldn't
allow that, and they started firing from the vehicle.  They returned fire,
and we heard information that four were killed and one person was captured
there.
Q.   What was the response of the authorities after that incident?
A.   Well, they immediately demanded that a certain man be handed over,
as I've already said.  And that the population of Hambarine -- in fact,
the population of the entire Brdo -- surrender whatever weapons they had.
Q.   Just to be clear, the person that they demanded surrender is Mr.
Aliskovic.  Is that correct?
A.   Aliskovic, yes.  The first name is Aziz.
Q.   Did the people in the Brdo region surrender their weapons, any or
all of the people surrender their weapons?
A.   Not that day.
Q.   What happened?
A.   Then Serb forces started shelling Brdo.
Q.   How did you find out about the shelling?
A.   Well, I was up there myself.
Q.   What did you see or hear?
A.   There was not much you could see, but shells were falling all
around us.  We were hiding in a basement, and we could hear the shells. We
saw a couple of locations where they fell.
Q.   What did you do after the -- when the shelling slowed down?
A.   In the intervals between rounds of shelling, we found cases and
empty shell cartridges scattered about the place.
Q.   Could you tell from -- did you have any idea what kind of weapons
were being used?
A.   Well, from our earlier experience from the JNA, and there were
several of us who had done our military duty, we concluded that those were
tanks and mortars doing the shelling, although we couldn't see them.
Q.   The next day, did you go back to your neighbourhood near Prijedor
town, through Biscani?
A.   Yes, I returned home.
Q.   Why did you go up to -- first of all, did you take part in any of
the fighting or any fighting in the Brdo area?
A.   No, no, I didn't.
Q.   Were you ever a member of any militia or armed resistance group?
A.   No.  No.
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
Q.   Why did you leave your neighbourhood and go to Rizvanovici?
A.   Simply because my house was surrounded by Serb homes, and my
neighbours were Serbs.  And I thought I would feel more comfortable and
safer up there.
Q.   Did you have family in Rizvanovici?
A.   Yes, because that's the place where we originally come from.
Q.   Were you arrested?
A.   Yes, in the month of June.
Q.   Would it be correct to say, then, that Hambarine was in the end of
April -- excuse me, around the end of May, around the 25th of May, and you
were in your neighbourhood in Prijedor town until the 18th of June?
A.   Yes, later when I returned from Rizvanovici, I was at home all the
time.
Q.   Why did you stay at home all the time?
A.   Because I didn't know where to go.
Q.   Where you afraid to travel around Prijedor?
A.   It was impossible to travel anywhere.
Q.   Did you ever see any houses searched before your arrest?  Before
the day of your arrest?
A.   No, no, I didn't.
Q.   How about on the day of your arrest?  Tell us what happened that
day.  And again, this is the 18th of June.
A.   Well, that morning when we woke up, our street was already
encircled by armed men from Tukovi.  The people from Tukovi were our
neighbours, and they had already encircled our street.  And from the
direction of Prijedor, military police were walking along the streets,
searching our houses.
Q.   What were your Serb neighbours doing?
A.   They surrounded our street, probably to prevent us from running
away through our backyards and fields.
Q.   Were the houses searched thoroughly, if you could tell?  Or what
actually happened in the search, if you were able to observe that?
A.   Well, I was able to observe the search of my own home.  It was
nothing special.  They didn't search it very thoroughly.  They just walked
in, looked inside the closets, and then walked out.
Q.   What happened to your family that day?  Were you all kept
together, or what happened?
A.   After they had searched the houses and went on to continue
searching the houses of our neighbours, they told all of us to get out.
They allowed my father to stay in, while myself and my two brothers were
told to get out into the road and wait there.
Q.   Were there other men with you, and approximately how many were
there with you?
A.   In total, there were 20 to 25 men who were found at home that day
in our street.
Q.   Was anybody beaten?
A.   Yes, Stipo Gavranovic.
Q.   Who beat him, and can you describe briefly the beating?
A.   First they brought all the people from our neighbourhood to the
intersection of Djure Djakovica and another street.  We were waiting for
something.  We didn't know what.  And all around us were the mil -- it was
the military police.  Our neighbours were no longer there.  And close to
the place where we were sitting, some bricks and pallets were lying.  And
Stipo sat down on to one of those bricks.  And then one military policeman
started to beat him.  And even outside his own house earlier on, he was
also beaten, but I didn't see that.
Q.   Were you and the other men taken away?
A.   Yes.  After a rather long wait, a bus came.  We were loaded on to
that bus and transported to Keraterm.
Q.   Did you recognise the bus as coming from a public -- excuse me,
coming from a company in Prijedor?
A.   Yes.  The bus belonged to the Autotransport company.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, I'm coming now to the experience in
the camp.  If you would like to take a break, this would be an appropriate
time.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  The trial stays adjourned.  We
resume 4.15.
--- Recess taken at 3.45 p.m.
--- On resuming at 4.19 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Let us first of all come back to the motion of
the Defence.  I have to announce the following decision of the Chamber:
The Defence's motion on providing all former transcripts of a witness is
dismissed.  First of all, to a certain extent, it's to apply Rule 66 to 68
correspondingly.  And the Trial Chamber believes that there is nothing
special with former transcripts opposed, for example, to other former
statements of a person, be it in public or not public.  We have to decide
on the individual criminal responsibility of Dr. Stakic on the basis and
in the limits of the fourth [Realtime transcript read in error"first"]
amended indictment.  As it is true for all other statements, the special
relevance for the case before us must be demonstrated, also when it's on
the question of former transcripts.  Of course, additionally, it has to be
pointed out that there are two exceptions:  One, if one party wanted to
come back and make reference of a former transcript, this transcript has
to be made available for the other party and the Bench seven days prior to
the day of the hearing of the witness.
And additionally, it remains the duty of the Office of the
Prosecutor, whenever they identify exculpatory material in a former
transcript, this has to be disclosed in the same way to the Defence and to
the Bench.
May I ask whether there is already an opinion of the Defence on
the question of lineup of the envisaged witness.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Yes, Your Honour, there is an opinion.  And our
opinion is that respectfully we would ask that the Court order a lineup
for the particular witness that the Office of the Prosecution wishes to
call, I believe, tomorrow.  So we would ask that that lineup proceed --
next Friday, I'm sorry.  And that would be Witness under 65 ter Number 47,
in the calling order, Number 7, if I'm correct.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for this statement.  We will make a
decision tomorrow early that we can ask the Office of the Prosecutor to
provide the necessary -- let me just check what is laid down here.
For the record, please, probably I was misunderstood.  At
16.20.57, it's not the first but the fourth amended indictment.  Could
that please be corrected.  Thank you.
Mr. Koumjian.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  If I could just comment on the lineup, Your Honour,
I don't have any experience in conducting a lineup here, so I'm using, I'm
relying somewhat on my knowledge of my prior jurisdiction, but also my
understanding of the relationship between the Detention Unit and the
Office of the Prosecutor.  The Detention Unit is clearly separate and does
not come under the authority of the Office of the Prosecutor.  The Office
of the Prosecutor is prepared to provide the witness and ensure that he is
transported to the lineup, if the Court orders a lineup.  But the physical
arrangements, I think would have to be done by the Detention Unit
including finding the other individuals to stand in the lineup.  I don't
think the Defence would care for us to select them.  They should be
selected if the Court orders it by the Detention Unit.  I know it's going
to be a very difficult logistical operation.  The witness will be here by
Wednesday morning, so we can do it any time from Wednesday or Thursday, if
that's possible, day, morning, or night.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for those comments.  I believe we can
proceed now hearing Witness B.  May Witness B be brought in, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  And perhaps -- I don't know if Your Honour wants me
to speak now or later, but I would like to clarify that we indicated this
issue was coming up for the Court's benefit because the Court had
identified the issue in pretrial.  It's not our opinion that a lineup will
be particularly useful.  We believe this witness is a recognition witness
who has indicated he knows -- knew Dr. Stakic before.  I do not have
information about whether he has seen pictures of him since his arrest. We
also indicated in pretrial our position regarding the change in
appearance.  But I put before the Chamber the issue that there would be a
possible identification of Dr. Stakic in the camp by this witness.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.
Please, Witness B.
Please proceed.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Witness B, can you describe what you saw when the buses arrived at
the Keraterm camp.
A.   When we arrived at Keraterm, there was nobody outside in the
compound.  And since the bus had stopped and we had got out and were lined
up, we were able to see that there were people inside the rooms on the
premises.
Q.   How many rooms were there in the Keraterm camp?
A.   There were four rooms in the Keraterm camp.
Q.   Can you briefly describe to the Judges what that camp looked like
and what the rooms were like.
A.   Well, it used to be a big company, a big factory.  And in the back
where the camp was set up, there were premises which had been used for
storage before the war.  And the rooms were called 1, 2, and 3.  And the
numbers went from the Prijedor-Banja Luka Road.  Across the road was Room
Number 1, followed by Rooms 2, 3, and 4.  The biggest was Room Number 2.
And the smallest was Number 3.
Q.   How many prisoners were in the Keraterm camp at one time, would
you estimate?
A.   Well, at one point, in end June, we were ordered to make a list of
prisoners per room, including name, surname, father's name, and
occupation.  And according to that list, only in our room, Number 1, there
were about 320 persons, prisoners, while Room Number 2 contained 450.  In
late July, that number had considerably grown.  As for Rooms Number 3 and
4, I couldn't tell how many people there were at that moment, but they
were full.
Q.   So based upon the size of those rooms in comparisons to Rooms 1
and 2 where you said there were approximately 750 in total in Rooms 1 and
2, how many would you estimate there would be in the camp in total?
A.   At that time, in late June, there were over 1200.
Q.   Did prisoners arrive at the camp often?  Would you say it was on a
weekly basis, a daily basis, or did they just come a few times while you
were in the camp?
A.   There was no rule governing new arrivals.  People were brought in
every day in smaller or greater numbers.  But every day, somebody would be
brought in.  Somebody would be taken away.
Q.   So it's clear, you were brought to the camp on June 18th.  What
day did you leave the camp?
A.   Yes.  Around the 5th of August.  I think it was the 5th of August
when we got out.
Q.   Was that the day the camp was closed?
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
A.   Yes.
Q.   Who were the guards in the camp?  Could you tell whether they were
police or army, and did you recognise any of them?  Without naming them,
did you recognise any of them from Prijedor?
A.   Yes, I knew many people.  And the force in question was the
reserve police.  Whether they belonged to Prijedor or Cirkin Polje or some
other municipality, I don't know.  All I know is they were reserve
policemen.
Q.   You mentioned Cirkin Polje.  Was Cirkin Polje an area or a
settlement within Prijedor municipality, or was that a separate
municipality?
A.   No, that belonged to the Prijedor municipality.
Q.   So what you're saying is you don't know which particular police
station within the municipality they belonged to, but they were part of
the Prijedor municipal reserve police.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes, yes.  Correct.
Q.   Was there any army around the camp that you observed?
A.   Yes.  On the other side of Keraterm, there were offices of the
military police.  They could be seen frequently in the vicinity of the
camp.  And the largest force that came to reinforce the guards' detail was
from the Territorial Defence, to reinforce, as I said, the team of guards.
But they came only to be there during the day and returned home every
evening.
Q.   You said -- I forget your exact words, but you talked about a
military headquarters.  Was that on the other side of the road directly
across from the camp?
A.   That was on the other side of the Prijedor-Banja Luka Road, not
within the perimeter.  They were housed on the premises of the Kozara
Putevi company.  It was some sort of military headquarters.  I don't know
what units were situated there.
Q.   Just to be clear, then, is that different from the military police
headquarters you talked about?
A.   No.  The military police were within the perimeter of Keraterm.
Q.   Can you describe the Judges the conditions that the prisoners
lived in in the Keraterm camp.  First, can you describe the space that you
had to live and sleep in.
A.   It was a large storage room.  We slept on pallets normally used
for the transport of goods.  Those are wooden pallets  where goods lie
before being loaded by forklifts onto trucks.  Many people slept on bare
concrete.  And, at the time when I arrived at the camp, the camp was
already well filled, so that we were placed near the door which had bars
on it like a prison.
Q.   How much space did you have between you and the persons lying next
to you?
A.   There was no space in between people.  People lay directly next to
each other.
Q.   At one point, did it become necessary where you were sleeping for
people to put parts of their bodies on top of the parts of the bodies of
the person next to them?
A.   Yes.  Specifically in the spot where I slept, I have to say that
we lay lined as sardines with our heads next to the wall.  And the inmates
who came later also slept very close to us, but their heads were next to
the bars.  So in the evening, when we lay down to sleep, four or five of
us had our legs almost intermingled, intercrossed, forming a net.  And all
night, we shifted.  The person who had his legs under the legs of another
person lay like that as long as he could stand it, and then they would
sort of change places.  He would put his legs on top of the other person's
legs, because there was no other way you could take it all night.
Q.   Again, could you tell us how many people in your room
approximately?  You said you counted once.
A.   It was in June that we made those lists.  In fact, in late June,
the number was 320 at the time, and it continued growing steadily.
Q.   Using the dimensions of this room, could you give us an idea so we
can imagine the size of the room that you were in?  Was it as big as this
room, bigger, or smaller?  Can you describe it?
A.   It was larger than this, but not much larger.
Q.   Can you describe the food that you received.  How many meals a day
did you receive?
A.   We got one meal per day, and I don't think it's really necessary
to describe it, because there isn't much to describe.  Two thin slices of
bread and some sort of stew, mainly water with cabbage and perhaps a
couple of potatoes in it.  But we didn't get even that every day.  There
were days, when for reasons we ignored, the stew was never distributed,
and all we got were the slices of bread.
Q.   Did the families of prisoners bring food to the camp for the
prisoners?
A.   Well, yes, our families tried every day to get some food through
to us, also some clothes.  But they rarely succeeded.
Q.   How do you know that?  How do you know that people's families were
trying to bring food and other goods to prisoners that they did not
receive?
A.   Well, I saw it.  You could see it.  When they came, our fathers,
mothers, sisters, they had to pass by the camp.  They had to walk along.
And when we see them with bags containing food in their hand and return 20
minutes later empty-handed, it means that the food was taken from them
somewhere at the gate.  And then we would wait to see if it would come
through to us.  And sometimes they returned home carrying their bags with
them.
Q.   Well, how often would the prisoners receive the bags of food and
other goods left by their families?
A.   Well, they got it very rarely.  As for myself, I got food from my
family and from -- from my family only twice.  I mean, myself and the
other members of my family who were inside.
Q.   Do you know how often your family tried to bring food or other
clothes or goods for you?
A.   Almost every day, someone would come.  They would try every day,
and sometimes they would turn them back from the bridge.  Sometimes they
weren't even able to cross the bridge and enter town.  But practically
every day, somebody tried to.
Q.   Were the prisoners in the camp interrogated?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Were you interrogated?
A.   Yes, I was.
Q.   What kind of questions were you asked?
A.   The usual police questions, nothing special.  "Are you a member of
the party?"  "Do you have weapons?"  "Who is selling weapons?"  So at that
time, these questions were quite usual.  "Did you go out to vote?"  "Who
did you vote for?"  And so on.
Q.   Was anyone beaten in the camp?
A.   In the camp?  Yes, yes.
Q.   How often did that happen?
A.   This would happen every day.
Q.   Would it happen during the day, at night, or both?
A.   In the beginning, in the month of June and partly in July, it was
mostly at night.
Q.   What about later, just before the camp was closed?
A.   From approximately the 20th of July, when the people from Brdo
came, then there were no rules.  People were beaten night and day then.
Night and day.
Q.   Who were the people that were beating the prisoners?  Were they
guards or other people?
A.   There were no rules there.  Mostly the guards, but anybody could
come into the camp.
Q.   Did you see people in military uniforms come into the camp and
beat people, army uniforms?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you see civilians come into the camp, people in civilian
clothes, and beat and kill people?
A.   No, I didn't see anybody in civilian clothes.
Q.   Were people in your room beaten inside the room or were they
called out of the room?
A.   No, there was no beating inside the room, because the guards
didn't enter the rooms, except for individuals.  But they would call
people out, and the person who was called out had to go out of the cell.
Q.   Did people get called out of the room and not return?
A.   Yes.  Yes, they did.
Q.   How often did that happen in your room?
A.   This didn't happen very often in my room.  For those who were
called out, not to come back.
Q.   Do you have information about other rooms?
A.   Yes.  Because after the people were called out at night, then they
would open the door for us in the morning, for us to go to the toilet. And
the night before, if people were called out and when we would hear this
and the beatings, then those who would not come back to the rooms, meaning
those who were killed, were left approximately towards Room Number 4, next
to a container.  And then vehicles would come.  In the beginning, this was
some kind of utility services vehicle that would come, and that vehicle
would take away those bodies.
Q.   When you say "a utility service vehicle", can you describe it or
tell us a little bit more about it?  Was this something that was part of
the municipal service?
A.   It was a vehicle that was used to transport or for funeral
services, to transport bodies, even before the war.
Q.   Can you give us any estimate of how many bodies you, yourself,
saw, how many corpses, at the Keraterm camp?  And right now I'm not
talking about Room 3 incident, which we'll come to later.
A.   Besides those killed in Room 3, I saw at least five or six more.
Q.   Did you know someone named Dzemal Mesic?
A.   Yes.  That man died next to me in my cell, because he used to
sleep close to me.
Q.   Tell the Judges what happened the night that this man died.
A.   One of the guards called out "Dzemal Mesic" and told him to come
outside.  And he did.  And then after a certain amount of time -- and in
the meantime, we heard blows.  And then after a certain amount of time, he
was brought back to the cell.  Those who were closest to the door placed
him in the place where he was usually lying down.  And then very shortly
afterwards, maybe after a couple of minutes, he died.
Q.   Do you recall the time that someone named Suad Halvadzic was
beaten?
A.   That was a night or two after Dzemal.
Q.   Besides being beaten, did anything else happen to his body?
A.   Yes.  A part of his ear was ripped off.
Q.   I'm trying to move quickly so we can finish your testimony.  But I
want to ask you, in the camp, were there women that you saw in the
Keraterm camp?
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
A.   There were no women except -- well, women did come.  They would
leave women at the camp, those who were waiting for some transport or
vehicles to transfer them to Omarska.  Two women even spent the night in
our cell.  But as a rule, they didn't stay there for long.
Q.   Were there minors, people under 18 or even under -- well, people
under 18, minors, in the camp?
A.   Yes, yes, there were.  I even met a boy.  He introduced himself to
us.  And through our conversation, he said that in -- in the conversation,
he said that he was 14 years old.  You could see that he was a child, but
we were really amazed that -- when we heard that he was so young.
Q.   Did you see any people that were older, past the normal retirement
age?
A.   Yes, there were older people there, much older than retired
people, because I think you could go and retire after -- once you were 60.
But there were people who were much older than that.  There was even a
person who we thought perhaps was even over 70 years old.  This was an old
man from Kozarac.  He wasn't very tall, but he was quite fit.  And you
could see that he was healthy.  He was alert.  And every morning, when we
would get up, he would do some exercises, which we found a little silly at
that time, because he was the only one who did that.  But he happened to
be the oldest amongst us.  So while we were talking to him, he even told
us that he was in Hitler's camp.  That's what he told us.  He said, "I was
in Hitler's camp, too, during World War II.  So then we asked him:  "Which
one is worse?"  And he laughed and he said, "This one is a hundred times
worse."  Because he was in Germany in a labour camp.  And he said, "Nobody
beat me.  I had food to eat.  I had my own bed."  So he said that this one
was much, much worse.
Q.   Do you remember the night of the Room 3 incident?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Tell the Judges about what had happened in the day or two before
that incident that led up to that day.
A.   One day the guards in the camp, in our camp, completely emptied
Room Number 3 where, up until that time, they had mostly people from
Kozarac in that cell.  They emptied it and they allocated the people from
Kozarac to the other three cells.  We didn't know what was going on.  But
after a couple of hours, we saw that buses were coming with new people.
And these were the people from Brdo.
Q.   Were these prisoners put into Room 3?
A.   Yes.  They were all put in Room 3, all of them.
Q.   Can you tell us approximately what time -- what the date was
approximately when this happened?
A.   It was approximately the 20th or the 21st of July when the first
started to arrive.
Q.   Were these prisoners from the Brdo area treated differently; and
if so, describe how they were treated.
A.   Yes, they were treated very differently.  The first few days - I
don't know how many days - they didn't receive any food.  And then mostly
all of the beatings and the abuse was concentrated in their room, so that
the other rooms were spared somewhat from that.
Q.   What happened the night that so many men were killed?
A.   That day, sometime in the afternoon -- since we didn't have
watches, nobody had a watch because we were robbed before that, so the
only way we could orient ourselves was by the sun.  So sometime in the
afternoon, a large group of soldiers entered the camp, which was not usual
for that time.  And even if they did enter the camp, there wouldn't be so
many of them.  They immediately picked out people from Room 3 for
themselves and they lined them up on the grassy area in front of Rooms
Number 1 and 2 and started to beat them.
Q.   And then what happened?
A.   I don't understand the question.
Q.   After the men were beaten, were they returned to the room?
A.   I don't know that, because we were ordered to turn our backs to
the door, so that we were able to just see a little bit.  So that I don't
know what happened to those people when they were returned to the rooms.
I don't know when they returned to the rooms.
Q.   Do you recall a day where you saw soldiers with a machine-gun in
the camp?
A.   That was that day, that day that we're talking about now.
Q.   Where was the machine-gun?
A.   In the course of that day, a table was placed in front of Room
Number 3.  It looked like a school desk.  And a little bit later, we saw
that a machine-gun was placed on that desk.
Q.   That night, what happened that you could hear or see?
A.   I didn't see anything that night.  We only heard things.  First we
heard the inmates from Room Number 3.  We heard some strange sounds,
nothing audible, nothing intelligible.  We just heard some strange sounds,
as if they were all speaking at the same time, or trying to say
something.  That's what we heard.
Q.   What else did you hear?  Tell us what happened that night that you
heard.
A.   We heard the moans, those sounds, from Room Number 3.  I heard the
shift commander, Kole, he was there.  We heard him -- I heard him asking
or begging for something, requesting something from those people who had
come, pleading with the people who had come to the camp.
Q.   Tell us what you remember hearing.
A.   I remember that he said something to the effect:  "Don't touch
Rooms Number 1 and 2."
Q.   At some time, did you hear gunfire?
A.   Yes.  After that, it wasn't that we heard shots.  We heard bursts
of fire from several weapons.
Q.   Where was your room in relation to Room 3?  Can you give us an
idea of how far away you were and how it was arranged between you, where
the machine-gun was, and where Room 3 was.
A.   Room Number 3 was in the same line.  My room was Number 1, then
Number 2, and then Number 3.  The machine-gun was placed in front of Room
Number 3, and it was at that moment, perhaps 30 metres away from me.  Not
more.  Maybe not even that much.
Q.   How long did the bursts of gunfire go on for?  Can you describe
what you heard that night.
A.   It went on for a long time.  Well, they were repeated.  First we
would hear bursts of fire.  Then it would stop for a little bit.  Then we
would hear individual shots.  Then again, there would be a lull.  Then
again we would hear bursts of fire.  So I couldn't really estimate how
long this took.  According to our estimate, from the moment the shooting
began until all of the shooting stopped, according to our estimate, it
went for about two hours, although...
Q.   What were the people in your room doing when the shooting was
going on?
A.   Nothing.  We were silent, and we were lying down, and waiting to
see if our turn would come as well.
Q.   Was anyone -- did any bullets pass into your room to your
knowledge?
A.   Yes.  A man in my room was wounded, and in Room Number 2, one man
was killed.
Q.   What happened the next morning?  What did you see or hear?
A.   The next morning, that morning, they didn't let us go to the
toilet at all, because you could see that there were a lot of bodies in
the compound in front of Room Number 3.  So that they didn't allow us to
go out anywhere.  After that, a truck came.  First, a small truck came
from the local utility company to pick up the dead and then, the guards
really laughed because they had sent them this vehicle, and there was so
many bodies.  It was a small truck that you couldn't even load ten people
on to.  So then this small truck went back, and a trailer truck entered
the Keraterm compound.  It was parked roughly near Rooms 1 and 2, and then
the bodies began to be loaded.
Q.   Do you know who was loading the bodies on to the trailer truck?
A.   I know one man.  The people from Room Number 3 were supposed to do
the loading.  I don't know why they couldn't do it.  Probably some of them
were quite tortured.  Some of them were sick.  And they asked:  "Is
anybody willing to volunteer to do this, people who are not horrified or
afraid of such things?  So who is willing to come and help us with the
loading?"  And they promised that those who helped would be returned to
the cells.  And then one man from my room volunteered.
Q.   What happened then?
A.   After that, all the dead were loaded, all the wounded were also
loaded, all those who were wounded that night.  And also, 15 fit, healthy
men, were also put on the trucks allegedly for unloading of the bodies
since the truck was covered with tarpaulin, the tarpaulin was closed, and
the truck left the camp, going in the direction of Kozarac.
Q.   Did you talk to one of the people that had loaded the bodies on to
the trailer truck?
A.   Yes, with the man who volunteered, and they really did return him
to the cell.
Q.   Did he tell you how many bodies he had loaded?
A.   I think that there was talk about 128 dead bodies.  We, ourselves,
could count about 45 wounded and 15 healthy men.
Q.   Did the truck leave the Keraterm camp that day?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   Were any of the people, the injured, or the 15 healthy, that you
saw get on that truck, did you ever see or hear of them being alive again?
A.   No.
Q.   Do you recall an incident that happened a day or two after the
Room 3 shooting involving the commander of the camp?
A.   Yes, I do.  That was a day or two later, after the massacre.  The
men from Room Number 3 were driven out of their room and ordered to line
up -- in fact, to lie down on the ground on their stomachs on the turf
outside Room Number 3 with their hands behind their necks and sticking
their heads as deep down into the grass as they could.  The then commander
of the camp was there at the time, the warden, holding a rifle in his
hand, and he was surrounded by a couple of guards.  Those men were told
that whoever moved would be finished, gone.  The warden of the camp raised
his rifle and seemed to be playing with it until he actually fired a shot
in the direction of the people lying on the ground.
Later on, one of the guards took out his pistol, walked among
those people who were lying down, and fired a shot in the direction of
somebody's head.
Q.   Were you able to see what happened to that person?  Did you
actually see him being shot in the head?
A.   Well, from that distance, I can say that the guard was right next
to the man, so the barrel of his gun must have been no more than 40
centimetres away from the person's head.
Q.   I want to go back to -- you were telling us about when the men
from Brdo who were brought to the camp in late July were beaten before the
massacre.  Was there anything else done to those men to humiliate them
that you saw?
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
A.   At one point, I mustered up all my courage to look outside, and I
saw people naked from the waist down.  And half of them were standing, and
half of them were kneeling.  And they were positioned in such a way as if
engaged in intercourse.
Q.   These people that were naked that you saw were the prisoners from
Brdo?
A.   Yes.  All of them were from Room -- from Cell Number 3.
Q.   I want to move on now to the day that the camp closed.  Can you
tell us -- before I move on to that, what was the name of the camp
commander that you referred to earlier?
A.   Commander Sikirica.
Q.   What happened on the day the camp closed?
A.   Early that morning, we saw that a large number of buses had
arrived outside the Keraterm camp.  The commander of the camp came,
carrying some papers, and we were told that the people whose names he
calls out should come out of the line, one by one, and stand on the
tarmac. About 120 people were called out.  They were lined up there and
put on to two buses which drove away towards Kozarac under escort.  Later,
when the buses had left, the other buses entered the perimeter of the
Keraterm, and all the rest of us were told to get on to the buses and that
no one must stay behind.  We did so, and we were transferred to
Trnopolje.
Q.   For a moment I want to talk about the buses that you talked about
in your testimony.  You said that when you were arrested that you were
taken to the camp by an Autotransport Prijedor bus.  You also said that a
truck came after the Room 3 massacre and took the bodies away.  Do you
remember if there were any markings on that truck?
A.   Yes, that truck, too, belonged to the Autotransport company.  I
know that from the lettering on the truck itself.
Q.   What about the two buses that came and took away the you said
approximately 120 men whose names were called out the day the camp closed.
Do you know what kind of buses those were?
A.   Yes.  Those buses were the usual public transport buses in
Prijedor.  They had some seats, like benches, inside, with more standing
than sitting places, and they were normally used for public transport
purposes.
Q.   The Buses that took you and the others whose names were not called
to Trnopolje, what kind of buses were those?
A.   The same buses of the same class.
Q.   And jumping ahead to -- I believe you're going to tell us later
about being transported on a convoy over Vlasic mountain towards Travnik,
what kind of buses were used, and trucks, in that convoy?
A.   Again, the buses of the Prijedor Autotransport company.
Q.   On these buses, could you tell if the drivers were the normal
drivers that would have been in normal times been driving the buses
transporting people within the city or municipality, civilians?
A.   In the convoy that took us across Mount Vlasic, the drivers wore
civilian clothes.  They did not have uniforms.  But I don't know whether
they were normally employed in the public transport services.
Q.   So going back to the day the camp closed, you said that 120 or so
names were called out.  Did you know the names of any of the people who
were called out and got on one of those two buses?
A.   Yes, I knew quite a lot of people out of those 120.
Q.   Do you recall any of the names now, just at this moment, of people
that you remember being called out and getting on one of those two buses
the day the camp closed?
A.   Yes.  I can remember.  Those were my neighbours who had been taken
away together with me.  Anto Gavranovic, for one.  Juro Matanovic.  He was
one of those who were called out and taken away in those buses.  Refik
Pelak, Ismet Avdic, Alija Alibegovic, Esad Islamovic, Rasim Music.
Q.   Did you hear where those buses next went or where they went later
that day after leaving Keraterm?
A.   They drove away in the direction of Kozarac.  And when we were
transferred to Trnopolje, a certain number of inmates from Omarska joined
us in Trnopolje and told us that those people were brought that day to
Omarska, spent there only a short while, were again loaded on to buses
that same day, and driven away, and they didn't know where.
Q.   Did you hear if any of the prisoners from Omarska were put on to
the buses during that stop?
A.   Yes.  I know only one name but they say that a couple of more
people were loaded on to the bus, too.  All of those people from Keraterm,
plus some people from Omarska.
Q.   What is the name of the one person you know from Omarska who was
ordered on to the bus?
A.   Dr. Esad Sadikovic.
Q.   Did you know Dr. Esad Sadikovic?
A.   No, not personally.
Q.   Did you hear that he had been a doctor for -- in the Seychelles
working for an international organisation?
A.   I heard about that later.  I didn't know it at the time.
Q.   Were any of the people that you saw having their names called out
at Keraterm and getting on those two buses ever seen again alive by you o
ever seen again alive to your knowledge?
A.   No.
Q.   Have you ever heard of a place in Sanski Most called -- and
forgive my pronunciation -- Hrastova Glavica?
A.   Yes, some of the people who had been taken away on buses were
later found in a place called Hrastova Glavica and identified.  Well, if
you ask me about the number of bodies identified, I don't know.  But a
large number of bodies were found, about 145.  How many of them were
identified, I don't know.  I know that some of them were.
Q.   That's okay.  We'll present other evidence regarding that.
When you say they were found, do you mean their corpses were
found?
A.   Yes, yes.  The corpses were found; in fact, the bones.
Q.   Did you see when these prisoners were called out and put on the
bus, who it was that was escorting the prisoners?  What kind of people
were they?  Were they soldiers or police?  Did you recognise the unit?
A.   The escort was from the police.  I believe it was the reserve
police force.  They belonged to the Prijedor police force, but they were
not active-duty.  It was one of the reserve units.
Q.   Did you --
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Can we go into private session for just a question
or two.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I can see no objections.  Then private session.
[Private session]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
[Open session]
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   When you were released from Keraterm or taken away from Keraterm,
where were you taken to?
A.   To Trnopolje.
Q.   Can you describe Trnopolje to the Judges.
A.   We were unloaded not far from the schooling building in Trnopolje.
Close to the school, there was a structure which resembled a small cinema
and it had a large yard, a wide perimeter, so we had more space for
walking.  We were unloaded from the buses there, and we were told to get
by as best we could.  We were left to our own means and devices, decide
ourselves what we would do, where we would sleep.  And most of the inmates
ended up sleeping under the sky, on the grass.
Q.   How many people were there in the Trnopolje camp?
A.   A lot.  Several thousand.
Q.   Can you describe, was life different in the Trnopolje camp from
Keraterm?  Was there more freedom for the prisoners?
A.   Well, more freedom.  As a rule, food was easier to get.  Visits
came through more easily.  Our fathers, mothers, sisters could reach us
and bring us some food; also, we got food from the Serbs once a day.  And
we had a larger, wider perimeter, inside which we could walk.  There were
a lot of people from Kozarac, who were there with their families.  There
were women and children waiting for some convoys or whatever.
Q.   Going back to Keraterm for a moment, what were the ethnicities of
the inmates in Keraterm?
A.   There were Muslims and Croats.  There was a pretty large number of
Croats, too.
Q.   What was the ethnicity of the people in the Trnopolje camp?
A.   The same thing, Muslims and Croats.
Q.   Have you heard people claim that Trnopolje was a refugee centre,
and that people were there voluntarily?
A.   Yes, I heard about that.  But that's not true.
Q.   Were you free when you were in Trnopolje to -- you and the others
who came from Keraterm -- to walk out if you wanted to and go home?
A.   We could do that, but under certain conditions, which were
dictated by the Serbs.  I wasn't there long, just four or five days.  And
I was released to go home after that.  Because one of the rules concerning
release from the camp was that those who had a formal decision on leaving
the autonomous district or region of Krajina, whatever they called it, and
to get that decision, you had to sign.  And in my case, my wife did it for
me.  Somebody could do it for you from your family.  At any rate, you had
to sign that you are waiving all your rights to your own property in
favour of that entity, whatever it was called, autonomous region of
Krajina.  My wife brought this formal decision, this piece of paper, and
based on that, I was issued with my release papers which said that I was
free to go home.  And that meant that I had to take the first convoy out,
because I had no longer any property there.
Q.   I'll come back to your release papers in a moment.  Just a few
quick questions about the Trnopolje camp.  Were people beaten at the
Trnopolje camp, to your knowledge?
A.   At Trnopolje, I watched one beating in those few days that I spent
there.
Q.   Did you -- what actually physically prevented the prisoners from
leaving the camp?  Was there a wall?  Were there guards?  What stopped you
from just walking out?
A.   Well, first, there was no wire fence or any other fence around the
entire camp making a full circle.  But there were checkpoints that you had
to pass positioned on all routes out of the camp.  And if they saw anyone
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
coming towards them in civilian clothes, they would certainly check their
papers.  So there was absolutely no chance for anyone to escape or to pass
through without some formal permit or certificate.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, this would be a good time for a break.
And I anticipate 15, 20 minutes left of direct.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The trial stays adjourned.  We resume 6.05.
--- Recess taken at 5.44 p.m.
--- On resuming at 6.07 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The witness may be brought in.
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, please.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  May witness be brought in immediately, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, may I just introduce Mr. Bergsmo who
is a member of the Prosecution team.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Welcome aboard.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Witness B, we were talking about your stay and release from the
Trnopolje camp.  In order to be released from the Trnopolje camp, can you
describe what kind of paperwork or what kind of administrative matters you
had to take care of, or your family had to?
A.   A little earlier, I was saying that they had to go somewhere.  I
never asked them or found out.  My wife or my father or somebody had to go
to the police or to the municipality, but I don't know where, to get this
paper signed that all the property we have is being left to some kind of
institution or body of theirs, the Serb institution.  I don't know what it
was called.  It's an entity or something like that.  I don't know exactly
what it was called.  And then when they signed it, then they would be
allowed to leave the Serb entity.  That's when you could be, then, on the
basis of that document, issued release papers from Trnopolje.  Also, they
found out -- I was still at Keraterm.  They found out that that was one of
the ways that we could be released from the camp.  So that's what our
family did for all of three of us.
Q.   I think the Judges would be interested if you could tell us what
were the other ways you heard an individual could be released from the
Trnopolje camp.
A.   That was the way that I got out.  There was another way:  When two
Serbs would come, and they would sign something for a particular Muslim
individual, that perhaps they were taking him home.  And we also heard,
but I don't know if anybody was released in that way, we heard that a
person could be released because there was also a Red Cross in Prijedor,
that it was possible to leave the camp if you were a blood donor, if a
person, perhaps, gave blood a certain number of times before the war, then
it was possible to be released in that way.
Q.   You say that you were released by going through the procedure
where you signed away all of your property rights.  Once that was done,
did you actually receive a certificate at the camp that allowed you to
walk out of the camp?
A.   I didn't sign the document.  My wife signed it on my behalf, and
then she brought that decision.  And based on that decision, they made up
my release papers, that I was being released from Trnopolje.  And at the
same time, it was also a pass for me permitting me to cross all the
checkpoints on the way to my house.
Q.   Did you maintain a copy of that release paper, and did you have
your wife fax it to my office to my attention the evening of April 23rd,
two days ago?
A.   Yes.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, I have that document.  I don't want to
necessarily have it admitted because it's very short and not translated.
But I would like the witness to be able to read and go through the
document.  Counsel has a copy, and I could also distribute a copy of the
actual document to the Court to look at.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please do so.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  May the witness have a copy, please, to refer to.
Q.   You have the document before you.  Is this a copy or a faxed copy
of the released certificate that you obtained at Trnopolje?
A.   Yes, it is.
Q.   The writing in the upper right which I believe says Za Koumjian,
is that something that your wife wrote on the fax to me?
A.   Yes.  She wrote that.  That is the person that is supposed to
receive the paper, the fax.
Q.   Can you read the printing, realising that it's very light, on the
upper left, the printed material.
A.   "Municipal Organisation of the Red Cross of Prijedor."
Q.   In the document, there's some hand writing in the middle that
includes your name in the top line. In the original is there actually some
typed material to the left of the handwriting that indicates, for example,
name on the top line?
A.   It is written:  "Receipt," and then below that, there is my
personal data, name, last name, date of birth, the town, a number,
probably the number of my ID card, my former ID card issued in Prijedor.
And below it states:  "Trnopolje, the 5th of August, 1992."  Then again it
states:  "Prijedor," my address.
Q.   Below that material, in the bottom centre there's a stamp.  And
can you just -- with a cross.  Can you read what is stamped in the
material next to the cross?
A.   It states:  "The Red Cross of Bosnia and Herzegovina" -- well, the
Red Cross of B and H -- "the municipal conference of the Red Cross,
Prijedor."
Q.   There appear to be two signatures above the cross.  First there's
one under your personal data.  Do you recognise that signature?
A.   I recognise both signatures.
Q.   Starting with the one that's under your personal data, the one on
your right, whose name is that?
A.   The name is Pero Curguz.  At that time, he was in charge of the
Red Cross office at Trnopolje.
Q.   And the name on the left, the signature on the left, again it's
left and above the cross, do you recognise that signature?
A.   You can't see the first and last name here, but I know this
signature very well.
Q.   Whose signature is that?
A.   It's Slobodan Kuruzovic's signature.
Q.   Do you know what Slobodan Kuruzovic's job was on the 5th of
August, 1992?
A.   He was the commander, the warden, of the Trnopolje camp.
Q.   Below the signature of Mr. Curguz, there is some writing, some
handwriting.  If you can read that, read it out loud.
A.   Yes.  It states as follows:  "Released, based on the certificate
of departure of AK Krajina, number 03-3-896-413 on the 8th of August,
1992."
Q.   Okay.  And by the way, you said the 8th of August.  Is it clear to
you what the digit is, 08 --
A.   Yes.
Q.   Is that clear to you, the second 8?
A.   Yes, the 8th.  That's the day when I went home.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry to interrupt, but to be complete, can
Witness B please explain what is the abbreviation "AK"?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I think it's Autonomna ^ Krajina,
autonomous region, or -- A is for autonomous, and the other letter, I
don't know what it stands for.  Or it could be autonomous region, AR.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you.  I'm finished with the document if the
Court is.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  You want to offer this as an exhibit?  Evidence,
I think, for completeness and, in order, probably later on, to follow what
we have done, it would be -- it would make sense in case the Defence wants
to come back to this document.  I think it's better.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Fine.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then what would be the number of this document?
THE REGISTRAR:  This would be Number S12B [Realtime transcript
read in error "S1B"], Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  S12B [Realtime transcript read in error "S1B"].
Any objections?
MR. OSTOJIC:  I do, Your Honour.  Since we just received the
document this afternoon, we would like an opportunity to discuss it, and
we would ask that the Court respectfully reserve the right or reserve the
ruling on the admissibility of the document until we've had time to
consult and determine whether our objection both on authenticity and
signatures can be verified.  So at this point, to make such an objection
may be preliminary, but once again, respectfully, if the Court can reserve
the right, understanding that this witness has answered some questions in
any event in that regard.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So it's additional item on the agenda for next
Wednesday.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please proceed with the examination-in-chief.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   When you were released from Trnopolje and when you went back to
your house, was anyone in your house at that time?
A.   No, no one except for my family.
Q.   How long did you stay at your house before you left the area?
A.   I stayed there for about ten days approximately.  I don't know
exactly.  But not long.  Maybe about 10 days.
Q.   How did you leave the region?  Describe that process.
A.   Since at that time, after the massacre at Brdo, the entire
population had moved away from there, towards Tukovi.  So the convoys were
going while we were still at the camp, but a lot of people still stayed.
And these people were waiting for the Serb authorities to organise a
convoy or convoys for them to cross over to Muslim territory.  That's how
they called it.  So while I was at home, I decided to join a convoy like
that.  So one day in the morning, about ten days after I had arrived home,
I could see many trucks and buses going down my street.  And we assumed
that this was a convoy, that these are trucks which were supposed to take
us to Muslim territory somewhere.  So we decided to board such a convoy,
get on to one of those trucks.  It was all very rushed.  We made our
decision.  We took a few things with us, and we went exactly to the place
where the trucks and the buses were filling with people.
Q.   Were there police at this point, or soldiers, at the point where
the convoy was being loaded?
A.   Yes.  The police was there already, the reserve police was there,
when the convoy was being formed.  So they were the ones who organised how
many people would get on to which truck, how many people would get on to
the buses.  They were the ones who were doing all of these things.  A
truck or a bus would come to an open field.  Then they would let through a
certain number of passengers.  Then the truck would leave that place, and
an empty one would come in its place.  So that all the loading took place
in one location.
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
Q.   How many people boarded that convoy in your estimate?  Can you
give us an estimation?
A.   I couldn't really say.  Many people, thousands of people, were
waiting for convoys.  But how many boarded, I don't even know myself how
big the convoy was.  I don't know the number of vehicles in it.  So I
couldn't make an estimate.  But there was a large number of people there.
Q.   From what you said, would it be correct for us to understand that
more people were waiting than there was room on the convoy?  That not
everyone was able to find a space on one of the vehicles?
A.   Yes.  In any case, a large number of people stayed behind.  They
didn't all board this convoy.  Other convoys were formed after our convoy.
Q.   What was the route that the convoy took briefly?  Can you tell us
where you went when you left that area in Tukovi?
A.   We passed through Prijedor and set out in the direction of Banja
Luka through Kozarac, Omarska, Banja Luka.  From Banja Luka, we went to
Skender Vakuf.  And then from Skender Vakuf onwards.  There was the Mount
Vlasic.  There weren't any inhabited places after that.
Q.   Were you and your family on a bus or a truck?
A.   We were in a bus.
Q.   You said that you stopped first in Kozarac.  Did any other
vehicles join your convoy in Kozarac, and did you learn where they came
from?
A.   Yes, the convoy stopped on the Prijedor-Banja Luka Road
approximately -- yeah, at a petrol station in Kozarac.  We stopped there.
And after a certain amount of time, we were joined by four buses.  And
then the convoy continued on its way.
Q.   Did you see any of the people on those buses at any point during
the convoy or after you reached your ultimate destination?
A.   For a while, I finished the trip together with them, because at
some point, on Mount Vlasic, the bus that I was in broke down.  So the
passengers from that bus were moved to the other buses and trucks in the
convoy.  And I got on to one of those buses in which the inmates from
Trnopolje already were.
Q.   During the convoy, did anyone ever come on to your bus and rob the
passengers?
A.   While I was on the first bus, which broke down, it was stopped,
and one of the soldiers who were part of the escort told us some story
that we were supposed to pass by Seselj's men, Arkan's man, and such
troops.  And lest our women be raped and our children killed, we should
empty our pockets of all valuables and collect anything worthwhile we had
and hand it over to them, so that they could pass it on to those troops as
some sort of fee for safe passage.  And that's what we did.
Q.   The person that came on the bus and collected the valuables, was
he a policeman or a soldier?
A.   It was a policeman, one of the policeman from our escort.
Q.   Did you recognise this person as one of the same policeman you saw
escorting the two buses that left Keraterm the day the camp was closed in
which all of those who entered those buses were never seen again?
A.   Yes.
Q.   At one point on the convoy, were you asked to get out of the bus
and line up?
A.   I had already once changed buses during that trip.  I had been
with inmates from Trnopolje, together with my wife and children, and
another man from my bus changed buses with me.  He had a wife and a child
with him, too.  So our wives and children were the only ones on that bus.
All the rest were men.  And on our way across Mount Vlasic, at some point,
the bus stopped near a creek.  We didn't know why.  On the right side of
the road, so as to let the other buses pass by.  At first, we were told to
get out if we wanted to, because it was very hot the month of July.  We
were told we could go to the creek and drink some water if we liked.  But
when we got to the creek, or almost near the creek, we saw a lot of Serb
soldiers.  And nobody dared go any further.  So for a while, we just sat
there on the buses until we were eventually ordered by our police escorts
to leave the buses, without exception, and to line up outside the bus.
Q.   What did that mean to you?  And from your knowledge of the camps,
what did you think was about to happen?
A.   I stood in the line, just as everyone else.  And at that moment, I
thought I knew what was going to happen next with extreme clarity, from
all my previous experience.  I thought that we were going to be robbed
again, beaten up, perhaps even something worse.  Because that's the way
that all the previous lineups I had seen ended.
Q.   What happened then?
A.   So as I said, we were standing there, lined up.  And then one of
the policemen said that -- actually, at one point, we were alone there.
Our bus was the only one standing there.  There was no one around.  And
while we were lined up, a trailer truck arrived and parked behind our bus.
And then one of those policemen from our escort told the women to get on
to that truck.  My wife asked if we were allowed to take our things.  And
since she had a child, a baby less than a month old in her arms, while I
was holding our other child, a four-year-old by the hand, she asked me to
help her move her things.  Actually, she asked for permission for me to
help her move her things from the bus to the truck. And when I did so, she
got on to the truck.  The other man who had his wife and child with him
did the same, and when we loaded everything, we got on and left.  The
truck departed leaving the bus behind together with all the people outside
Q.   Did you recognise any of the men from the Trnopolje camp who were
lined up in that line that you were able to get away from thanks to what
your wife had had done?
A.   Yes, there was a man who was a good friend of mine among the
inmates.  Himzo Mrkalj.  While the majority of the rest were the men from
Kozarac, whom I didn't know.
Q.   Did the truck you were on continue on towards the front line, and
then were you allowed to get out and did you walk to Travnik?
A.   The truck drove for a while, not long, and stopped again, pulled
over at a clearing.  And we were all ordered to get off.  And the clearing
was already full of people, very large number of people, who had already
arrived on different trucks and buses which had got there before us so
that we all continued again in the direction of Travnik.
Q.   Did you ever see Himzo Mrkalj or any of the other men that you saw
lined up at that last stop again?
A.   No.
Q.   Did he or any of the other men that you remember, make it to
Travnik?
A.   No.
Q.   When the people arrived past the front line, was there a concern
among many of the people about their family members?  Can you describe
that?
A.   Only after we arrived in Travnik, while we were getting settled,
finding accommodation, it was only then that we heard that ours was not
the only bus that had been left there, that other men had been taken off
other buses and trucks, two from one bus, three from another.  And there
were also two buses from Mount Vlasic which were also left there.  And
then people started making lists of their family members whom they
believed to have been on those buses.  And the list, when it was
completed, contained more than 250 names, around that number.
Q.   Those thousands of people that you saw in Tukovi waiting to leave
the territory, what was the ethnicity of those people?
A.   All of them were Muslims, and a small number of Croats.
Q.   Why were thousands, if you know, of Muslims and Croats wanting to
leave the territory at that time?
A.   Because we no longer had any rights there.  We no longer had the
right to live, let alone own anything.  Any day, somebody could come,
confiscate your car, take away your house, shoot you, without ever being
held responsible for it.  So it was the only solution, the only way out,
to go as far as away from there as possible, at any cost.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you for your patience, Your Honours.  I'm far
exceeding my estimate.  No further questions.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  Even though it's an additional
burden for Witness B, I don't believe it would be fair to start the
cross-examination today.  And therefore, we would kindly ask you to come
back tomorrow in the afternoon for the cross-examination.  For today,
you're excused.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Two small issues:  There is a small mistake on
the record at 18.22.02.  There it says:  "Exhibit S1B."  It should read
"S12B".  Could this please be corrected.  Thank you.
And then I have to announce a decision of the Trial Chamber that
it is ordered that a formal identification may take place next Friday.
It's a burden of proof for the Office of the Prosecutor; and therefore, it
is expected that the Office of the Prosecutor points out from possible
persons, possibly some other inmates of the United Nations Detention Unit,
to come.  And I think this would be an idea - and I expect the comments
from the parties to this - to come in the beginning of the hearing on
Friday to this courtroom.  And this would give all the participants, of
course, especially the Bench, to see the immediate reactions of this
witness.  This is the best application of the principle of directness.
Comments from the Office of the Prosecutor?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I'd rather see what can be arranged before I make
any comments.  I think the transportation and security people will have
some problems.  We'll try to deal with them, and then report to the Court
what our comments are.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  As I explained, on the basis of some domestic
jurisdictions, I believe it's appropriate to have a number of five persons
present.
What are the comments of the Defence?
MR. LUKIC:  We accept your proposal, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So I hope we can overcome all obstacles, I'm
aware of this, in order to come as close as possible to the truth.
The trial stands adjourned.  We resume tomorrow as indicated.
--- Whereupon the hearing adjourned at
6.50 p.m., to be reconvened on
Friday, the 26th day of April, 2002,
at 1.30 p.m.
