Friday, 24 May 2002
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
[The witness entered court]
--- Upon commencing at 2.28 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please be seated.  Could you please call the
case.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good afternoon.  This is Case Number IT-97-24-T,
the Prosecutor versus Milomir Stakic.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Could we have the
appearances, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Good afternoon.  Nicholas Koumjian with Ruth Karper
for the Prosecution.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.
MR. LUKIC:  Good afternoon, Branko Lukic with Mr. John Ostojic for
the Defence.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  May we --
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, before we begin, I just want to inform
the Trial Chamber, in light of some of the comments of the Trial Chamber
yesterday and in today's conference, there is a video that we were
planning on showing with the next witness, who actually took it, of the
Kozarac area taken last summer, if the Court, Trial Chamber, wanted to
show that to the witness, it's available today.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for the information.  We should
immediately proceed with the cross-examination.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
WITNESS:  WITNESS P [Resumed]
[Witness answered through interpreter]
Cross-examined by Mr. Ostojic:  [Continued].
Q.   Good afternoon, Witness P.  Once again, my name is John Ostojic.
Thank you for coming and we'll try to be brief this afternoon.
Sir, I'd like to focus your attention on the Trnopolje camp as
you've described it.  I'd like to ask you, were you ever at the Trnopolje
camp prior to May of 1992?
A.   I knew Trnopolje.  Sometimes I would transport some construction
materials from a shop, and also for the 1st of May celebrations, various
sports events would take place there.  And this is how I am familiar with
the area of Trnopolje.
Q.   I understand from your testimony that you were brought to
Trnopolje camp for a couple of days starting on May 26th of 1992.  Were
you at Trnopolje the May 1st prior to May 26th, 1992, for purposes that
you just described in your answer, or was it the year before?
A.   It may have been a year before, because I went there for the 1st
of May celebrations then.
Q.   [Previous translation continues]...  Trnopolje a year prior to May
of 1992 or thereabouts, can you describe for us how it was different in
appearance, if you can, how it was different in appearance from -- and
we're trying to limit the question to the actual structures of the camp.
How was it different in May of 1991 to that which you saw in May of 1992
when you were detained there?
A.   I am sure that the school existed also the year before, and also
during the time when the camp was there.  As for the cafe that I also
mentioned across the road from the Trnopolje hall building, the cafe was
also there for a long time.  The large cinema hall itself was also there
for a long time, and now whether it was refurbished a year ago or some
time ago I can't really tell you.  The shop was also there all the time.
I don't know whether it was bigger or smaller before than at the time when
I was there.
Q.   Can you help us and tell us, if you wish, whether or not there
were any homes immediately adjacent to the property that we now refer to a
the Trnopolje camp?
A.   Well, across the road from the shop that I mentioned, there were
some houses there.  And as you went on towards Kozarac, further up from
the school towards Kozarac, this area was inhabited quite densely on both
sides of the Trnopolje/Kozarac road.
Q.   Is it fair to state that the Trnopolje camp was actually in the
middle of a residential housing community, if you know?
A.   Well, one could say that they were on the outskirts of the areas
inhabited by people, because there was also the railroad and the fish
pond.  So that would be the outer boundary of the inhabited area of
Trnopolje.
Q.   Tell us, if you will, in 1992, May, the two or so days that you
were there, whether there was a fence surrounding the Trnopolje camp?
A.   Partially yes, and partially no.
Q.   Get back to that in a moment.  Tell us in 1991, or whenever you
were there prior to May of 1992, whether there was a fence surrounding the
Trnopolje camp?
A.   I think that the fence existed in 1991.  It fenced off a section
of the Trnopolje/Kozarac   Road and the Trnopolje/Prijedor, the old road,
Trnopolje/Prijedor, the intersection there, as far as I can remember.
Q.   Yes, thank you.  And I recognise that it's been some time, ten
years or so, since you were there.  But if you could help us, is it fair
to state that the fence that was, if I can call it partially, surrounding
the Trnopolje camp was the same fence in 1991, and prior to that, 1990, if
you had visited then, as it was in 1992, May, when you were detained
there?
A.   I can't recall the details.  I do know that there were some
fenced-in areas before and after May 1992.
Q.   Do you know, sir, where the checkpoint was at the Trnopolje camp,
how far away or how close in proximity to the entrance of the camp it was?
A.   The access to the camp was from the Kozarac side, from the
Prijedor side, and to the south from the railway station.  So the point
that I myself saw, the checkpoint, I was able to see the checkpoint in the
direction of Prijedor while I was in the camp.  The other camps, I was not
interested in.  I wasn't moving around in the camp, and I didn't see them.
Q.   Finally, with respect to the fencing, if I may, is it fair to say
that there was not a fence at Trnopolje camp which surrounded the entire
camp?  Or as best as you can, if you can, help us in understanding the
dimensions of the fence, if it was on the south, east, north, west, or all
those borders?
A.   I can't tell you that.  I will tell you, however, that during my
stay there, and before I left the camp in Trnopolje, there was no fence
that would enclose the entire perimeter of the Trnopolje camp.
Q.   Can you estimate for us -- strike that.  Do you know, sir, if the
Trnopolje camp or property premises were used in 1991 and/or 1992 to house
Serbian refugees from the area of Croatia?
A.   I don't know.
Q.   Let me move to a different -- slightly different area.  In
discussing your arrival to Trnopolje camp on May 26, 1992, I believe on
page 43, line 20 of your transcript and your testimony two days ago, you
mentioned that you slept in your own vehicle.  Correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you tell us or give us an estimate, sir, how many other
persons, while they were detained in Trnopolje camp, actually brought
their vehicles and slept in their vehicles during the time period,
obviously, that you were there, two or so days?
A.   There may have been several dozens of cars, several dozens of
tractors, and several trucks.  And also some tents that were set up next
to the tractor trailers or perhaps were just standing on the meadow in
front of the school and in front of the Trnopolje community hall.
Q.   You also mentioned to us, briefly, and I'm summarising it, and
correct me if I am wrong, that after approximately nine days your wife
left Trnopolje camp, and that she, although your father and your brothers
remained, she would go to Trnopolje camp every other day in order to
provide for your family and others, possibly, milk, food, cheese, dairy
products, et cetera.  Do you recall that testimony?  It's page 48, line 19
through 20, for the record.
A.   Yes, that's what I said.
Q.   Just to refresh your recollection on that, you also were asked by
the Office of the Prosecutor whether or not there was a risk or danger to
your wife assisting, and I believe on page 48, line 19, the question was
as follows:  "Was it dangerous for your wife to go to Trnopolje?"  Line 20
page 48, answer:  "It was dangerous.  Any form of movement was dangerous.
There were many drunk soldiers along the road who were not subject to any
control or command.  There were cases of rapes, women, of murders of
people passing by.  It was always a risk."
Do you remember giving that testimony, sir?
A.   Yes.
Q.   I just have a couple follow-up questions on that if you don't
mind.  When you say "many drunk soldiers" on line 21 of that answer, what
do you mean by that?
A.   That's what I heard from my wife.  Any number higher than one is
many.  You can imagine how frightening it is for a woman to pass by such
people who were drunk and asking:  "What do you want, do you have any
money." That was the fear that women couldn't describe, and they actually
preferred not to talk about it and not to talk about such occurrences.
Q.   I most certainly understand, sir.  My question, however, is were
you ever told by your wife or others any specific number which would
quantify for us the amount that was mentioned "many drunk soldiers"?
A.   No, I don't know the number.
Q.   You also, sir, with respect to the answer that you provided two
days ago on page 48, lines 20 through 23, where you stated that "there
were many drunk soldiers along the road who were not subject to any
control or command."  What do you mean, sir, when you say "who were not
subject to any control or command"?
A.   Well, a normal soldier who is under some kind of control shouldn't
be drunk while on duty, and he would have to abide by the normal rules of
conduct, in accordance with the regulations when communicating with
civilians, which was not always the case.
Q.   You mentioned also an instance where there were drunk soldiers on
the road from Omarska to Manjaca.  Do you remember that?
A.   I remember that.
Q.   In that instance, sir, do you remember how many drunken soldiers
are we referring about?
A.   When the bus stopped in a Serb village called Hankola, three or
four such soldiers entered our bus and beat us on the bus where I was.  So
I can assure you that there were four soldiers, three or four soldiers,
who entered the bus in Hankola in front of the cafe and beat people who
were transported from Omarska to Manjaca.
Q.   So just to the record is clear, this was an instance where you saw
drunk soldiers again, taking part in certain activities that you've
previously described from the time in Omarska while you were going to
Manjaca.  Correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  Were these soldiers that you saw also, as you
described the soldiers that were dangerous during the Trnopolje events
that we just talked about, were they also not subject to any control or
command?
A.   Well, in my opinion, it was a willful act by these people.
Q.   And isn't it correct, sir, that it was the willful act of these
individuals that you're talking about.  Correct?
A.   In this case that I experienced, I can say that it was the case.
Q.   Staying with this theme for a moment, if I may, in Omarska when
you were detained in Omarska camp during the Petrovdan celebration July
11th and July 12th, 1992, that you described, and the bonfire, if you
remember that testimony -- do you remember that?
A.   I spoke about the big tyre from a Caterpillar vehicle.  I wasn't
talking about any pyre.
Q.   Fair enough.  It was a fire that was started with a tyre or large
tyres as you've described it.  I'm just trying to direct you to that day
or that date and that place, because I have some questions in connection
with that. So, the evidence will stand and I apologise if I've misstated
what you've earlier testified on that issue.  All I want today is have you
focus on the July 11th and July 12th facts that you shared with us in
connection with that Petrovdan celebration.  Fair enough?
A.   Yes.
Q.   On page 50 of your testimony, you described that on July 11th,
there was a lot of rejoicing and singing.  Let me get the page number.  Do
you remember that?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   Now, also, sir, can you tell us whether or not there was a lot of
drinking by the people who were either securing or providing some sort of
security at the Omarska camp on that July 11th and 12th, namely, either
the military personnel or the guards that were previously described?  Were
they drinking?
A.   I didn't see any of them with a bottle in his hand.  But on the
basis of the songs that they were singing and the laughter and the events
that occurred later around the white house, one could establish quite
clearly that these people were, in fact, drunk.  To what degree and what
the actual number of people was, it was impossible to determine that with
total security from that place.
Q.   One moment.
If I may be permitted to read from the statement that you provided
to the OTP on August 26th through the 30th, signed on September 1st, 1994,
page 19, first full paragraph, which starts one quarter of the page down.
If the Court would permit me to read that paragraph.  I'm going to read
the entire paragraph and if the Court feels I need to stop at any point,
because my point stops at halfway, but I'll proceed.  Page 19 of your
statement, sir:  "On Petrovdan, the Serbs were shooting more than usual.
They were drinking a lot.  Petrovdan is celebrated on the evening of the
day before.  This is the celebration started on the 11th and continued on
all through the next day.  To the Serbs it didn't mean anything to pull a
prisoner out from the white house and put him on the fire.  During the
daytime, nothing much happened.  They were, in general, very drunk.  It
was during the night on the 11th going on to the 12th that they were
taking out people, beating them, and throwing them on the fire.  It was
mainly the guards who would do anything with the prisoners.  Those guards
did what they wanted.  On the evening of the 12th, there was no fire.
When they threw people on the fire, they were more dead than alive.  They
would beat the prisoners almost dead and then throw them on the fire.  I
think approximately ten people thrown on the fire.  At night, it is
difficult to see exactly, but there were screams of the people when they
were thrown on the fire.  I stood at the window for ten minutes, and
during that time, I saw one person thrown on the fire.  I heard the
screams of other people.  I do not know who the other people were, nor do
I know the names of the guards who threw people on the fire.  People who
were in rooms 26 and 15 would be able to say much more about the white
house and what happened there because their rooms were almost right
opposite the white house."
Sir, does this help refresh your recollection that, in fact, the
guards and the personnel at the camp on or about Petrovdan were not only
drunk and were not only drinking a lot, but as you say in the fourth or
fifth sentence, they were "very drunk"?
A.   Well, whether they were drunk or very drunk, the difference, as
far as I'm concerned, is not really great.  Now, whether I said drunk,
very drunk, or slightly drunk, everything above two or three pomels ^ is
considered to be drunk by law.
Q.   Nonetheless, they were drunk.  The guards who were throwing the
prisoners, as you've described, were intoxicated.  Correct?
A.   That doesn't give them the right to throw people into the fire.
Q.   And sir, I agree with you on that point.  However, all I'm trying
to understand, from a factual standpoint, is it correct that the guards,
or the personnel, that were throwing the detainees, however wrong it may
be, that they were, in fact, drunk.  Correct?
A.   Can we say that they were half drunk?
Q.   If I may just ask the Court for just some instruction.  I'm not
sure to respond to the witness.  I'm not sure that I got a responsive
answer to my question, if the Court believes that I have, I will move on?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I think the answer was exhaustive.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Thank you.
Q.   Similarly to the drunken soldiers that you experienced or that
your wife was put at risk for during the Trnopolje visits she made to your
father and two brothers and similarly to the drunken soldiers you
described to us, during the Omarska to Manjaca, were these drunken
personnel, guards or soldiers, also not subject to any control or command?
A.   I cannot evaluate that.  If there had been any proper control, I
don't think that there would be any alcohol in the workplace.  In my
opinion, they were able to decide themselves what to do and how to act.
Q.   You also, if I may just turn the subject a little bit, turn to
another subject, you also described additional prisoners or prisoners,
detainees, who were at greater risk at Omarska.  At one point I think you
mentioned that prisoners who had money and prisoners who were politically
involved were at greater risk.  Do you remember that testimony?
A.   I do.
Q.   With respect to the --
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could we please have the interpreters that we
have once again on channel 4 the English translation.
THE INTERPRETER:  Can you hear us now?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Yes, okay.  We may proceed.
MR. OSTOJIC:
Q.   Sir, do you know, with respect to the prisoners who were
identified or isolated and at risk because of their personal wealth, do
you know if these crimes that were committed upon them were random acts of
a criminal element who sought to rob and steal personally from certain
detainees at the Omarska camp?
A.   I can't tell that.
Q.   Do you know, sir, if there were any acts of personal vendetta by
any of the guards or personnel at the camp, against any of the detainees?
A.   Well, in my opinion, all the police officers that were detained in
the camp disappeared from the camp in unknown circumstances, and the
assumption is that they were all killed.  In many such cases, these were
acts of revenge towards the police officers on the part of the camp
leadership.  People also who were higher up from the camp, the leadership
of the municipality, and we may go on.  The region, republic, Yugoslavia,
it was a well-organised chain of liquidations of individuals and groups.
Q.   I understand.  Let me ask you this:  Do you know of any instances
where a person or individual detainee was killed as a result of jealousy
between any of the people watching the detainee and that individual
detainee, whether it be that he was wealthy, owned a restaurant, or was a
police officer or politically active?  Do you know of any such instance,
sir?
A.   I don't know whether it was the idea of individuals to kill these
people.  The fact is that the people were killed.  I don't know who made
decisions in the camp, why such decisions were made.  I don't know that
either.  What the criterion was, according to which these people were
selected, but we could assume these were the rich people, the police
officers, active-duty servicemen, not to go into any more details.  So at
any rate, the leadership of the camp in Omarska would have to give the
criteria according to which they worked, although I assume that they do
not remember anything.
Q.   Let me direct your attention, if I may, to your statement given to
the OTP on August 26th through the 30th, 1994, signed on September 1st,
1994, page 23, first full paragraph.  If I may read this in connection
with the issue that we were just discussing, Your Honour.  Page 23, first
full paragraph from your statement, sir:  "Dedo Crnalic was one of those
killed in the morning.  He was one of the more wealthy people from
Prijedor.  He had a good restaurant.  He was a good tailor.  One of the
Serbs probably killed him because of jealousy.  I saw him killed.  He was
stabbed in the stomach, and then they cleaned their knives on his shirt
after they killed him."
Sir, with respect to that statement, as you sit here, and just
tell us what your testimony is, was Dedo Crnalic killed possibly because
of jealousy, probably because of jealousy, or you just don't know?
A.   I would have to ask the person who killed him why he did it, what
the true reason for it was.
Q.   Approximately two and a half years after being detained at Omarska
and giving the statement to the OTP, why at that time, sir, did you think
that the person who killed Mr. Dedo Crnalic did it as a result -- probably
killed him -- because of jealousy?
A.   Well, would things have changed if he had been killed for some
other reason?
Q.   Let me ask you if I may, sir -- to change the subject, the topic,
please, with respect to your initial presentation or arrival at Manjaca
camp, you informed us that they at that time also asked for your
identification papers and essentially registered you.  And I'm
paraphrasing, sir.  If I'm incorrect on this, please clarify for me.  I
don't mean to incorrectly paraphrase your testimony.
A.   Yes, it was more or less like that.
Q.   You also told us, sir, that while you were detained in Omarska
that you were also essentially registered and the personnel there asked
for your identification papers, et cetera.  Do you remember that
testimony?
A.   Yes, I remember it.
Q.   My question is directly this:  Did you show the personnel at
Manjaca camp the same identification papers that you showed the personnel
at Omarska camp?
A.   Well, it was the only papers we had, we showed.
Q.   Right.  My question, though, is it fair to conclude, then, that
after showing your identification papers at Omarska camp, that you
actually retained and kept those identification papers with you during
your entire stay at Omarska, and then presented those same identification
papers to the personnel that asked you for them at the Manjaca camp,
several months or whatever the time period is?  Would that be fair?
A.   Well, most of the people kept their papers from the people in the
Omarska camp.  We were definitely stripped of our ID when we arrived at
the Manjaca camp.
Q.   Is it your testimony, sir, that you do not have or you were ever
returned your personal identification cards after your detention at the
Manjaca camp?
A.   My ID card came in a big box, a box containing documents, to
Karlovac in the reception centre there.  And there everyone could look for
his ID.  Not all of the documents were found.  I'm speaking of my
particular case.
Q.   Yes, and that's what we're interested in.  Is it fair to state
that all the documentation that you had with you upon your arrival to the
Omarska camp was actually retained by you and brought to the Manjaca camp
with you?  Correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you at any time, sir, while discussing the tragic events of
the spring and summer of 1992, did you ever discuss with any other
detainees whether there were drunken soldiers at any time at the Keraterm
camp?
A.   No, I didn't.
Q.   Can you tell us if you know, sir, what, if anything, prevented the
guards or the personnel at the Omarska camp, while you were detained
there, from actually killing each and every one of the detainees there?
A.   I didn't see.
Q.   But as we know, and I don't want to be presumptuous, all the
detainees were not killed.  Correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   I don't remember your specific testimony on this, and don't want
to guess.
MR. OSTOJIC:  If the Court will permit me.
Q.   At one point, I believe you estimated from the number of detainees
at Omarska camp, how many do you believe were actually killed during the
time period that you were at the Omarska camp?
A.   I don't know the exact number.  Well, between a thousand and 2.000
people would be the assessment.  I don't know how true that is.  History
will tell.
Q.   If I may just elaborate on that, sir, how many people were
actually detained in Omarska during the time period that you were there?
A.   Well, we didn't know until we were actually released.  When we
were released, they said that a thousand five hundred people went to
Manjaca, and approximately the same number to Trnopolje.  And about 150
were left to stay there for another week or so.  And when the Omarska camp
was closed so as to show the international organisations that they had
beds to sleep in, that they had enough food, and then when we were
transferred to Manjaca a day or two after that, the Omarska camp was
visited by international organisations, the UNHCR and many others.  And
there, they saw our fairly normal state of affairs while they were
visiting it.  Every prisoner had a bed, had enough food, was clean.  They
were sitting in front of the kitchen, so that was the picture that the
world was able to see, in connection with the Omarska camp.  At the
moment, one of the prisoners, I don't know in what language he used to
tell a foreigner, a foreign employee, that this was only -- a it was a
wrong picture that some of the people had been taken to Trnopolje, to
Manjaca, and then we were visited by these very same people in Manjaca,
and they told us that they were given this information at the Omarska
camp.
So about three to three and a half thousand people.  The number
varied.  People would come.  People would disappear.  I don't know what
the exact figures.  I think that the people who managed the camps have
these figures recorded somewhere.
Q.   All I'm interested, sir, is to know directly, during your
experience at the Omarska camp, how many did you personally see or know of
of detainees who were actually killed?
A.   Well, if I say that someone was taken away and never returned, I
don't know to say about him, whether he is to be proclaimed dead or
missing.
Q.   If the Court permits, and if the witness, you can classify them in
any way you wish.  I just want to know how you classify them and what that
number is, from your perspective directly, sir.
A.   Well, at least 50 people, to the best of my knowledge.  A number
of them I could see dead, and another number would disappear in the
direction of the white house.
Q.   Thank you.
Witness P, on behalf of the Defence, we would like to thank you
for your cooperation and your testimony.  Again, we apologise that you've
had to wait over a couple of days.  Thank you very much, sir.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Any re-examination?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Just one or two questions.
Re-examined by Mr. Koumjian:
Q.   Witness P, you talked about yourself having been stopped at some
checkpoints prior to the attack on Kozarac which I believe was exactly ten
years ago today.  You mentioned two checkpoints, Omarska and a second
checkpoint.  I believe you said Tunjica.  Is that correct?
A.   Tunjica, yes.
Q.   Do you know who was manning those two checkpoints?
A.   At one point in time -- in any case, the police was always
present. And very frequently, there was a military vehicle there with
people wearing military uniforms at those checkpoints.
Q.   Do you know if these were people of one ethnicity or not?
A.   Well, since the takeover of power in Banja Luka, it was obvious
that these were only Serb ethnicities in the police and in the army.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  No further questions on redirect.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.
Questioned by the Court:
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Witness P, sorry that I have to ask once again a
question you already answered.  It's for the purpose of the legal
assessment, go into some detail.  On page 49 of the transcript, line 20,
following you were asked:  "During your questioning, were you beaten at
that time?"  It was Omarska camp.  Answer, line 21:  "During the
interrogation, there was a civilian standing.  I had to sit on a chair
wrong way around so that my back would be free for beatings.  During the
interrogation, there was a civilian standing behind me.  A young person in
uniform was questioning me.  The other one was taking down notes.  He
wasn't interfering in the conversation.  And when the person interrogating
was dissatisfied with my answer, then he would give a sign to the civilian
to beat me with a rubber baton."
Could you please tell us how long took this interrogation?  How
many times and where were you beaten?
A.   The interrogation lasted, perhaps, from between 20 and 30 minutes.
How many times I was beaten on my back, I really do not know.  In any
case, more than ten times.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Witness P, in your statement from 1994, on page
12, last line, until page 13, first paragraph, you said:  "The
interrogation took approximately two hours.  My back hurt, but there was
no bleeding.  It was only black and blue.  No bones were broken.  My
colleague in the neighbouring room had two ribs broken during his
interrogation. They did ask me whether I heard the screams and beatings in
the other room.  They said if I didn't answer correctly, I would be
treated similarly and to just wait, that I would hear the screams."
In 1994, you told the representative of the OTP that it
interrogation took approximately two hours.  Is this correct?
A.   Well, our arrival, the fact that we waited in front of the office
where people were sitting, the interrogation itself, general discussion
about what should be done with us, this is what I meant when I said a
longer period of time.  But the interrogation itself lasted up to half an
hour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for this clarification.
In the same statement of 1994, page 15, second paragraph, you
said:  "After my first interrogation, nothing happened to me except when
they came and asked for my money.  Bjelobrk, he was a taxi driver from
Omarska, he was the one telling them I had money.  I was advised to tell
them where my money was; otherwise, I could be beaten to death."  Do you
remember this, and could you explain the details of this?
A.   Well, I did give that statement.  Bjelobrk, how he came by
information and how he informed the guards about it, I do not know.  At
any rate, I spoke to a person who had to go along with Bjelobrk to his own
home to find money and gold for him.  That colleague told me:  "If they
should look for you, asking for money, you should say how much you have
and give it to them.  If you don't do that, you will not fare  well."  And
that is what I did.  Two or three of my colleagues who unfortunately tried
to give answers, they were taken away never to return.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  You mentioned three names at that time.  I
continue to quote from the same paragraph:  "That happened to another
driver and the owner of the sawmill.  Ekrem Melkic was the driver and
Vasif Kahrimanovic was the owner of the mill.  Hilmil Nukic was another
driver.  His house burnt down and his money was in that house, so they
didn't ask him many questions.  My house didn't burn down, and I had to
draw sketches of the house to show them where my money was."  Is that
correct?
A.   Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  And the three persons you named here, they were
never seen again?
A.   Two, no -- are no longer alive, but one is.  I could also mention
a third person who was taken away in the same fashion never to return.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could you please give us the name.
A.   Vasif Alihodzic.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Another issue:  On page 6 of your statement,
paragraph 2, in 1994 you said:  "This I heard from my friend, a Muslim
policeman.  He was sent back to Kozarac from his station in Prijedor and
told not to come back to work again.  I spent two months with this man in
Omarska.  He was taken away from there and never came back."  Do you
remember the name of this man?
A.   Dedo Arifagic is his name.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Did you, during the two months that you spent
with this man in Omarska, discuss why, and by whom, he was sent back to
Kozarac from his station in Prijedor and told not to come back to work
again?
A.   Well, we didn't go into the details.  After the takeover in
Prijedor, someone of the police, of the police command in Prijedor,
controlled by the Serbs then, established contact with the police in
Kozarac to join the Serb police force and declare their loyalty.  And they
had only insignia of the Serb police, which the people in Kozarac did not
want to receive.  This is as much as I know about it.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Did your friend, the Muslim policeman, tell you
who was in charge, giving order to the police, not only who was head of
the police but also possible other superior persons?
A.   No, he didn't speak about that.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  And then finally, I want to turn to
a totally different issue:  Could you please tell the Tribunal whether or
not there was any change in the paying system by the banks, after the
so-called takeover?
A.   My company was in the Srbac municipality, and the payment
transactions that until then went to Sarajevo, were redirected to Banja
Luka or Belgrade.  I could note that from the new giro account numbers
which were in the various payment forms for insurance, pension insurance,
social insurance, and so forth.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  In your statement of 1994, page 6, third
paragraph, you said:  "The companies were taken over by the Serbs.  The
paying system by the banks was now directed to Banja Luka, and from Banja
Luka it was directed to Belgrade.  I knew this because whenever I had to
make payments, I had to fill in two sides of the cheque.  On one side
there were blanks which I had to fill in for payments to Sarajevo and that
bit was missing.  In general, the paper was divided into three parts.
There was a stamp and blanks that had to be filled in for Sarajevo, the
second for the Opstina, and the third for Belgrade.  After the takeover,
they cut out the one -- they cut out the one for Sarajevo and replaced it
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
with Belgrade."  Is this correct?
A.   Well, I don't know if I said cut out or replaced.  I cannot
remember, but I know that the payment transactions, as a whole, went to
all directions except Sarajevo.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Furthermore, you stated, quote from page 5,
third-last paragraph:  "For example, we did not receive television
broadcast from Sarajevo.  All the bank accounts for business payments, for
electricity or gas or water were in Belgrade.  No money went to Sarajevo.
All taxes went to Belgrade instead of Sarajevo.  It became difficult to
travel.  There was a lack of petrol."  Correct?
A.   That is correct.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you for this.
Judge Fassi Fihri.
JUDGE FASSI FIHRI: [Interpretation] Witness P, you said that the
white house was the antechambre of death, and that there was another
house, a red house.  What was the use of the red house?
A.   What was done in the red house, I know that the people that had to
slaughter cattle kept talking about the red house.  It could be seen
through the window.  And there, they could find remains of clothing, of
shoes of their well-known colleagues who had been taken out a day or so
before.  And that is why we called it the red house, because it was a
place where people were killed, probably during the night.  I don't know
the exact entrance, where the exact entrance of the house was.  We could
only see the house from the back.  That is all.
JUDGE FASSI FIHRI: [Interpretation] So the two houses were used
for executioning people?
A.   Yes.
JUDGE FASSI FIHRI: [Interpretation] Thank you.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Judge Vassylenko.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  Thank you.
Have you ever heard about Dr. Stakic before the April takeover in
Prijedor municipality?
A.   No, I didn't.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  And what do you know about the role of Dr.
Stakic in the event you described in your testimony?
A.   Well, I never knew that everything was under his control.  I
didn't know what his position was, during the war.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  On the page 4 of your written testimony, taken
in August 1994, you said that the weapons changeover would occur at night.
After the 6th of April when the western world recognised Bosnia and
Herzegovina, how do you explain this?
A.   Well, I explain it by quoting what I said -- what I heard from a
Serb who lived in Banja   Luka.  He told me that people of Serb ethnicity
received arms during the night.  It was also mentioned that people had to
keep their lights on so that they would know which houses were Serb houses
or whether someone would joke and that accidentally lights were on in the
house of a Muslim.  Whether they received arms or not, I do not know.  But
when the war began, all people of Serb nationality carried guns.  So the
assumptions and stories proved to be true.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  And who ordered to give arms to the population?
A.   I don't know.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  And one more question:  On the page 12 of your
written testimony made in August 1994, you mentioned the function of the
investigation commission in the Omarska camp.  What was the composition of
this investigation commission, whom this commission was subordinated to?
A.   I don't know who they were subordinate to officially.  I know some
people by sight.  I recognised them during the interrogations.  I can
mention their names.  That was Gostimir Modic.  Then a retired police
officer by the name of Meakic, and the director of the Kozara National
Park.  I think his name was Knezevic.  I'm not sure, but I do know that he
was the director of the Kozara  National Park.  I did not know the other
members of the commission.  I saw that commission in a joint meeting at
the time when I was brought to a room above the kitchen in Omarska, I
recognised these three men.  And their names were mentioned quite a few
times by other people who would also say:  "I was interrogated by such and
such a person" or so and so.  We heard that at the beginning, people from
Banja Luka would come in to interrogate.  At one point, there was a rumour
that those people stopped coming, because less and less people would be
brought in to the camp.  And that is why probably the people from Prijedor
continued to work on their own.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  Those people you mentioned, did they belong to
the police, to the military, or to civilian?  Who were they?
A.   I saw Meakic wearing a police uniform.  And as for Mr. Modic and
Mr. Knezevic, I saw them in civilian clothes.  So I don't know who they
were subordinate to.
JUDGE VASSYLENKO:  I have no more questions.  Thank you.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] You're welcome.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Any other questions?
MR. OSTOJIC:  No, Your Honour.  Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  No, Mr. President.  Thank you.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then we all have to thank you, Witness P, for
your patience with us and giving us so many detailed answers and insight
of that what happened from your point of view in 1992.  And we have to
thank you for this.  And you're excused.
[The witness withdrew]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The trial stands adjourned until 4.00.
--- Recess taken at 3.34 p.m.
--- On resuming at 4.03 p.m.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  We may then proceed, please, the OTP.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you.  The next witness is s
Your Honour, before Your Honours is a binder containing new
exhibits that the Prosecution intends to offer and to identify today and
have given numbers at least for identification today.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  You're speaking about list 1, 2, 3?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  If you could go into details.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  This binder contains the exhibits in list 2 and
list 3.  If Your Honours' information, list 2 contains exhibits broadly
interpreted as coming within the category of Crisis Staff or National
Defence Council.  And list 3 includes specific exhibits that we planned --
I haven't yet met with the next witness, but we plan to probably, or
possibly depending on what I learn from the witness over the weekend, if
he can comment on these, present and have the witness who will next
testify on Monday comment on these exhibits.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  Sorry for letting you stand there.
Welcome, Mr. Inayat.  And could you please give the solemn declaration.
THE WITNESS:  I solemnly declare that I will speak the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you, please be seated.
WITNESS:  MAZHAR INAYAT
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  You may start.
Examined by Mr. Koumjian:
Q.   Sir, would you state your name for the record.
A.   My name is Mazhar Inayat.
Q.   Mr. Inayat, can you tell the Chamber by who are you employed and
what is your title?
A.   I am currently working with the Office of the Prosecutor as an
investigator, and I have been the investigations team leader since
December of 1997.
Q.   When did you begin working for the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICTY?
A.   My first working day at the Tribunal was 9th of August, 1995.
Q.   Prior to working with the United Nations, did you have any -- or
with the ICTY specifically, did you have any prior law enforcement
experience?
A.   Yes, I have been with the police force in Pakistan since 15th of
December, 1980.
Q.   Until what date approximately working?
A.   I'm on absence of leave since 9th of August, 1995.  So I'm still
employed by the police in Pakistan.
Q.   Mr. Inayat, would you please inform the Trial Chamber regarding
the handling of evidence by the office of the Prosecution, specifically
when evidence is received or recovered, how is it physically handled,
where is it kept, and what records are kept documenting that evidence?
A.   As an investigator, if I were to take signed statements from
witnesses or if I were to receive documentary material from outside
agencies, the first thing I would do is when I come back to the Tribunal,
I would record the information in a form called "information indexing
form," the IFF form.  And in that form, I would list the source of the
information, when it was received, the dates it was received, the location
where it was received.  And if there were others involved with me, then
the evidence has been received.  And after completing the IFF form, I
would take the material to the evidence unit of the OTP, of the Office of
the Prosecutor.  And I would make an entry on their IFF register
indicating that I have brought the evidence.
The evidence unit would then forward the material to a records
clerk who would then stamp the evidence.  Each and every page has to be
stamped with a unique number, ERN number, evidence record number.  Once
the unique numbers have been stamped on to the documents, then they are
sent for scanning, to scanners, who are also staff working in the evidence
unit.  The scanners would then scan the material and then it's made
available to the OTP staff and we can view it electronically either on our
Keyfile database or on our Zyfind database.
Q.   How do these procedures different for physical evidence, a
firearm, for example, or for something such as a photograph or video?
A.   I think the only differentiation is that if the evidence has been
seized, then it has to be treated differently.  For example, if I'm on a
search and seize mission and I have seized material under a search warrant
issued by this Chamber or by the Tribunal, then I have to complete a chain
of custody form immediately.  I have to write down the exact details of
immediately when that happens.  And then that chain of custody form
basically then is brought back with the evidence, and I'm the custodian of
that evidence up to the point it has been submitted with the evidence
unit.  And again, when I come to the evidence unit, I have to fill out
another form for the chain of custody, and then the material is taken over
by the evidence unit.  Same procedures are adopted for stamping and
scanning.  But the material from chain of custody will go in a separate
vault, not the normal vault.
Q.   How are the ERN number, the ERN numbers, given to physical
evidence?  You mentioned a stamp on each page.  Are physical items of
evidence also given ERN numbers?
A.   Yes.  Each and everything, even videos will be given -- of course
the ERN number for videos will start with the letter V.  And for audios,
it will start with the letter A.  But everything has to be stamped when it
is registered with the evidence unit.
Q.   You indicated that you have been with the Office of the Prosecutor
for a long time.  How long have you been working on investigations related
to the municipality of Prijedor?
A.   When I was promoted as team leader in December of 1997, I joined
the -- one of the teams in the Office of the Prosecutor referred to as
team 1, which has been mainly responsible for investigating crimes in the
northwestern Bosnia, Prijedor being part of that region.  So I would say
that since December of 1997, 1st December, 1997, I have been working on
Prijedor.
Q.   I'd now like to go to a document labelled "list number 1."
MR. KOUMJIAN:  And perhaps, at this time, Your Honour, the three
lists could be given exhibit numbers, lists 1, 2, and 3 if that's --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  No objections?
MR. OSTOJIC:  No, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could we please have the new numbers.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I know the registry, I had asked them, indicated
the binders also be marked.  I don't know if they would prefer we mark the
binders first if they have already begun, if there's any preference.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I would say the list comes first, and then the
content.  So list number 1.
THE REGISTRAR:  List number 1 would be S53.  List number 2 would
be S54.  And list number 3 would be S55.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Admitted into evidence under these numbers.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Mr. Inayat, is it correct that list number 1 was prepared by you?
A.   I prepared the last column, which is called sources, yes.
Q.   Does this list -- well, you wouldn't be able to testify to this.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  But this list, for Your Honours' information,
concerns items that are already admitted into evidence, that already have
an exhibit number.
Q.   On list number 1, Mr. Inayat, can you explain the last column
"sources" what procedures you went through in order to fill in that
column as to the source of the documents that have been admitted to date
on this case.
A.   I think it's important that I must make this very clear, that
"sources" only means that I'm trying to indicate how the OTP came about
these documents.  And the way to find this out is that if I have the ERN
number for a certain document which you can see is also mentioned in the
middle columns.  And I can go into Zyfind or Keyfile databases and also
the IFF database, and after reviewing those databases, I can get all the
information on the source and that's what I have done to indicate the
source in the last column.
Q.   As to list number 2 and number 3, did you also prepare those
lists?
A.   I did, yes.
Q.   And each of these, the documents are listed by 65 ter number.  Is
that correct?
A.   That is correct, yes.
Q.   And they also have the ERN or ERN numbers.  Correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you fill in the information regarding the source in the same
manner?
A.   Precisely.
Q.   You mentioned, and it's indicated, on some of these sources, that
these items were seized in Prijedor.  Are you familiar with the Office of
the Prosecutor served search warrants in Prijedor at any time?
A.   There was a search and seizure mission in Prijedor which was
conducted on 12th of December, 1997.  A large team of investigators and
interpreters and lawyers went on that mission with search warrants issued
by Judge Fuad Riad in the first week of December 1997.  And we conducted
searches at four different locations in Prijedor.  I was personally a
member of the search team.
Q.   Was there a second search?
A.   There was a second search in Prijedor which was conducted at six
different locations, and this second search took place in October, from
28th -- sorry from 27th until 29th of October, 2000.  And again, I was a
member of that search team.  But on the second occasion, I have to
clarify, that we did not have search warrants, although we did have the
prosecutors' directive, which allowed us to conduct the searches.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, if the witness, if the map that has
been marked --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  May I just, I'm a little bit surprised about
this document.  For example, reading on page 1 on the bottom line, SK44.
This document was never admitted into evidence.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Apparently there was an error made.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I hope this is the only one.  Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honours, may Exhibit S3 be displayed on the
ELMO.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  And apparently, sorry, the same is true for SK
43A and B.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  That is correct.  That was the report that was not
admitted.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.  Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Mr. Inayat, you indicated that these seizures, first in 1997, that
you went to four location inside Prijedor.  Are these locations indicated
on this map, the Prijedor town map, Exhibit S3?
A.   Yes, they are indicated, yes.
Q.   Can you point to those and indicate the four locations.
A.   This one here is the Municipal Assembly building, and this is the
location where I personally went to.  This here is the SUP or the police
station building.  A lot of my colleagues went there.  And the third one
is the SDS offices.  In fact, the arrow is indicating to the street, so
the SDS offices are very close to the end of this arrow.  That's the third
location.  And finally, a team went to this location which is the radio
station and Kozarski Vjesnik offices.  Kozarski Vjesnik offices will
locate in the radio station building, so that's the fourth location.  This
is 12 December, 1997.
Q.   Thank you.  And in the year 2000 seizures, can you indicate the
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
locations that were searched?
A.   In October 2000, we searched the police station once again.  And I
went there.  So let me put it like this.  Yes.  So I went to the police
station here.  And I went on the 28th and 29th.  I went there on two days.
Then we went to the Ljubija mine headquarters.  This is here.
Then we went to the health centre, which is here.  The fourth location we
went to was the Prijedor hospital, which is here.  The fifth location was
in the Omarska camp, which you cannot see here on the map, which is
further southeast of Prijedor.  So these were the locations we went in
October 2000.
Q.   Thank you.  Mr. Inayat, did you also prepare certain maps for use
in this case?
A.   Yes, I have.
Q.   And can you tell us what you used in order to prepare those maps,
what kind of computer programmes or hardware and software you used?
A.   The OTP has in its possession, geographical information systems
software called Artview.  We've had it since 1996.  The current version we
are using is Artview 3.2.  This is a software developed and which is owned
by an American company which has offices in Rotterdam, and the company is
called Esri.  I received training almost 18 months ago on how to use this
software.  It's a powerful tool which allows me to create a map and to
insert any information I want.  I can highlight villages.  Two arrows
indicate landscapes that I want to.  I have been frequently using the
system, and I think I probably believe something like four maps have been
exhibited in this case that I have created on Artview.
Q.   How are the actual locations determined as far as the relationship
between one location and another?  What is used in that software, do you
know?
A.   The software has a certain search tools.  For example, if I were
to focus on the municipality  of Prijedor, the actual map will not show me
where Hambarine is, for example.  Just giving an example.  But using the
search tool, if I were to highlight Hambarine, it will give me the exact
coordinate, in fact, it will take me spot on where Hambarine is.  And then
using certain other features from the programme, I can then use certain
dots or images or symbols to point where Hambarine is, and then I can use
even text to write the word "Hambarine."  So there are other tools such as
a tool that allows me to measure distances.  For example, if I wanted to
know the exact distance between Prijedor and, say, Kozarac, I will use
that tool and it will give me the exact distance.  As I said, it's a
powerful programme which allows me a number of things to do to prepare
maps which can then be seen and, you know, and in court.
Q.   If S51 could be displayed on the ELMO, please.
Sir, on some of the maps, there are photographs surrounding the
map.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes, I have prepared some maps on Artview where the trial team
wanted to also highlight digital images of relevant places, so I was able
to do that also.
Q.   Did you prepare today an indication for each of these photographs
that you used as to the date that that photograph was taken?
A.   Yes, I did create this three-page document which gives information
on when the digital photographs appearing on these maps were taken.
Q.   I believe that everyone should have a document which was
distributed this afternoon, the first page, it's a spreadsheet.  And the
first page or table, item number 1, is Ljubija/Brisevo overview.  Could
this be marked as the next exhibit in order.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could you please give us some guidance what you
are speaking about.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes, it is a --
MR. OSTOJIC:  Follows the three lists that were previously marked
independent from the binder.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  It's a three-page document.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Here we are.  Right.  So consequently, it would
be 56.  Right?  Objections?
MR. OSTOJIC:  No objections, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Admitted.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Mr. Inayat, can you briefly explain this table that you prepared
in S56.
A.   If you look at the first column, it gives four serial numbers
which are for four different maps that I have prepared which have digital
images.  And then for each of these four maps, in the fourth column, you
will see digital photograph number.  This is the number which is on the
photograph on the map.  And the last column indicates the date when the
image was recorded by an investigator and the name of the investigator.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, I have another document which should
have been distributed indicating "index of Prijedor photographs."  May
that be marked next in order, S57, I believe.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  57.  I can see no objections.
MR. OSTOJIC:  No objection, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Admitted.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Mr. Inayat, is it correct that this index of Prijedor photographs
was prepared by you and indicates the source of the photographs that were
in Exhibit Number 15, I believe, S15, the booklet of photographs from
Prijedor for this case?
A.   Yes.  When I received this booklet which had something like 30-odd
photographs on it with ERN numbers, so I searched the sources as to how we
received the photographs.  And in the last column, I've indicated that.
Q.   Mr. Inayat, can you tell us -- briefly describe for the Trial
Chamber the procedure used when a statement is taken from a witness who
does not speak the same language as the interviewer.  What are the OTP
procedures for taking a statement through interpretation?
A.   I'll just give a personal example, because I have been involved in
taking statements from many witnesses.  So after I've identified a witness
who has to be met, I will call him, seek his permission for an interview.
Once that's given, I will go with an interpreter, occasionally also with
trial lawyer from the team, and we will meet with the witness.  After
introductions and in most cases after giving him my visiting card, we'll
spend about five, ten minutes explaining him the reason for this visit and
how long the interview will take.  Of course, the interpreter is
interpreting all along because most witnesses from former Yugoslavia, they
do not understand English.  I have a laptop with me, and I explain this to
the witness, that it might take a day or two, and that he has to give me
brief answers which the interpreter will relay to me, and I'll ask him
questions.  And we always ask witnesses to always distinguish between what
they have seen and what they have heard.  So with some advice on these
matters, we start with the interview.  Once the interview has been
recorded, the investigator or, in my case, I would read the statement to
myself once again on the laptop and see if any additional follow-up is
required.  If it is required, then I'll ask additional questions to
clarify areas of his statement or her statement.
Once all that has been done and I have edited the statement, in
terms of spellchecks and things like that, then I will request the
interpreter to read back the statement to the witness. The interpreter is
looking at an English transcript, but she is translating that into the
B/C/S language.  Once the readback has been completed, investigators will
always ask the witness if he is satisfied with his or her statement
because they have to sign it, and since they are going to adopt it, they
have to say they are satisfied.  And once the witness is satisfied with
the statement, we will print the statement and we will ask the witness to
sign on the first page, initial all other pages, and finally on the last
page, there is a witness acknowledgment, in which the witness says that
the statement has been read back to me and that I agree with the contents.
In recent years, we've also inserted a B/C/S witness acknowledgment so
that the witness can read this.  And then he will again sign the last
page.  The interpreter will sign the interpretation.  There's a
certification, interpretation certification.  She'll sign and initial all
other pages.  And the investigator will also sign the first page and
initial all other pages.
Q.   Is the statement a verbatim -- taken verbatim from the witness,
the witness's words, or is the statement first written in a narrative form
by the investigator summarising the answers and information given by the
witness?
A.   The matter that I've always used as an investigator, I have taken
down verbatim what the witness has been telling me.
Q.   Do you take down every word that the witness says?
A.   I take most of what the interpreter says.
Q.   Is the -- you indicated that the statement is read back.  You
prepare the statement in English.  Is that correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   And it's read back to the witness by the interpreter.  Is that
correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   Is the interpreter reading off the screen of the laptop normally
or off of printed material?
A.   It can vary from investigator to investigator.  I personally
prefer to allow the interpreter to sit with me and to start reading from
the monitor, from the laptop.  Some investigators prefer printing it out
and then doing the read back, but then if changes are required, then a lot
of time is wasted.  So just to save time.
Q.   You indicated that the witness signs the statement.  Is that
statement the witness signs then, the English statement that you've
prepared or the investigator has prepared?
A.   Yes, certainly, yes, always invariably.
Q.   Now, this Trial Chamber has seen B/C/S versions of those
statements.  Can you explain when those are prepared?
A.   So when I have taken statements from witnesses on mission, I'll
come back and complete the  IFF form for each statement.  It will go to the
evidence unit.  And then if the team has identified that particular
witness to testify or for further follow up, then a translation request is
put in to the CLS branch of the Tribunal where all translation work is
done.  And it is at that point that that English statement that the
investigator has taken is then translated into the B/C/S language.
Q.   Last summer, did you take a video, a film, from a helicopter over
the area of Prijedor, among other areas?
A.   That is correct, on 22nd of July, 2001, that happened.
Q.   Did you prepare an edited version of that tape?
A.   I have prepared an edited tape which is about 11 minutes and 40
seconds.
Q.   When you say edited, can you explain what you did to the first
film that you took?
A.   The first film that I took of Prijedor was something like 55
minutes, maybe even more than that, and having discussed this within the
trial team, it was believed in courts you don't have that much time to
show the whole film, so it's better to just concentrate on the main areas
that you want shown in the Court.  So keeping that in mind, I went to the
audiovisual section in the Tribunal, and I had it edited to show only the
relevant portions, related to the indictment I should say.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, the video is prepared to be played.
May it be given a number at this point.
THE REGISTRAR:  This would be S58.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I can see no objections.  Admitted.
MR. OSTOJIC:  I'm sorry.  No objection, Your Honour.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, may we play S58, and may I ask the
witness at any point he wants to stop the tape, he can ask for it to be
stopped.  Please point out the sights that you recognise on the tape as
it's being played.  May we proceed in that manner.  Thank you, Mr.
President.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] We are looking at the Omarska
detention camp, and in the background you can see the open-cast quarry
where iron ore was extracted before the war.  This Your Honours, you can
see there are about four buildings.  The one nearest to us is the
administration building, and then there is this big red hangar building,
and the small building in front of the big red hangar building is the area
referred to as the white house.  This is the administration building, Your
Honours.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Does that contain the kitchen?
A.   That does contain the kitchen on the front portion on the ground
floor.
Q.   Can you see the red house?
A.   Yes, the red house is the small --
THE INTERPRETER:  Could the counsel and the witness please slow
down and make pauses between question and answer.  Thank you.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is the open-cast quarry, which
is about I would say 500 metres from the main hangar building.  And this
camp, Your Honours, is located southeast of Prijedor about 21 kilometres I
would say by road.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Can we stop the tape at this point.
Q.   We see some roads here by the camp.  Can you explain where those
roads go?
A.   In fact, what I'm looking at right now is there is -- one of
the -- this road is basically is going around the camp.  And if we just
play this a little bit, I can then point out the direction it takes to go
to Trnopolje.  This is just coming out of the camp now.  And this road
that you see is heading west towards Trnopolje.  And the rail track is
also running parallel.  In the distance you can see the fish pond, which
is very close to the Trnopolje camp.  [Need notation for video played].
This is, Your Honours, I think about -- less than 5, maybe 6, 7
kilometres from Omarska.  This is the fish pond I was referring to, which
is located south of Trnopolje camp.  In fact, very close to the camp.
This, Your Honours, in the very centre of your screens is the big white
building which before the war was a school in Trnopolje and turned into a
detention area, also known as the Trnopolje camp.
And the railway station in Trnopolje is located about 200 metres
from this camp.  Initially, most people who were deported were deported
from this railway station.  Your Honours, this grassy area that you see at
the back of the camp, this was mainly used for the refugees.  The majority
of refugees who couldn't go into these buildings inside were staying
outside.  The smaller white building that you see to the right of your
screens was also part of this camp, but it was the community centre.  And
just behind it was the Serbian Red Cross headquarters.  This place,
Trnopolje, Your Honours, is about 5 kilometres south of Kozarac, where we
will be heading now after we have finished with Trnopolje.
This is the railway station, Your Honours, at the bottom of your
screens.  This is a road coming from Omarska, the car is heading towards
Trnopolje from Omarska.  So this is an asphalt road right in front of the
Trnopolje camp heading towards Kozarac on the right side.  This is in
between Kozarac and Trnopolje, the Ukrainian orthodox church, which is
still intact.  And very close to this church are the small hamlets of
Jaskici and Sivci, places that will probably be mentioned during the
course of this trial.  The main road heading towards Kozarac.
This here, Your Honours, is Kozarac.  And Your Honours, this is
Kamicani.  Look at it very close to Kozarac.  This, Your Honour, is the
big road that you see at the bottom, is the main Banja Luka/Prijedor Road.
Banja Luka is about 48 kilometres from Prijedor.  We are still in
Kamicani.  And this, the centre of your screens, is the wood-processing
plant in Kozarac.  And very soon you will see the intersection, the main
intersection of Kozarac.  This, Your Honours, is the orthodox church in
Kozarac.  And here you can see Kozarac village, which is quite a big
settlement.  Another view of Kozarac looking north.
Your Honours, there is a road from Kozarac, a metal road going up
to the top of the mountains, about 9 to 10 kilometres in distance.  It
takes you to Benkov's barracks.  This is the Benkov's barracks.  These
barracks, before the war, were used as a summer camp for students from all
over the country, but in January 1992 was taken over by the RS army, the
JNA and later the VRS.  And even today, it is with them.
You can see those barracks at the back, facing the forest.  There
are several barracks.  And end of May, beginning of June, people who were
fleeing from Kozarac, they were arrested from the forested area and
detained here for several weeks before being transported to other camps in
Prijedor.  So these are the barracks which were used as detention.
From here, Your Honours, we'll be heading west.  And the first
location we'll come to is the Keraterm ceramics factory which is also
known the detention camp.  Your Honours, at the bottom of your screen,
the big building you see is the Keraterm factory.  The brick factory is
just behind it.  We may not be able to see, this one on the right.  This
factory is located less than 2 kilometres from Prijedor centre.  And on
the main Prijedor/Banja   Luka Road.  Your Honours, now you will be seeing
at the very bottom of your screens, I will indicate that, the offices of
the Kozara Putovi construction company which you just saw the red roofs at
the bottom of your screens.  And these offices were used for
interrogations during the initial operation of this detention camp.
This is the front view of the Keraterm camp.  And you see an
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
asphalt path leading to a metal door here, Your Honours.  You will see it
again.  This is referred to as room number 3.  It's right in the centre of
your screens now.  And rooms 1 and 2 were to the left, and room 4 to the
right.  Your Honours, this is the centre of Prijedor where all the
government buildings are, which I showed you on that map also.  And in the
middle of your screens, you see Prijedor hotel right on River Sana.  Your
Honours, now we are heading towards west of Prijedor to the Brdo region.
Six villages located there, Biscani, Rizvanovici, Rakovcani, Hambarine,
Brisevo --   oh sorry, Carakovo, not south direction.  Now we are in
Biscani.  There's a lot of construction going on these days when we made
this film.  This Your Honours is still Biscani.  You will see a small
white-coloured clear mine.  This clear mine, as you can see it at the
right hand middle of your screens is located very close to a square called
Mrkalj square, and I think this will figure quite frequently during -- I
was even trying to point from the helicopter.  This, Your Honours, is the
hamlet, Hegici, also located in Biscani and will be referred to during
these proceedings.
Your Honours, we are now heading to Rizvanovici.  This is the
village of Rizvanovici, located within kilometres of Biscani.  Prijedor
city in the distance, and fish pond also in the distance.  Your Honours,
this is Rakovcani, also located -- in fact very, very close to
Rizvanovici.  Now we are still in Rakovcani.  Now, Your Honours, we are
coming to Hambarine Polje, part of Hambarine village.
This, Your Honours, is Hambarine village, the big building in the
centre of the screen is the community centre.  Hambarine, I believe, is
probably one of the biggest villages in the Brdo region.  And this, Your
Honours, we are overflying Carakovo, the fifth village, located very close
to Sana, Sana River, I mean.  This is a community centre you see at the
middle of your screens.  It is also a new cemetery.  And Your Honours,
River Sana and the thing I want to show you here is the bridge called the
Zege Bridge, and we will be focussing on it now.  This place will also be
mentioned when witnesses talk about Carakovo.  This is the bridge.
From here, Your Honours, we will be going to Ljubija.  This is the
Ljubija football ground.  This, Your Honours, is an area where we exhumed
mass graves.  We won't be able to see the exact place there because
helicopters couldn't fly over certain areas.  This, Your Honours, is
Brisevo, overwhelmingly Catholic village completely destroyed, and a lot
of people killed in July of 1992.
The last thing you will see, I think we are about to finish now,
is the Catholic church was built in 1990, a newly-built Catholic church in
the distance there.  One of the maps shows the photograph gives the
impression that the church is still intact.  The photograph was taken from
the front of it.  That's why.  If you look at this aerial image, it shows
that it's destroyed.  There is no roof.  That's it.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q.   Mr. Inayat, you indicated at one point a map --
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, please.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Thank you.
Q.   Mr. Inayat, you indicated at one point a location where bodies had
been exhumed, an exhumation site.  What is the name of that site?
A.   In fact, there are two locations there.  The first one is called
Redak, in a small area called Kipe.  That site was exhumed in, I believe,
1999.  And then the second site was exhumed last year, also very close to
the first one in the Ljubija area, and the site is called Jakerina Kos.
Those were the two sites exhumed by us.
Q.   I think at one point you were indicating that this was an area
where a helicopter could not fly over.  Was that Jakerina Kos?
A.   No, that was Redak Kipe.  And Jakerina Kos is about 2 kilometres
further down the road.  But there is a map I know, that you are using,
where I've indicated the exact locations of these two mass graves.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, I don't have any more questions of the
witness.  But the exhibits referred to in Exhibits Number 54 and 55 are in
binders.  I'm wondering if we could mark those at this point,
indicating -- I realise the Defence hasn't had time to make any objections
regarding them.  I don't know if Your Honour prefers to mark them now or
at a later point.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I think it's worthwhile marking, and then let's
wait and see whether or not there are objections.
Could the registry please start with the new exhibit numbers.
THE REGISTRAR:  So we are talking about these two right now?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Starting with 99.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Starting with each 65 ter number.
THE REGISTRAR:  So number 99 will be S59. 158 will be S60. 172 is
S61.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Most of these, Your Honours, do have a B/C/S
translation, or an English translation and a B/C/S original.  So can we
assume that for each of these the English is A and the B/C/S is B?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Yes.  But let's be careful and do it piece by
piece that we really have everything together.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  So on 99, the English would be S59A,and the B/C/S
S59B.  Is that correct?
THE REGISTRAR:  Yes, this is correct.
Proceed?  So we have S60A and S60B.  S61A and S61B.  65 ter number
201 will be S62A and S62B.  Number 204 will be S63A and S63B. Number 207
--
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please not so fast that I can follow whether we
have both English and B/C/S version.  Is it correct, the former 204,
B/C/S, there is no better copy available?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  We can try to see if there's a better copy
available.  May we leave this for now, and we will try to see if our
original is any better.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Right.  207.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 207 will be S64A and S64B.  Number 208 will
be S65A and S65B.  Number 212 will be S66A and S66B.  Number 218 will be
S67A, S67B.  Number 219 will be S68A and S68B.  Number 224 will be S69A
and S69B.  Number 225 will be S70A and S70B.  Number 226 will be S71A and
S71B.  Number 227 will be S72A and S72B.  Number 228 will be S73A and
S73B.  Number 229 will be S74A and S74B.
Number 230 will be S75A and S75B.  Number 237 will be S76A and
S76B.  Number 246 will be S77A and S77B.  Number 247 will be S78A and
S78B.  Number 248 will be S79A and S79B.  Number 253 will be S80A and
S80B.  Number 257 will be S81A and S81B.  Number 267 will be S82A and
S82B.  Number 268 -- sorry.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  267.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I think there's a problem with 267.  I see, Your
Honours.  Only one page B/C/S.  I see.  I see, I'm sorry.  It does have.
All three pages are translated.
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone, Your Honour, please.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Announcement and decision.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Correct.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  All together.  Okay.
THE REGISTRAR:  So number 268 will be S83A and S83B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Stop.  What should go as 83A, I can understand
in English.  But then we have numerous pages in B/C/S.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Can we check for a moment.  I think this may
already be admitted, this exhibit.  I'm double checking that.
No.  Apparently it's a different interview.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  But shall we please do with all the B/C/S pages?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Well, I think the reason there are multiple pages
is in order to get all of the newspaper in.  Each one, it's the same page
but photographed several different times, so to have the entire article
photocopied, apparently they put the newspaper in different positions.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.  Please continue.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 278 will become S84A and S84B.  Number 279
will become --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Stop once again.  Here I have one page in
English, and two pages in B/C/S.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  The second page in B/C/S, apparently the
translation is not included at the moment.  We could check on that.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So for the record, the B/C/S with register
number 00633806 is still open.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Correct.  We're checking to see if there's a
translation of that page.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then proceed to 279.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Actually, if I could suggest, to make it easier, we
take out the second page.  It's also a separate decision, so it probably
should be given a different number in any case.  And we can decide on
whether we want to admit that as a separate exhibit later.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 279 becomes S85A and S85B.  Number 299
becomes S86A and S86B.  Number 303 becomes S87A and S87B.  Number 305
becomes S88A and S88B.  Number 306 becomes S89A and S89B.  Number 365
becomes S90A and S90B.  Number 440 becomes S91A and S91B.  Number --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Wait a minute.  It's the wrong one.  455.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 455 becomes S92A and S92B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Shall we continue with list 3 immediately?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 21 becomes S93A and S93B.  Number 25
becomes S94A and S94B.  Number 42 becomes S95A and S95B.  Number 69
becomes S96A and S96B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  What's wrong here?  We have two English pages.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  That's correct.  The only thing on the last page is
a stamp regarding how it was obtained.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I have the impression we have two English
translations.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  And we have two different decisions, I believe.
Maybe not.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Could the English page be explained, please,
after 96B.  To which document does this belong?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I believe what happened in this case, which happens
sometimes, is that the same document was received, IFFed and ERNed twice
and translated twice.  It's the same decision.  It may have been obtained
from two different sources.  We would ask that just one remain, the first
remain, and both of the English and the B/C/S, and the second be removed.
So the original B/C/S would be P0038529.  And the other page, we can
remove.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I'm hesitant whether we can really remove.  I
don't know what the content, but evidently, there are different stamps on
it.  And I don't know whatever will be the meaning at the end of the day.
And therefore, I believe we should have it as it is.  My only question was
what about the following English page 00389096A?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes, that is a certification as to how it was
received.  And perhaps we may give that a different letter other than A
and B.  Actually, it should be part of B, because that's the certification
how the original, B, was received.  That's probably the back of the
original stamp that was placed on the back.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.  76.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 76 becomes S97A and S97B.  Number 77
becomes S98A and S98B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Sorry.  But I can't see any 77.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  That actually is already admitted, and so we should
not give it a number.  I'm sorry, that should not have been on the chart.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then we may proceed with 79.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 79 becomes S98A and S98B.  Number 81
becomes S99A and S99B.
Number 83 becomes S100A and S100B.  Number 84 becomes S101A and
S101B.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Next on the chart is already admitted also, so we
will not have the 65 ter in the binder.  So that should be skipped, number
87.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 120 becomes S102A and S102B.  Number 133
becomes S103A and S103B.  Number 139 becomes S104A and S104B.  Number
140 becomes S105A and S105B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Here, we once again have two B/C/S versions.
Correct?  Or even three or more?  Could you please have a look what's
about 105B.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I notice that the three B/C/S, each has a different
ERN number, although they are sequential.  So I'm confused about it, but
apparently they were seized as three different original papers.  Each page
was ERNed separately, but it's the same document, so there's one English
translation.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So for the record, and for the list, we should
clarify that Exhibit Number 105B consists of four documents.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.  And actually, looking at the signature, it is
three different documents.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please proceed.  171.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 171 becomes S106A and S106B.  Number 200
becomes S107A and S107B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Before we turn to 220, I don't believe that this
can be the translation of what we can find in B/C/S.  Or is it the
intention only to admit into evidence, or to tender, to be correct, now
number 97 on the B/C/S version, and to exclude the rest of the page?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I'm sorry, I'm confused by number 97.  We're
talking about 65 ter number 200?
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  220.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.  The only -- we're only talking about decision
number 97.  This, I believe, is a page out of the gazette.  I'm not sure
about that, but we're only tendering number 97 which is translated, for
this exhibit.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 220 as described becomes S108A and S108B.
Number 222 becomes S109A and S109B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  This seems to be a little bit confusing.  I have
numerous documents under 222.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  It's numerous decisions.  It's one copy of one
issue, issue number 2, for the gazette of the Autonomous Region of
Krajina, 1992.  So the gazette lists numerous decisions, but the gazette
was seized as one document, one publication.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So is it correct to state that the document 109A
includes 50 pages?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes.  That's correct.  That's exactly correct,
running sequentially in ERN number 00497838 to 7860.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  261.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 261 becomes S110A and S110B.  Number 262
becomes S111A and S111B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Once again, it's the same problem.  It's only 55
on 111B?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Correct.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 263 becomes S112A and S112B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  The same will be true with 264, it's only 97?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Yes, Mr. President.
THE REGISTRAR:  Number 264 becomes S113A and S113B.  Number 276
becomes S114A and S114B.  Number 289 becomes S115A and S115B.  Number
298 becomes S116A and S116B.  Number 305 becomes S117A and S117B.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG: I can't see 305.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Apparently, it didn't make it into the binder, and
perhaps we will not mark it.  We'll bring it down Monday, if we use it.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So please, may it be skipped from the registry.
And we conclude by S116A and B.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, Mr. President, just one other matter
on this.  List number 1, Your Honour pointed out that there were a couple
of items listed as admitted that were not.  We have corrected that.  It
has been corrected by Ms. Karper during the testimony of Mr. Inayat, and
we could substitute, Your Honour, if it's agreeable to all parties, a
corrected list.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  That's fine, we appreciate.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  S53.  I can hand out a corrected S53.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.
Any other technical problems?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I would move the video into evidence if it has not
yet been actually admitted into evidence.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I think it has been.  It has a number already.
And I would say it's only fair to give the Defence the opportunity to
object until, say, Tuesday.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.  That would be great.  Thank
you very much.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  So then it's appropriate to have a break until
5.45.
--- Recess taken at 5.23 p.m.
--- On resuming at 5.45 p.m.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  Your Honour, for the record, the Prosecution is
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
assisted now also by Lise-Lotte Karlsson.
We have no further questions.  The witness is available.  But if
the Defence wanted to indicate their preference, which I have no objection
to.
MR. OSTOJIC:  We will proceed in any way the Court wants us to. We
can either ask a couple questions.  We, however, having just received some
of these, although previously obviously they were presented to us, would
like some time to go into detail with each of the exhibits with the
witness.  We are prepared to go forward for about a half hour, otherwise
we would reserve our right to continue to ask this witness some other
questions based upon his testimony and obviously his duties here at the
OTP.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I understand that you intend to proceed with
some general questions during the next half hour, and then later on,
having had a view on all the documents, cross-examination also related to
some documents?
MR. OSTOJIC:  That's fair, if that's the way the Court wants me to
proceed --
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Okay.  Then let's proceed this way.
May the witness be brought in once again.
Cross-examined by Mr. Ostojic:
MR. OSTOJIC:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Mr. Inayat, my name is John Ostojic, and I'm here with Mr. Branko
Lukic and we represent the accused Milomir Stakic in this case.  Good
evening or good afternoon.  I'm going to ask you a couple questions today
with some guidelines the Court has provided us.  I may be asking you some
questions in the future when you testify again in connection with other
documents related to these you've presented to us today.  So bear with me
please.  Sir, just briefly, can you tell us what your educational
background is.
A.   In 1980, I finished my -- graduated from the University of
Islamabad in Pakistan with a master's degree in International Relations.
And in 1988, I was selected on a British Consul scholarship and I attended
Exeter University for a year and a half, and I did my masters in Police
Studies.
Q.   I'm sorry, I didn't catch the name of the university.
A.   Exeter university is about 200 kilometres southwest of London.
Q.   Thank you.  A couple general questions, in connection with some of
the testimony you gave today.  I note on page 13, line 21 through 25 of
today's transcript, and proceeding on page 14, line 1 and might be just
me, but you initially stated that there were six locations during the
second search that were performed.  And I was able only to write down
five.  So maybe if I list them and then you can tell me which one is
missing.  Or if you'd like to list them, I'll do whichever you'd like.
Were there six locations or five that you actually searched?
A.   In fact, there were six locations.  And the map that I was using
today perhaps an older version.  And on that map, I couldn't find the
sixth location which I'm certain I had pointed out.  I can repeat those
locations once again.  It was the Prijedor medical hospital.  It was the
health centre in Prijedor.  The Ljubija mines headquarter offices in
Prijedor.  The Omarska administrative offices, located adjacent to the
Omarska detention camp.  Then there was this police station in Prijedor.
And I have to admit that the sixth location, I just can't recall it.  And
I am certain it was six locations, and I can give you those later on.
Q.   That's fine.  I just wasn't sure if it was my notes.  It was not
two police stations --
A.   Yes, thank you for reminding me.  Omarska police station.  So we
went to two police stations, one in Prijedor and the second one in
Omarska.
Q.   Thank you.  On December 1997, I believe you said was the
approximate time in which you became team leader of team 1, and that was
the time that you received a legal and lawful warrant to do a search and
seizure of four locations in the area that we've commonly referred to as
the Prijedor municipality.  Correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   And approximately three years later, October 27th through the
29th, the year 2000, you mentioned that you went on a second search
mission or search and seizure mission, but this time, and I'm paraphrasing
your testimony, I apologise for doing so, but you correct me if I am
wrong, this time you mentioned that "there was no search warrant," but
there was an OTP directive.  And I'm paraphrasing.  Is that accurate or
close to what you said earlier this afternoon?
A.   The directive that I was referring to issued by the Prosecutor
under, I believe, Rule 39.  So it was a directive issued by the Prosecutor
allowing us to search locations in Prijedor.
Q.   Why wasn't, if you know, a warrant issued in October of 2000 as it
was in December of 1997 to do a search and seizure in the area commonly
referred to as the Prijedor municipality?
A.   Before going on this search mission in October 2000, we had
requested Judge Rodrigues who was the president of the Trial Chamber
trying Kvocka et al, and we had requested a motion a search warrant be
issued.  But Judge Rodrigues and the Trial Chamber, I believe, dismissed
that motion, did not allow it, because the team I am representing was not
only trying Kvocka, we are trying the Stakic case and other issues in
Prijedor.  So we still wanted the search to be conducted.  So we went to
the Prosecutor, and which, as I said, allows her to issue a directive and
which we used for these searches.
Q.   During the first search prior to going to Prijedor -- strike that.
Let me just finish on this thought.  I apologise.  Can you distinguish
which records were obtained through the search and seizure from the 2000
search and seizure versus the December 1997 search and seizure?
A.   Let me first go to the 12th of December 1997 search and seizure
mission.  During that mission, which was conducted in one day, we started
in the morning around about 9.00, and we finished our searches
approximately, I would say, 7.00 in the evening at the Prijedor police
station, at the municipal building, assembly building, at the SDS offices,
and at the Radio Prijedor -- radio station Prijedor offices.  So of
course, at those four locations, we sought and we seized a lot of material
with a limited staff that was available to us to do the searches. It was
not possible to sift through material and make a selection there.  So
obviously, we selected a very large collection which was later properly
reviewed when it was brought to the Tribunal.
But as far as the second search mission is concerned, from October
2000, we went with a limited objective.  We went with the decision that we
will review the material even if it take three days, that is why the
searches were allowed to be conducted from the 27th to 29th.  And at the
six locations, we recovered -- I have the exact numbers of documents, but
we recovered really a very limited number of documents.  So that's the
difference between the two searches.
Q.   Can you tell us, since it's relatively easy, if it's not too
difficult, can you tell us how many you recovered in December 1997,
documents, and how many you recovered in October of 2000?
A.   I would be only guessing.  But I have the -- exact numbers
available to me.  If only I'd known, because I had the impression that you
wouldn't be cross-examining today, otherwise I could have brought those
numbers.  I can tell you that in the first seizure, that happened in
December 1997, but please take it as an estimate, that it was probably a
hundred thousand pages.  I would say about 40.000 documents from all the
four locations.  But when it comes to the October search mission, I think
not more than 3 to 400 documents, maybe consisting of 5.000 pages.
Q.   I understand totally that it's an estimate, sir, and we're not
going to hold you to those numbers at any time until we have an
opportunity to have you do a little further research and refresh your
recollection on that.  And so I just want -- just to clarify, in December
of 1997, is it true that the only location that you yourself personally
did a search and seizure was in the municipal building, the municipality
municipal building.  Correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   You did not go into the SUP building or the SDS building or the
radio station, Kozarski Vjesnik, correct?
A.   I did not go to the radio station and Kozarski Vjesnik offices,
and I did not go to the SDS offices.  However, after concluding the
searches at the municipal building, probably by 5.00, I would imagine, I
was then asked to report to the police station from where, in fact, for
the record -- for record purposes, let me point out the largest collection
was seized.  I was asked to come and assist the search team there.  So I
spent about two hours with the search party at the police station in the
evening.
Q.   In your computer data, would you be able to, by clicking certain
search bases or data information, would you be able to inventory how many
documents came from the radio station and Kozarski Vjesnik?
A.   Oh yes, certainly, yes.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.  I'll be following up on that, if I may.  Did
you, during your December 1997 search and seizure, did you obtain the
original documents from all four of these locations that you've
identified?
A.   Whatever was seized from these four locations was, in fact, lying
around there.  So those, I believe, were originals.  We did not ask them
to provide us copies with what we had seized.  We just picked up material
that we thought was relevant.  So I imagine that that is original.
Q.   And do you still have, or does the OTP still maintain, those
original documents from those four locations during your search and
seizure of December 1997?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   And all those documents have been scanned.  Correct, to the best
of your knowledge?
A.   No.  I'm quite certain that the documentation seized from Prijedor
in 1997 is all in the system, yes, scanned.
Q.   Now, can you tell us if one of the reasons or if you know that the
OTP wanted to seize documents from the radio station, Kozarski Vjesnik, in
December 1997 was because they wanted to determine what the propaganda was
from the people in the territory  of Prijedor municipality?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I object, relevance, what the purpose of the OTP
was.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Would you explain.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Well, I'm truly leading up to a point, and it's not
as if I'm hiding it, if I may explain and elaborate a little bit.  If the
OTP has seized all the documents from the radio station, and if they are
using a selective group of those documents to show propaganda that may or
was instituted by various Serbs during that time period, it is difficult
for the Defence to go to the radio station and to Kozarski Vjesnik and
find any documents since we believe, respectfully, all the documents were
taken away.  So to give this Trial Chamber the proper perspective or at
least our perspective, we would think that the Kozarski Vjesnik would also
show possibly propaganda that has been issued by the SDA, HDZ, and other
political parties we have discussed here.  To date, we have been unable to
because they continuously tell us no such information is available. That's
all been taken away.  So that's the purpose for it.  And it's not meant to
obtain any confidential information from him, because I think the witness
has established that they actually do have the documents, original or in
copy form, and still maintain those documents.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I think the witness has already stated that
these documents are in the possession of the OTP, and I don't know -- I
can't identify the sense of an additional question when it's to find out
what is still in the possession of the OTP and to have access, this is a
different question.
MR. OSTOJIC:  If I may proceed, Your Honour.
Q.   With respect to the SDS documents that were seized in December of
1997, can you tell us if the documents -- strike that.  Can you also
describe for us, not at this time, but the specific documents that were
seized during your search and seizure of December of 1997?
A.   Are you talking of the quantity of documents seized from SDS
offices?
Q.   Forgive me for interrupting.  I know you said approximately
40.000.  And we said we're not holding you to that number.  All I'm asking
is:  Is there a mechanism within a 10 or 20 minute period, or you tell me
whatever period it is, to punch in a code, a search request, and say here
are all the documents we received from the December 1997 search and
seizure from SDS headquarters or SDS building?
A.   Yes, that is possible.
Q.   How long would it take you to do that for each one of these four
locations that you searched on December 1997?
THE INTERPRETER:  Could the counsel and witness please slow down
and make pauses between question and answer.
A.   Can you please repeat the question.
MR. OSTOJIC:
Q.   How long would it take you to -- if someone were to ask you,
please give me an index of all the documents that were obtained from the
December 1997 search and seizure, an index, how long would it take you to
say or to find the information that indeed from the municipality,
municipal building, we got X amount of documents, and from the SUP, we got
Y amount, et cetera?
A.   First of all, the document collection that was seized in December
1997, for records, let me point out, the largest collection came from the
police station.  Second, municipal building.  Third, SDS offices.  Fourth,
Kozarski Vjesnik and radio station.  Now, if this Chamber asks me to
provide an index, I would imagine it should not take me more than three to
four days.  But if the urgency was that it should be done quicker than
that, then I think I can go to the ISU section within the OTP and put in a
request and maybe they can do it in a day's time.  But if you were to ask
me to do it, I would imagine it would take me three to four days because
that's not the only thing I'm doing.  I have to really juggle in between
the times I can spend on different projects.
Q.   I appreciate that.  What does IU [sic] stand for?
A.   The information systems unit.
Q.   And the same question with respect to the items, although less in
amount, I think you said approximately, although we're not holding you to
these numbers, 3 to 400 documents, approximately 5.000 pages, the same can
be provided by either yourself or the IU unit --
A.   ISU unit.
Q.   With respect to those six locations from the search and seizure in
October of 2000, correct?
A.   I think as far as the second search mission is concerned, that can
be done by me and much quicker because of the limited number of documents
that were seized.
Q.   Okay.  Let me now turn to the first search and seizure that you
did.  Were you assisted by any personnel other than the OTP and team
members during this first search and seizure?  And what I'm looking for,
if I may ask a leading question or specific on this just for the purposes
of expediting it, December 1997, were you assisted by any members of the
Republic of Bosnia or the AID group, or unit referred to as AID?
A.   No.
Q.   During the second search and seizure, were you assisted at any
time by any other entity other than the personnel working for the OTP
through the ICTY?
A.   Again, if you're referring to the federation forces, no.  But RS
forces, they helped us.
Q.   Is it your testimony that the federation forces did not help you
in either December 1997 or October 27th through the 29th, 2000.  Correct?
A.   I think that's correct, yes.
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
Q.   Let me ask you if I may, to turn to a different subject quickly,
and we may get to it at a later time, you discussed the interview process
that is conducted with the witnesses.  And just trying to focus you on
that issue if I may.  On page 37, line 21 of your testimony earlier today,
one of the procedures for taking a statement from the witness is I believe
you said at that page number and line, again, page 37, line 21, said that
we would ask the witnesses to give "brief answers."  Again, Mr. Inayat, I
just don't want to represent that's what you said.  I believe you did, but
if you didn't, clarify it for the record.  That's my notes and my
recollection on that.
A.   Maybe I did not phrase it properly.  What I meant was that
sometimes when you put a question to a witness, the witness tends to give
very lengthy response, which is very difficult for the translator, the
interpreter working on the interview, to keep in mind.  So with that in
mind, I said that normally we tell our witnesses if they have lengthy
responses they need to break that information up into smaller pieces.  I
didn't mean that they shall give a summary of the question, summarised
response.
Q.   Then at another portion of your testimony, I think you said we
would take down their statements verbatim and actually then I think you
corrected the verbatim and said we would take down verbatim what the
interpreter would say.  Correct?
A.   Precisely.  Because I don't understand the B/C/S language, so I
have to rely on the --
Q.   Fair.  And the answers are as good as the interpreters are.  Would
that be something you would agree with me on?
A.   As a non-B/C/S speaker, we have to rely on what the interpreters
are telling us.
Q.   Were you doing the questioning of the witnesses?
A.   Invariably.  The interpreters are not supposed to put questions.
Q.   I'm not suggesting that they did.  I apologise if that was the
inference.  Did you have a prepared questionnaire that you would ask each
and every different witness that you would interview from time to time?
A.   I don't recall ever using a questionnaire, a written questionnaire
for interviewing witnesses.  I've used a questionnaire for interviewing
accused, but never witnesses.  That has, at least, not been my way of
practice.
Q.   Do you know if other investigators or persons on your team who
have taken statements from witnesses, whether or not they have used
prepared questionnaires or questions to certain witnesses?
A.   I don't think so.  There were several investigators working in my
team and this thing has never come up where investigators have indicated
that they are using questionnaires for interviews.
Q.   How do you, as an investigator, know what to ask each and every
witness?  First, if you could describe for us how do you know that the
witness will be relevant to either this case or any other case in the
ICTY?
A.   Well, we have access to a large commission of expert report which
was put together in 1993 and 1994.  And the commission of experts
appointed by the United Nations.  They requested several governments in
Europe and in Asia to interview refugees living in their countries, and
those interviews were done by police officers in those respective
countries.  So that was a starting point for us, for our investigations.
For example, for Prijedor, I know, again, I don't want to give an exact
figure, but I know hundreds of witnesses were interviewed by policemen in
Scandinavia and Germany and Holland as part of the commission of experts
report.  So that was a starting point.  That's how we found out our main
witnesses.
Q.   Of all the witnesses that you've interviewed, on how many
occasions -- or that you know, witness statements in connection with the
Prijedor municipality, since becoming a team leader on December of 1997,
how many occasions did you find that the Prosecutor would be either
present, and if you could distinguish when he isn't, or when the
Prosecutor was actually asking questions of the witnesses?
A.   When you say Prosecutor, you mean the trial attorneys working on
the team?
Q.   Correct.
A.   Okay.  In most of the interviews that I personally have done, and
it's difficult for me to give an exact number, I would say something like
70 to 80, I have conducted the interviews on my own.  But as we are
getting closer to trial, there have been occasions when trial attorneys
working on this case have accompanied investigators, and I don't know if
you asked me this also, whether the questioning is done by trial
attorneys.  In the interviews that I have conducted, I can say that
invariably, I have put the questions.  There must have been rare occasions
when trial attorney present in the room may have asked me to ask
additional questions just to clarify things.  But as investigator, I have
put those questions.
Q.   Are you as an investigator, you don't have any mandate to get
information from a witness which would be in favour of or against any
individual accused.  Correct?
A.   I'm sorry, I didn't follow the question.
Q.   You as an investigator, are you an independent person who merely
seeks to obtain information from either a victim, or someone related to
the victim, in connection with events that may have occurred in a certain
area?  You're not someone who is attempting to obtain information only in
favour of one side against the other, are you?
A.   To be honest, I don't know if I really followed what you're
saying.  But there have been occasions when I have sought witnesses out,
and there have been occasions when witnesses have given me information
that tends to be in favour of the accused.  And that has been written
down, which probably is called Rule 68.  And that has been identified.
Q.   I'm not denying that.  Please don't read too much into my
questioning, although I understand that it's late.  Do you know how many
items or were you involved -- strike that.  Sir, were you involved at all
in compiling the Rule 68, otherwise known as exculpatory materials, for
this case that we're here on behalf of Dr. Stakic?
A.   I personally have not been involved, but the taskings have come
from me to the investigators that that has to be done.
Q.   Did you verify, being the person that was actually involved in the
search and seizures both in December of 1997 and October of 2000, did you
go back and verify from the materials that you received and said:  "Yes,
I'm confident as the team leader this is all the 68 exculpatory materials
that we have in our possession in connection with any of the issues
relating to Dr. Stakic?"
A.   I don't think that's part of my job description.
Q.   Did you do it or didn't you do it?
A.   I didn't do it.
Q.   Did anyone from your team -- I apologise.  I keep forgetting that
we are getting it translated in three different languages.  My apologies
to the interpreters and to the Court and to the witness.  Did you, sir,
first tell me how many members are in your team if you can.  I don't know
what's confidential or not.  To the extent -- I'd rather have you err on
the side of telling me it's confidential, than saying something that we
would have an issue with later.  Can you tell me how many members are on
your team?
A.   I don't think there's a problem telling that.
Q.   I don't either.
A.   You see, it can vary from time to time.  When I joined the team,
there was two investigators.  There have been in the year 2000, even 2001
when we had nine investigators, now we are back to seven.  So it varies
from time to time.
Q.   When you say your team, sir, does that include any of the
attorneys who would be participating in any of the trials before this
Tribunal and these Chambers here?
A.   No.  Although trial attorneys are assigned to certain teams, but
they come under directly the senior trial attorneys and not the team
leader.
Q.   Is Dominic Smyth in your team?
A.   He used to be in team one at a certain point.
Q.   What time did he -- if I'm allowed to ask, or if not I'll withdraw
the question.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  My objection is just relevance.  I think we're
getting pretty far afield.
MR. OSTOJIC:  I'll precede, if I may, on a different point.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Please.
MR. OSTOJIC:  I'll come back to that later.
Q.   Can you tell us who of your team members made the decision as to
which documents constitutes exculpatory materials pursuant to Rule 68?
MR. KOUMJIAN:  I would object that this is beyond the scope of
direct examination.  This is not the witness that conducted Rule 68
searches.  I don't think that's the subject of his testimony.  If there is
a hearing regarding whether the Prosecutor's office in this case has
complied with the Rule 68, it would make sense to have the witnesses, who
were actually involved in that, testify.  It's beyond the scope of his
direct examination.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  I disagree.  I think the leader of a team should
know about this.  Therefore, please proceed.
MR. OSTOJIC:  Thank you.
Q.   Mr. Inayat, can you answer that for us, do you know who they were?
A.   Can you, once again, just repeat the question.
Q.   Who were the members of your team who compiled the exculpatory
materials that were given in the Dr. Stakic case, pursuant to Rule 68?
A.   The day-to-day administrative working of the investigation side is
conducted by an investigator called Sue Ellen Taylor.  I have to refer
this question to her to find out the exact answer.
Q.   Prior to conducting interviews with witnesses, do any of your team
members, including yourself, meet with the Prosecutor?
A.   With the trial attorneys within the team, you mean?
Q.   Yes, I'm sorry.  Specifically that.  But I hesitate because the
trial attorneys change as do the team members, as do -- does a lot of
different functions so.  The trial attorneys at that time, I would, I
guess...
A.   Yeah.  Most of the time, when the missions are planned, the team
leader makes out a list of people that have to be interviewed during a
mission.  And under our OTP procedures, the senior trial attorneys have to
be made aware of any outgoing missions.  And just to make sure that the
senior trial attorney and the team leader are aware of this mission, there
is consultation about the mission plan.  The senior trial attorney in my
team, and in my experience, has never sat down with me to discuss what
evidence the witnesses will talk about or what the questioning is supposed
to be.  I'm personally not aware of any such development.
Q.   You, being the team leader of team one, do you help and assist the
other members of your team, whether two, nine, or seven in number, meaning
the size, do you give them an indication of the types of questions you're
looking for or areas that you want to cover?
A.   Most investigators that I've worked with have come into this
Tribunal with 10 to 15 years of experience, sometimes maybe less.  But
mainly 10 to 15 years of experience.  I've never felt the need to discuss
the evidence of each and every witness.  However, whenever it comes to
important witnesses, such as political leaders, such as police officers,
such as people with a military background, either I have been involved in
their interviews myself.  Or when the staff working under me, when they go
on such missions, we have a discussion on these important witnesses.
Q.   Do you -- or did you, before interviewing certain witnesses,
review the indictment against the accused Dr. Stakic in this case?
A.   I'm personally not aware if I have interviewed any witnesses
specifically for Dr. Stakic's case.
Q.   Did you review his indictment at any time, of the various forms
that it took?  It's currently the fourth amended indictment I believe, but
I'm not limiting it to just the fourth amended indictment.
A.   Yes, I have reviewed it.  I've looked at it.  I've read it.
Q.   Do each of your team members look at it at any time?
A.   They are supposed to.  They are duty bound.
Q.   Why is that?  What's the duty telling them to review the
indictment prepared by the OTP in connection with the accused?
A.   To know the facts of the case.
Q.   The facts that are disputed or the facts that are undisputed?
Which do they look for?
A.   I don't know what to say on this.  But what I certainly know is
that all investigators, they read the indictment and that they have the
indictment just to be aware of what has been alleged.
Q.   Let me ask you:  From having experience since 1980 with the police
and your background and schooling and having worked here as a team leader
since 1997, you don't take the indictment and accept the facts that the
Prosecutor prepare in the indictment and say, "Yes, those facts are
undisputed.  All we are going to do is go out and find the evidence."  In
fact, you say "I just want to find out the truth.  Is this really true?"
Or tell me how you do it?
A.   I totally agree with you.
Q.   Which one?
A.   I totally agree with you --
THE INTERPRETER:  Could the counsel and witness please make pauses
between question and answer.
MR. OSTOJIC:  I, again, apologise, Your Honour, to the
interpreters and to the Court and the witness.
Q.   Thank you.  Sorry.
A.   I totally agree with you that even though I've read the indictment
several times, and if I were to go and interview a witness, I wouldn't
stop him if he were to give me evidence which was inconsistent with the
indictment.  I would never stop him.  I will just take what the witness is
saying.
Q.   You don't have a legal degree, correct, sir?
A.   No, I don't.
Q.   I know you got a masters in international relations, and I respect
that very much.  In your testimony on line -- I mean on page 42, page 14,
you mentioned a word that I think has a legal -- or I'm going to ask you.
When you said most people were deported from such and such an area, or
deportation, are you telling us today that that's a legal opinion, or is
that just a layman's way of describing something that perhaps you learned
or gleaned from the statements, discussions with the Prosecutor, or any
scenario you might want to envision?
A.   When I talked of the railway station in Trnopolje which is, as I
said, about 200 metres from Trnopolje camp, and having read witness
statements and also have interviewed some of them, most of them talk about
the deportations.  They said that they were deported from the camp by
train during the initial weeks of the camp.  And so I've picked up this
word basically from what witnesses have told me.
Q.   Speaking of those statements, you stated that you take down
statements or you try to, obviously with certain limitations.  And I, by
no means, mean to be disrespectful to you, but you take down statements,
verbatim answers, in essence, is what you said.  My question in connection
with that is why, if you know, why don't you have a tape recorder during
your interview process with the witnesses that you're taking statements
of?
A.   I know that in 1997, this thing was very seriously being
considered.  But I wasn't privy to the final discussions which were held
in which it was decided that that's not feasible.  So we just kept on with
the laptops and writing the statements down.
Q.   Who decided that?
A.   I think you'll have to ask from the senior management in the OTP.
Q.   You don't know.
A.   No, I don't know.
Q.   At any time, sir, as an investigator with the 22 years of
experience that you have both in Pakistan and here at the ICTY, since 1980
I believe you said, had you at any time given a thought to say, it would
be fair and it would be neutral for everyone, including the Trial Chamber,
to hear the questioner ask the questions and to hear the response being
given by the witnesses?  And it would actually take away the method of
having you go through the process of typing down the statement, preparing
the statement, having the statement written down, and then translated.
Did you ever contemplate that?
A.   Personally, it may be what you're saying is right.  But as I said,
I wasn't privy to the consultations where they must have considered all
factors before deciding not to have these recorded interviews.
MR. OSTOJIC:  I know I'm running out of time.  If I may, just for
the record, and I know that we have an agreement on this, just reserve my
right.  And I want to thank Mr. Inayat for his answers today and for
staying as late as he did.  I appreciate it very much.  We have no further
questions at this time, Your Honour, with the understanding that I may
come back, but ever so limited, on some of these issues.  Thank you.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you.  Then the witness is excused for
today.  And probably we come back to you at a further point in time when
the Defence so wants.  It's, of course, for you to decide when it's
appropriate.
Blank page inserted to ensure pagination corresponds between the French and
English transcripts.
Any other observations for today?
MR. OSTOJIC:  No, Your Honours.
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Thank you, Witness.
MR. KOUMJIAN:  No, Mr. President.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE SCHOMBURG:  Then the trial stands adjourned until Monday,
9.00.
--- Whereupon the hearing adjourned at
6.26  p.m., to be reconvened on
Monday, the 27th day of May, 2002,
at 9.00 a.m.
