Thursday, 24 August 2006
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
--- Upon commencing at 9.03 a.m.
[Trial Chamber and legal officer confer]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Madam Registrar, good morning to you.  And
could you kindly call the case, please.
THE REGISTRAR:  Good morning, Your Honours.  This is the case
number IT-05-88-T, the Prosecutor versus Vujadin Popovic et al.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, Madam.
Same advisory to all the accused:  If at any time during the
proceedings you are not receiving interpretation, please draw our
attention straight away.  Thank you.
I see no alterations in the team.  Mr. Nicholls is here, and I say
it for the record.
Yes, are there any preliminaries?   Madam Faveau?
MS. FAVEAU:  [No interpretation].
JUDGE AGIUS:  I can understand what you are saying and the
technical problem that you say you have but -- in relation to this
witness, but as far as I am concerned, I am not receiving interpretation
into English, and that is the second technical problem.  And I am on
channel 4, so it is not a question of not being --
THE INTERPRETER:  Could the counsel please repeat.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Madam Faveau, could you kindly repeat your
remark or your comment.
MS. FAVEAU: [Interpretation] Thank you, Your Honour.  It is
actually a technical problem I'd like to put to you.  We have received the
transcript of the testimony of this witness last week, last Wednesday.  We
only received the audio recording in B/C/S on Friday.  We can't give such
recordings to our client until Monday morning, then Monday morning there
is the whole procedure of getting audio recording into the Detention Unit,
so that they only received it on Tuesday afternoon.  They were able to
listen to it only yesterday afternoon.  My client and others, I believe,
have had some problems to open the software in order to listen to the
testimony.  We're not asking for the trial to be postponed.  We're ready
to go, but we'd like you assistance for the Prosecutor to provide us with
this B/C/S material earlier so that the communication procedure with the
Detention Unit be better, smoother, and faster.  Thank you.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, Madam Faveau, for pointing that out.
Who is going to respond to that?  Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I agree, Your Honour, we will try and make sure it
isn't provided that late again.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, Mr. Nicholls, and also for your
cooperation.
And incidentally, those of you who may wish to go last or towards
the end of the cross-examination because of this technical problem, please
make the necessary arrangements amongst yourselves and you will be
accommodated accordingly.  Thank you.  So the other thing I wanted -- yes,
Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Just one small point, Your Honours.  I think it was
discussed yesterday.  We had prepared some map books.  The Defence kindly
have not objected to those, so those should have been passed out to Your
Honours.  Those are not yet, I understand, in e-court, but they will be.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, they are here.  I thank you for them.  The only
thing I want to mention is that if you intend to make use of these maps
with the witness or, for that matter, any other maps or any other photos
with witnesses, make sure that if there is an explanation, like there is
on this map, "Srebrenica has been Serbian and remains Serbian," et cetera,
or "Zepa is also Serbian," or a map with handwritten memos and indications
of places and sites, et cetera, that you don't use those maps with the
witness.  Let the witness mark on maps, but don't give witnesses
ready-marked maps which would be tantamount to eliciting information which
is already there on the map or on photos.  We had the same problems in
other cases.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I understand that, Your Honour.  I was thinking
about using map 5 in that book with this witness.  It does have markings
on it and notations.  In that case, I will not do that and we'll try to
get a different map during the break if I need to use a map.
JUDGE AGIUS:  This one I think is harmless, if there is no
objection from the Defence.  This seems to be a translation of what there
is handwritten on the map, so it does not really create a major problem.
But if there are other markings --
MR. NICHOLLS:  I think it is map 5, Your Honour, does have some
markings on it.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah, let me just go through them.
But by major problems is when you have, for example, a photo of a
destroyed house and then underneath:  "House of Mirzad Dudic" and then ask
him:  Do you recognise this house? for example, all right?
MR. NICHOLLS:  I understand, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Or a photo of some place marked underneath,
indicating the location, and then you ask him, the witness:  Do you
recognise this road in the countryside with the buildings in the
background?
Yes, Mr. McCloskey.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Just on a related issue that might help speed
things along.  As you know, Mr. Ruez will be testifying soon.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  And we have in the past had him mark maps prior to
him getting into court.  It's not the -- sometimes the traditional way,
but it does save time and it's not the problem you're talking of, but it's
similar.  So that is our expectation that he will have -- he will be the
one who will have marked the maps.
JUDGE AGIUS:  That's not the problem I was referring to,
definitely.
All right.  Are there any other preliminaries?  I just wanted to
confirm to you that later on in the morning we'll be handing down the
decision on the e-court filing of cross-examination documents, as per the
agreed suggestions.  And nothing else, so we can -- yes?
MR. McCLOSKEY:  I know everyone's working on it, but the final
dates for the confidential programme would help with setting up witnesses.
I know that's --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah, I think we can go into private session for a
couple of minutes.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  We are in open session, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you so much.
Yes, I think we can admit the witness.  The witness is testifying
under the protective measures included in the -- indicated in yesterday's
decision - that is with a pseudonym - and we have to decide what number we
are going to give him because you've not indicated this in your motion,
consequently we did not allocate a pseudonym ourselves.  And of course
with face distortion.  Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.  I'm sorry we didn't put
that in our motion.  We -- I believe we're up to PW-110 will be his
number.
JUDGE AGIUS:  PW?
MR. NICHOLLS:  110.
JUDGE AGIUS:  110, okay.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I'm not sure we need to bring the shutters down
when he comes in, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Pardon?
MR. NICHOLLS:  I can't recall if we bring the shutters down
because he has a pseudonym.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.
[Trial Chamber and registrar confer]
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, we don't need to bring down the curtain, I'm
being told, because precautions are taken.
[The witness entered court]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Good morning to you, sir.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Good morning.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And welcome to this Tribunal.  Very shortly you will
be starting your testimony as a Prosecution witness.  As per your request,
we have granted you some protective measures.  You will not be referred to
by your name, but by a nom de plume, a pseudonym.  You are going to be
Prosecution Witness 110.  And anyone who is following the proceedings from
outside this courtroom will not be able to see your face because we have a
mechanical means of hiding it, as you will see on your own monitor as we
go along.  Otherwise, the other thing I wanted to tell you is that Madam
Usher, who is standing next to you, will be handing to you a solemn
declaration, which is tantamount to an oath in various jurisdictions, and
that is your undertaking to speak the truth in the course of your
testimony.  If you at any time require a break, please tell us you're
feeling tired, and we will grant you -- we will give you a break.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  Thank you.
Please take the solemn declaration and read it out and that will
be your undertaking.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will speak
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you.  You may sit down.
Mr. Nicholls on the Prosecution side will be asking you a series
of questions.  Please try to keep your replies, your answers, as brief as
possible, and when you are being asked for a yes or no answer, stick to
that.  If you need to go further, let us know and we'll decide whether to
give you permission or not.
Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honours.
WITNESS:  WITNESS PW-110
[Witness answered through interpreter]
Examination by Mr. Nicholls:
Q.   Good morning, sir.
A.   Good morning.
MR. NICHOLLS:  The first order of business, if I could have the
assistance of an usher, is to show the witness the pseudonym sheet.
Q.   Sir, please read that to yourself silently, and I'll ask you:  Can
you confirm that your name is written on that sheet of paper which you've
been handed?
A.   Yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Would you kindly show it to the members of the
Defence teams, and then it will be handed to the registrar, who will enter
it into the records as a sealed document.
Registrar, could you please indicate to us which number you are
going to give it, which exhibit number.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I understand in the future, Your Honour, these will
also be in the e-court system.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah, do you want to see it, Mr. Nicholls?
MR. NICHOLLS:  No.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.
So this will become Exhibit Number?
THE REGISTRAR:  That will be Exhibit Number P2101 [Realtime
transcript read in error "P2102"].
JUDGE AGIUS:  P210 -- that's correct, then, because on the
transcript it's P2102 and I heard you say P2101.
THE REGISTRAR:  Yes, Your Honour; P2101.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  That's corrected.
Mr. Nicholls, please proceed.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you.
I request we go into private session for some preliminary
background.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, let's go into private session.
[Private session]
Pages 633-637 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
We are in open session now, Witness.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Sir, how long did you stay in Konjevic Polje?
A.   I was six days in Konjevic Polje, and during those six days I
believe that Mr. Morillon came, the commander of UNPROFOR forces, and he
went up there to a mosque in Hrncici.  I don't know exactly because I'm
not familiar with the area.  I believe it was the Hrncici mosque.  This is
where he hoisted up the UN flags.  And then the Serbs who were in Tumace
opened fire on the population right before Morillon's face.  I'm not 100
per cent sure, but I believe that one UNPROFOR soldier was seriously hurt.
There were a lot of people killed, a lot of people injured.  Morillon
was there and he was watching that with his own two eyes.  If he was a
good man, he would be sitting here today and he would testify to the event
that happened right before his eyes.
Q.   Thank you.  That was a bit of a long answer to the question, but
thank you.  Now, where did you go from Konjevic Polje?
A.   After that, we moved to Pervane.  That's where we stayed for three
days.  And then a decision was issued.  Everybody started withdrawing
towards Srebrenica.  I and my two brothers arrived in Srebrenica on the
14th of March.
Q.   1993?
A.   Yes.
Q.   While in Srebrenica, did you do any kind of work, you personally?
A.   Yes, I worked as a farm worker.  We had a horse, a cow.  We had
the cow for milk and the horse to carry stuff for us, and that was that.
Q.   You said you went with two of your brothers.  Were either of your
brothers in the --
A.   Yes.
Q.   Please wait -- thank you, but please wait for me to finish the
question.  Was either of your brothers in the army, the Bosnian army, in
the enclave?
A.   The one who had not arrived, he was a cook -- actually, a baker in
a private store in the village, throughout all that time.  In my own
village, he was also a cook, he was never a soldier.
Q.   Okay, just to be clear, are you saying he was a cook for the army
in the enclave?
A.   Yes, yes.  He was a member of the -- some sort of reserves.  I'm
not a hundred per cent sure.  The enclave was under the patronage of the
United Nations, the arms had been distributed, and he was acting as a
cook.  He was something as a cook there.
JUDGE AGIUS:  It is not clear.  What time are we talking about
here?  Is it still March, 1993, or later?  Because he refers to Srebrenica
being an enclave under the patronage of the United Nations.  If it's after
16th April, we're talking of the period of demilitarisation, and he speaks
of arms being distributed instead of arms being collected.  Perhaps he
could clarify all this.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No, no.  The arms had been collected
by UNPROFOR.  There was just an observation point at a most critical
point.  They didn't have arms.  Whoever was seen with arms by UNPROFOR,
the arms would be seized from them by UNPROFOR.
JUDGE AGIUS:  That makes it clear.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   From the time you arrived until July, 1995, was your brother a
cook for the army, or reserve as you called them, in the -- in Srebrenica?
A.   He was only observing.  They could not hold arms because of the
UNPROFOR.  They only had an observation point in an area that I am not
familiar with.  I never went there, and that's the only thing they were
doing, they were just observing, without any arms.
Q.   Listen to my question, please.  I'm asking if your brother worked
as a cook for these reserves until July, 1995.
A.   Yes, yes, yes.  He was a cook.  He was always a cook, before that
and during that time.  He was never a soldier.  He was always a cook, just
a cook.
Q.   Now I want to talk a little bit about how you came to leave
Srebrenica.  When did you leave Srebrenica?
A.   When the Serbs started coming in in order to occupy Srebrenica.
We left on the 11th of July in the morning.  Some went towards Potocari,
some of us went through the woods.  On the 11th of September, the entire
population - I apologise, it was in July - on the 11th of July, the whole
population left Srebrenica.
Q.   Very briefly - very briefly - describe to me what the week before
July 11th was like for the inhabitants of Srebrenica.  What was going on?
A.   Well, the area was rife with panic, and the people moved from the
upper part of Srebrenica.  They all came to Vidikovac and lower down.
From Sunday till Tuesday, nobody was there, save for some bedridden
people, people who could not leave their houses.
Q.   Now, were there any announcements made that you heard, about
leaving on the 11th of July?
A.   No, no, no.
Q.   You said that some people went to Potocari and some people went
into the woods --
A.   Yes.  Women, children, and the elderly went to Potocari.  I don't
know if any younger people went there as well.
Q.   Where did you go?
A.   I went in the direction of the village of Susnjari.  There we
formed a column and proceeded towards the free territory.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Your Honours.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I just thought perhaps a redaction.
JUDGE AGIUS:  One moment, because I was marking -- making a mark.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Not a huge issue, but --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, okay.  Yeah.  That's -- there isn't much of it,
but I think we need to redact line -- from line 16 to 18; I would redact
the three of them.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Now, sir, what about your other brother?  Where did he go?
A.   My other brother was an invalid.  He went to Potocari.  And
luckily for him, although they kept people behind, he was allowed to go
and he went from there.
Q.   When you say "they kept people behind," some people, who's "they"?
A.   Serb soldiers.
Q.   Are you okay, sir?
A.   Yes, but my headphones keep moving on my head.  Otherwise, I'm
okay.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.
Usher, please, if you could kindly make the necessary adjustments
for him.
Mr. Nicholls, and any of the Defence teams that are nearer to the
witness than we are, usually we can more or less have a very close visual
view of his face on the monitor, but when it's -- visual -- face
distortion, we can't.  And you're much nearer to him than we are.  If you
notice any sign of tiredness or need for a break, please draw our
attention straight away.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Because we can't see as much as we would see under
normal circumstances, in other words.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:  There used to be an option to see the undistorted
video in the courtroom.  I don't know if that is --
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, we don't have it.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Perhaps that's correct, Your Honour.  Private
session just for one moment.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.
So let's redact from line 5, please -- from line 6 to here, and
let's go into private session for a while.
[Private session]
Page 644 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
JUDGE AGIUS:  We are in public session again.  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   All right.  Now I want to talk to you about something you spoke
about earlier, the formation of the column in Susnjari, and the night of
the 11th to 12th of July in Susnjari.  Now, where did you sleep that
night?
A.   In Susnjari.
Q.   But where in Susnjari?  What type of place did you sleep in?
A.   In a meadow, where everybody was, all the men who had arrived
there.
Q.   And how many men was that, approximately?
A.   According to an estimate, there must have been at least 15.000
men.
Q.   Is that your estimate or an estimate you heard?
A.   Well, we talked amongst each other.  We looked at each other.  We
thought that there may have well been over 15.000 people, even 20.000,
maybe.
Q.   Was it all men or were there any other women or children in this
column?
A.   At that time, there were neither women nor children there.
Q.   What time did you leave Susnjari?  I mean the --
A.   I left in the afternoon, on the 12th of July.  I was with the last
group of people who left Susnjari.
Q.   And where was your other brother at this time?  Don't say his
name.
A.   He was there.  He was there.
Q.   With you?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you just describe for us a little bit, so we get a picture,
the terrain that you and all these men were walking through in the
direction towards Tuzla.
A.   We were walking in a column -- actually, in several columns.  Not
-- sometimes we were walking single file because of the way the terrain
looked.
Q.   And were any men in this column armed?
A.   Yes.  There were very few armed men, and those men walked with the
front of the columns.  They left with the first columns that left.
Q.   Were you able to form an estimate of how many men were armed?
A.   Maybe 400 or 500.  It was very difficult to tell with so many
people being there.  It was difficult to tell how many people were armed.
Q.   I understand, sir.  I didn't -- I wouldn't expect you to know an
exact number.  What kind of weapons were they armed with?
A.   Infantry.
Q.   Infantry what?  If you could explain what --
A.   Rifles.  They mostly had rifles.
Q.   Were you armed?  Did you have a rifle?
A.   No, no.
Q.   What about your brother?
A.   No.
Q.   What did you bring with you as you -- as you set out on this trek?
A.   A rucksack, and I had three tins of meat that I had received from
humanitarian aid.  I had a spare jacket across my shoulder and a sack of
sugar.  That's all I had.
Q.   And now if you could just look -- sorry.  You had a jacket -- or a
spare jacket.  What kind of clothes were these?  Were they military?
Civilian?  Could you describe your clothing.
A.   No, I wore civilian clothes.  I wore a leather jacket, a pair of
trousers, some shoes.  I can't remember exactly.  What I had on my
shoulder was a rucksack; that's all I had.
Q.   And then you said you left in the afternoon of the 12th.  Describe
a little bit that day in your own words where you went and what you did.
A.   I'm telling you, on that same day we left Susnjari and we walked
until the sun set, when we could no longer see.  I did not sleep at all
that night.  I did not sleep the previous day, and I had not slept the
previous night, and then I lie down and slept that night.  When the day
broke, my brother was no longer there.  Some people were on their way
back.  Some were moving forward.  I returned a little, and then some
people started moving forward.  I went with them.  I found my brother
there.  We sat down.  We discussed as to what should be done.  In the
meantime, the Serb soldier took a megaphones and --
Q.   Let me stop you.  Thank you.  We'll get to those other parts of
what happened next.  Do you know approximately where you spent the night
of 12th/13th July?  You said you hadn't had much sleep, you laid down.
Where did you spend the next night?
A.   In the forest called Buljim.
Q.   So now we come to the 13th July.  You started describing how you
woke up that morning.  Let's start with where was your brother that
morning when you woke up?  You began to talk about that.
A.   I'm telling you, a group of people returned, and I returned with
them.  And then the same group of people moved forward.  I went with them
and he was a bit further down, close to the area where we exited from the
woods, this Samici, Lolici, I haven't a clue what the name is.
Q.   The transcript says "Samici."  I think you said "Sandici."
A.   Not Samici.  Sandici is the name.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you for pointing that out, Mr. Nicholls.
Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   If I can just clarify one moment, Witness, your last answer.  You
woke up, your brother wasn't there, you moved with some other people
[Realtime transcript read in error "brother"], and then you were reunited
with your brother.  Is that right?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   Now, you said the area where you exited the woods was something
like Sandici or Lolici, you're not sure what the name is.  Tell me about
how you came to be --
A.   No, no.  No.  It was also in Buljim, but when we went down, when
we surrendered, it was in Sandici.  It was also Buljim, the place where I
found my brother.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I understand Buljim to be the name of the forest, if
I understand him well.
Yes, Mr. Bourgon.
MR. BOURGON:  Your Honour, I would just like to get some
clarification.  I'm looking at the question that was put by my colleague
at page 27, line 4.  Of course it's kind of a leading question, but that's
not the point of my objection.  I'd just like to get clarification,
because I don't quite get the question.  It says:  "Could you clarify.
You woke up, your brother wasn't there, you moved with some other brother,
and then you were reunited with your brother."  And then the answer is
yes, but I fail to understand this part.
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, no, you're a hundred per cent right.  It's the
transcript which is wrong.  He never said I moved with another brother, he
moved with some others and then he was reunited with the brother.  So it's
the transcript that needs to be corrected.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I thank my colleague for pointing out --
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank Mr. Bourgon as well.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Please describe how you came to leave the woods and how you ended
up in Sandici.
A.   As I told you, the dawn broke, the Serb soldiers took up
megaphones, and started calling out to us to surrender.  There were people
in camouflage uniforms amongst us who said:  Yes, we will surrender, but
bring UNPROFOR and the Red Cross over.  However, they made no promises;
rather, they issued an ultimatum to the effect that we should surrender by
10.00 or else.  Since we did not surrender until 10.00, we were issued
with another ultimatum to surrender by 3.00 in the afternoon.  It was at
that point that we decided to surrender ourselves.
Q.   All right.  Let me ask you a quick follow-up question.  You said
you were up in woods and the Serb soldiers took up megaphones and started
calling out to you to surrender.  Where were they calling from, these Serb
soldiers?  Where were they?
A.   They were a bit further away from us, but in the same general
area, in the same field.  This was a rather large mountain, woodland, and
it would take you a couple of hours to cross it through, certainly.
Q.   And you say you decided to surrender.  What about your brother;
what did he decide to do?
A.   He decided the same.
Q.   And then what did you do?  What happened?
A.   The column set out to surrender.  As we came down there, the Serb
soldiers approached us and asked us for any money that we might have in
all foreign currencies.  They threatened us that if we should not
surrender all our money, we would suffer the same fate as those before us.
Of course we didn't ask who those before us were or what happened to them.
As we went along, there were women and children passing by in a
bus.  I knew some of the women on the bus, and they were looking at us
just as I'm looking at you now.  They went away whilst we remained there
as prisoners.
Q.   Okay.  I was going to talk about that a little bit later, but
let's talk about it now.  How many buses did you see with, as you say,
women and children passing by?
A.   Several vehicles went by.  There was my aunt there, another lady
from Drinjaca near Zvornik.  There was one -- third lady that I didn't
know, but she told my brother that we had been captured.
Q.   Which direction were these buses going in on this road?
A.   They went toward Vlasenica and the free territory there.  That was
where the women and children were transported to.
JUDGE KWON:  Mr. Nicholls, I wonder if you could clarify with the
witness whether there were some armed people when they surrendered to the
Serb forces.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I was -- I will do that now.
Q.   If you heard Your Honour's comments, sir, were there any armed men
in the column at this point you surrendered?
A.   No, no.  There was one person among us who had military boots on,
and he was immediately criticised for it by Serb soldiers, but none of us
had any camouflage uniforms.  This person wearing military boots had them
by necessity, of course, because probably he didn't have any other
footwear.  It was summertime and it was very hot.  It must have been very
uncomfortable for him.
Q.   Well, that aside, then, just to be clear, did anybody have any
rifles at the time of this surrender?  I think you answered it, but I want
it to be very clear.
A.   No.
JUDGE KWON:  Mr. Witness, did you know at the time that where 400,
500 who had been armed went?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] They went off in the first column.
We didn't know where they were.  This particular column had been cut off
from us, which of course we weren't aware of at the time.
JUDGE KWON:  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   And I'll ask one question to try to continue to clarify that.  I
think you answered this before, Witness, but where in the overall column
were you and your brother?
A.   I myself was perhaps somewhere halfway through the column.
Q.   And is that the whole column or your segment of the column?
Because you said it broke up.
A.   No, no.  Do you mean when we were surrendering?  When we were
surrendering, I was in the last column to leave Susnjari.
Q.   Okay.  All right.  Now, you talked a moment ago about soldiers
demanding money and foreign currency.  What happened next after that?
A.   We raised our arms.  They told us to move, running, and people
were already seated in the meadow there.  We were simply filling out the
ranks.  There was one Serb soldier who had this red ribbon.  He seemed to
be the main person there.  He said:  We were already negotiating for your
exchange with other -- with the UNPROFOR.  And there was a young man there
who told me some 10 or 15 minutes later, when we saw women and children on
the buses passing there, he --
MR. LAZAREVIC:  I apologise.  I hate to interrupt the witness.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.
MR. LAZAREVIC:  But it seems we have some problems.  I believe
that the witness is speaking too fast and it does cause some problems to
the interpreters, because we understand his language and we know what he's
talking.  Well, let me just make one brief example.  The witness just said
that the person with the -- the --
JUDGE AGIUS:  The red ribbon.
MR. LAZAREVIC: -- that the governments are negotiating.  Instead
of this, we read here that "we are negotiating with UNPROFOR," and it
basically does --
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, no, it does make a difference, of course.
MR. LAZAREVIC:  -- make a difference.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you for your observation and for your help,
Mr. Lazarevic.
Mr. Nicholls -- first of all, I do wish to have a confirmation
from the interpreter's booth.
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, Your Honour, this may have been the case.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, exactly.
So I understand, Witness, that you need to speak a little bit more
slowly.  Let me --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That's the way I speak, and I do
consider it to be slow.
JUDGE AGIUS:  But it's not slow enough.  Let me explain to you
what the problem is.  Here, when I speak in English, as I am doing now,
what I am saying has to be translated by people behind the windows that
you see on the sides into your language - otherwise you would not
understand what I am saying - and it has to be translated also into the
French language for those who are following in French.  Similarly, when
you are speaking in Serbo-Croat, the interpreters have to translate to us
in English and they have to catch up with the speed of your delivery of --
so the slower you speak, the better it is for them to be able to catch and
translate every single word that you say.
No one is criticising the way you speak or that this is -- we are
trying to make it difficult for you, but we're just asking you to slow
down a little bit more so that you make the interpreters' task a little
bit easier.  All right?  And I am sure you will cooperate in this.  Okay.
I thank you.
Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And once more, thank you, Mr. Lazarevic.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Yes, sir, please, I'll try to speak a little bit slower.  Maybe we
both can.  We want the record to be as accurate as it can be.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah, and I think it's the case of going through
this part again, since, as Mr. Lazarevic pointed out, it's not correct or
it -- let me go through it.  You were asked this question, sir.
Mr. Nicholls asked:  "Okay.  All right.  Now, you talked a moment ago
about soldiers demanding money and foreign currency.  What happened next
after that?"
And then you started answering.  You said:  "We raised our arms.
They told us to move, running, and the people were already seated in the
meadow there."
Do you confirm this?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Then in the transcript we have the following:  "We
were simply filling out the ranks."  Do you confirm that?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And then I have:  "There was one Serb soldier who
had this red ribbon," a bandanna.  Do you confirm that?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] It was black.
JUDGE AGIUS:  So that's the first item that needs to be corrected.
And then also in relation to this Serb soldier you are reported to having
said:  "He seemed to be the main person there."  Correct?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  "And he said:  We were already negotiating for your
exchange with other -- with the UNPROFOR."  Is this correct?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No, no.  No, none of us told us [as
interpeted] there were negotiations with the UNPROFOR, but rather that the
negotiations were in course between the Serb and Bosnian governments --
Bosniak government.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  And then we have:  "And there was a young man
there who told me some 10 minutes or 15 minutes later, when we saw women
and children on the buses passing there --" and you were stopped in -- at
that point.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Not a young man.  There was a woman
with a child aged 10.  This man with the black bandanna told the lady to
go down there where the bus was parked.  We weren't able to see the bus
because of the lay of the terrain.  The lady -- the woman thanked the
soldier for it.  Two young girls also stood up.  One that was more
beautiful of the two --
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Stop right there.  We'll get to that.  We're getting a bit ahead.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
And I thank Mr. Lazarevic again.  And if there are substantive
mistakes in the transcript, please draw our attention straight away.  If
they are minor mistakes that can be rectified later, let's not waste time
on them.  We will attend to them later on.  But any substantive mistakes
in the transcript from what the witness is testifying are important to be
noted down immediately.
Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Could I ask Your Honours to ask the booth if the
problem is the speed the witness is talking or if there is any other
problem, because "UNPROFOR" and "government" --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, I don't need to put the question now.  They
have heard you.  It seems that the problem, at least as far as I can say,
because I am not following the proceedings in French, is the translation
in the English -- translation from B/C/S to English.  If you could
indicate to me what the problem is -- first of all, where is the -- that's
okay.  I think it's there, if I can see well.
What is the problem?
THE INTERPRETER:  It was the speed, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  The speed.  Okay.
So as you can see, Witness, it's the speed that has complicated
matters.  If you can slow down again, as I asked you to do earlier on, it
would be very important.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I will try to slow down a bit.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
And if at any time, Madam Interpreters, he is going too fast,
please draw my attention straight away.  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.  I spoke we go to 10.30?
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, correct.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Now, sir, approximately how many men came out of the woods and
surrendered in this incident you've been discussing?
A.   According to an estimate, there must have been over a thousand of
them.
Q.   When you reached the meadow where you say you were -- sat down,
was the meadow empty, or were there already prisoners there when you
arrived?
A.   There were prisoners there.
Q.   How many would you estimate were already there when you arrived?
A.   Perhaps about 500 of them, but others kept coming in.
Q.   Now, were you able to sit anywhere you wanted in this meadow or
were you told where to sit?
A.   No.  Wherever there was an empty spot.  We were just filling out
the ranks.
Q.   Okay.  And were there any soldiers at this field?  Serb soldiers,
I mean.
A.   Yes.  The ranks were about 20 or more metres long, and every
single row was guarded by two soldiers at each end of the row.
Q.   Row of prisoners, you mean?
A.   Yes, yes, prisoners.
Q.   Now, you've explained well that you were told that negotiations
were taking place between the governments for an exchange.  Did that --
and then you started to tell us about how that soldier sent one woman and
her child to a bus to get on.  Can you finish telling me about any people
who left the meadow.
A.   When the soldier ordered the lady and the child to leave, he --
she stood and thanked him.  There were two young girls there, too.  When
they stood up, the Serb soldiers who were there told the more beautiful of
the two that she should -- they told this particular soldier that she
should stay behind.  However, the Serb soldier did not listen to them.  He
told the girls and the lady to leave.  There were about a dozen young boys
who also stood up, but then the soldier told them:  No, no, you should sit
down because you're capable of carrying a machine-gun.
Q.   Okay.  I think this is a point that might need clarification.  How
many boys stood up -- you started talking about some boys who stood up to
leave.  How many of them were there?
A.   About a dozen.  I don't know precisely.  I didn't count them, but
there were about a dozen of them.
Q.   Were any of them allowed to leave of these boys?
A.   Pardon?
Q.   Were any of these dozen boys allowed to leave and get on buses?
A.   Oh, yes.  They left, the dozen of them, perhaps a bit more or a
bit less than ten.  I didn't count them all.  I didn't know what was to
come.  Had I known what was ahead of us, I would have tried my best to
memorise things better.
Q.   That's all right.  Nobody -- at least, I don't expect you to
remember everything from what happened 11 years ago.  How many boys were
told to sit down because they could carry a machine-gun?
A.   I think there was just one.
Q.   About how old were the boys who were allowed to leave and were
allowed to get on the buses?
A.   I think that none of them had -- were 15 yet.
Q.   Now, on this meadow, how many -- how long did you spend there
before you were -- before you went someplace else?
A.   We stayed there for a couple of hours at least.
Q.   During that time, were you provided with any food?
A.   No.
Q.   Were you - and by "you" I mean the prisoners collectively -
provided with any water?
A.   Everyone was given water, but I don't know if they had received
enough because we just couldn't get enough water with the thirst that
there was.
Q.   Now, were you able to see whether there were any wounded prisoners
or any prisoners who looked as though they needed medical treatment?
A.   Yes.  There were wounded there.  People were asking for bandages
from the soldiers, but the soldiers told them:  No.  Well, if you are --
can manage to find some bandages on your own, well, fine.  But they
wouldn't provide us with anything.
Q.   While you were on that meadow, was there any kind of physical
abuse of the prisoners by the soldiers?
A.   No.
MR. NICHOLLS:  It might be better to break now, Your Honour, if
that's okay, because I think the next little chunk might not finish in
five minutes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Certainly, Mr. Nicholls.
We'll have a 30-minute break because there were some redactions,
and because of that we need 30 minutes.
Yes, Mr. Meek.
MR. MEEK:  I apologise, Your Honour.  I was just trying to get
Steve's attention.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  Thank you.
MR. MEEK:  Sorry.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  Yes.  Thank you.
Do we need -- because since there are members of the public in the
gallery, I suppose we need to put the curtains down before the witness is
-- leaves the courtroom.  Alternatively, the guards can ask the members
of the public to leave the gallery now, and it will spare us having to put
down the curtains.
Wait, wait, wait, Usher.
And the cameras are not to focus on the witness as he exits the
courtroom.  Thank you.
There will be a break of 30 minutes from now.  Thank you.
--- Recess taken at 10.24 a.m.
--- On resuming at 10.58 a.m.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   We left off before the break, sir, we were still talking about the
time you were held prisoner in the meadow at Sandici.  While you were
there, did any senior officers arrive at the meadow?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you describe that, please.
A.   As we were sitting on the meadow, this was close to the dusk,
General Mladic arrived.  I didn't know him at the time, but certain
persons --
THE INTERPRETER:  Could the witness explain who.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] -- told us that Mladic had arrived.
He told us, "Good evening, Neighbours."  He also promised and said our
governments were negotiating and tomorrow you should all be exchanged, all
for all.  He told us that we were to go to certain hangars.  The soldier
wearing a black bandanna told us that we would receive some supper, but
Mladic said, No, you're not going to get any supper, you're just going to
get some water.  Then he went away.  Let me just say this once again:
When he told us that we would be exchanged the following day, all for all,
we applauded him and said, Thank you, sir.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Thank you.  Again I'll remind you to please, if you can - I know
it's difficult - to speak a little bit slower than you normally would.
Who was it who told you this person you hadn't seen before was
General Mladic?
A.   Persons who were captured, who I -- I hadn't seen him before.
Q.   Did you ever see a picture of General Mladic after these events?
A.   I did.  Later on, when he came to Potocari I saw it on TV when I
went to the free territory.  And I'm a hundred per cent sure that that was
Ratko Mladic.
Q.   We'd also finished, and you had explained to Their Honours that
there was no physical abuse of the prisoners in the meadow.  Was there any
kind of humiliating treatment that you observed?
A.   No.  Only one person who was sitting on the transporter told us:
Let me not shoot you all and go straight to The Hague, because at that
time that was already something that existed.
Q.   All right.  Now, I'd like to have you please explain to us how you
came to leave the meadow, you personally, and what you could see how the
other prisoners left as well.
A.   When they wanted to transport us from there, the lorries and the
buses that transported the women and the children and returned empty, a
command was issued, the first line run to the vehicles and load them, the
second line, and then all the way up to my line.  And then I stood up.  I
ran down the hill.  They told us to get on the lorry.  I got into the
trailer behind the lorry - it had high sides - and I saw a Serbian soldier
with a black cap, and he told us that he would get on with the driver.
And as a vehicle was full, it would leave.  And as soon as it was dark, we
were driving up the hill and we saw vehicles moving by us.  We didn't know
who they were, what vehicles those were.  And when we arrived in Bratunac,
one driver who was there told us:  Those are Vihor's garages on the
left-hand side.  We could see the buildings on the right-hand side.  We
couldn't see anything.  We did not dare lift our heads or put our hand on
the sides of the trailer.  Then the Serb soldiers surrounded the vehicles,
and they started asking whether there were -- there was anybody from the
villages around Srebrenica, for example, Husmanici, Potocari, Slatina,
Bljeceva.  Glogova was also mentioned.  In the meantime, if somebody
appeared, they would ask his father's name --
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  Again, I know it's difficult.  Please try to
speak a little more slowly.  We want everything to be captured by the
interpreters and captured by our transcript.  So please continue a little
bit more slowly.
A.   And then, as a person appeared, they would take him away.  And the
driver who was with us in the same trailer, he told us:  These are Vihor's
garages.  I don't know to this very day where those garages are.  And he
was a driver by profession.  I don't know who he was affiliated with, but
I know he was a driver.  And as the person was taken up there, we would
hear a blunt hit and the person would start crying out and wailing.
Q.   Okay.  Let me ask you a couple questions now.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Your Honour, could we go into private session for
one moment?
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.  Let's go into private session for a while,
please.
[Private session]
[Open session]
JUDGE AGIUS:  We are in open session.  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Let me ask you a few follow-up questions, sir, about your journey
to these Vihor garages.  Which direction were the trucks, one of which you
were on, going on the road?  Which direction were they going as they took
you away?  Towards which town?
A.   Bratunac.
Q.   You said that a driver told you once the vehicles -- excuse me,
the lorry had parked, that it was Vihor's garages where you were.
A.   Yes.  The one who was captured together with us, he told us that.
I know his name, if you want me to tell you his name, and I know where he
is from.  I had not met him before.  I only met him in Srebrenica.  But I
can tell you his name.
Q.   That's what I wanted to clarify.  The driver was a fellow prisoner
who worked as a driver; it wasn't the driver of the truck who brought you
to Vihor's garages?
A.   That's correct, yes.  He was not the driver of that vehicle.
Q.   You said that the vehicle had high sides, the truck you were in.
Did it have a roof?
A.   Yes, high sides but no roof.  It was open -- an open lorry.  There
were just some boards on the bottom, and that's all it had.  Those boards
were there so as to have the women and the children not sitting on the
very bottom of that trailer.  And that's all the trailer and the lorry
had.
Q.   Thank you.  Approximately how many men were in your trailer?
A.   There were at least 30 to 40 people there.  We could not stretch
our legs.  We had to sit very tight.  The lorry was rather long, that
trailer was rather long.
Q.   Once you were parked at the Vihor's garages, could you -- were you
able to see out of the truck or were the sides too high?
A.   Nobody was allowed to lift their heads, and unless you lifted your
head you couldn't see a thing.  That's how high the sides were.  As we
were sitting down in the lorry, we could not see anything without lifting
our heads, which we didn't dare do.
Q.   Did anybody try to look out?
A.   I only heard somebody putting their hand on the side of the lorry
and was immediately hit with a rifle.  Nobody else dared repeat that.
Q.   From what you could hear, were you able to estimate how many other
trucks were parked alongside the lorry or trailer that you were in?
A.   There was a column of vehicles parked there.  I don't know how
many vehicles were there.  Only on the following day could I see how long
the column is, as we were climbing up the hill.  I don't know whether all
the vehicles were there, whether we were all there, or whether some other
-- some vehicles went in some other directions.  I didn't know at the
time.
Q.   Thank you.  You were talking about how you could hear people being
called out according to which village they came from, their names, and
then you would hear sounds of, you said thuds, I think, and screams and
shouts.  Can you describe just briefly to us how that worked.  Who was
coming and asking -- calling out names of villages and calling out names
of people?
A.   We couldn't hear people introducing themselves.  They went from
one vehicle to another.  They came to our vehicle and asked whether there
was somebody from Srebrenica.  Nobody was taken out of my lorry until the
next morning, and if somebody answered, they would take them away.  They
would hit them with the rifle butts, they would threaten them.  And as
they took them to the garage, which was some 50 metres away from our
vehicle, and when we heard those thuds, then these men started screaming
and then they would start yelling:  Stop that, stop that.  And then we
would hear a burst of fire, and this lasted the whole night.  In the
course of the night, one Serb soldier jumped on the trailer and did not
ask for people from various villages.  He was very specific and said
whether there was anybody from Srebrenica.  One person stood up.  I know
his name because I knew him.  Our fields were next to each other, and he
said:  I was from Srebrenica.  And the person asked him:  Which village
are you from?  And he said from Ljeskovik.  And then he said:  Sit down.
He did not want to take that person away.  That person was older than me
at the time.  He may have been the same age as I am now.
Q.   Thank you.  While you were kept there on these trucks that night,
were you given any food?
A.   No, never, never.  We were never offered any food.
Q.   Were you given any water?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And was there any offer of medical treatment to anybody that you
saw who might have needed help?
A.   No.
Q.   Now, you said the next morning someone was taken off your truck.
Did you spend the whole night on the truck?
A.   The whole night.  In the morning, the soldiers started shouting:
Don't let the civilians get away.  Because I suppose they were afraid that
the civilians might have talked about the massacre.  And they said:  Don't
let the civilians anywhere near.  And when it dawned, one Serb soldier
jumped on the trailer and said to one person which was in the left corner,
and he said:  Where are you from?  And he said:  Omer, and I don't know
whether that was his name or his father's name.  And then the soldier
said:  Come off the truck.  He took him away.  The person got off the
truck.  And then from the right-hand side they took another young man.
They had recognised him.  I don't know who that Serbian soldier was.  I
didn't know him, and he took that young man away from the trailer.  And
then they started shouting:  Take them to Fikret and Halija.  The Serbs
speak in a different way.  They had H's where it is necessary.  Instead of
Alija they said Halija and instead of Halid they said Alid, and they said,
okay, take them to Fikret and Halija and have them exchanged.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Lazarevic.
MR. LAZAREVIC:  Well, since I was invited by the Trial Chamber to
do some comment, to be honest, even I didn't quite understand what the
witness was talking about even though I understand the language.  Frankly
I understood that some civilians -- I didn't understand whether he was
saying that some civilians were trying to approach these detainees, or
what was this all about?  If we can go through this again.  I really don't
know what that was all about.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I can ask that question again.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, please do, Mr. Nicholls.
I thank you, Mr. Lazarevic.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Again, sir, please, as much as you can, try to speak a little bit
more slowly.  You spoke about hearing in the morning:  Don't let the
civilians -- hearing the soldiers shouting:  Don't let the civilians get
away.  And that you were --
A.   No, no.  The civilians were the local Serbs residing in Bratunac.
Those were not civilians from Srebrenica.  Those were the local Serb
civilians, the locals of Bratunac.  There was a building there.  As we
arrived that evening, one young man peaked through the window and an
elderly lady pulled a curtain on the window so as to prevent the child
looking through the window.  Those were the Serbs -- Serb residents of
Bratunac.  There were no Bosniak residents of Bratunac at the time.
Q.   So what you heard the soldiers saying was that they needed to keep
the Bratunac Serb civilians away from the trucks and the prisoners.
A.   They didn't say "Serbs," they only said:  Don't let the civilians
come up here to that street.  They didn't allow their own civilians to go
there.  They were not referring to the Bosniak civilians.
Q.   All right.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Could we go into private session for just one
moment?
JUDGE AGIUS:  Let's go into private session for a while, please.
[Private session]
[Open session]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.  We are back in open session,
Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   I'd like you to tell the Court now how you came to leave --
JUDGE AGIUS:  One moment, because I don't think we have covered
the totality of Mr. Lazarevic's observation.  So we've cleared one thing;
namely, that in the morning some of the soldiers were asking or shouting
that the civilians should not be allowed to come near the trucks.  We've
cleared that.  We've also cleared this last point that we had in private
session.  But then earlier on when he was testifying, he said:  "And when
it dawned --" at dawn, in other words -- "one Serb soldier jumped on the
trailer and said to one person who was in the left corner, and he said:
Where are you from?  And he said:  Omer."  So this he needs to clarify.
Do you confirm this, first of all, Witness?  Do you confirm that
at dawn or just after dawn one Serb soldier jumped on the trailer and
asked one of you who was on the left corner:  Where are you from?  Do you
confirm this?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Your Honour, it was not the soldier
who jumped on the trailer.  He jumped on the back of the lorry, and he
recognised that prisoner.  And I don't know whether his name was Omer or
his father's name was Omer, but this soldier recognised that person.  It
was already daylight, and then he ordered that person to get off.  And
then they -- this person also probably recognised the other man, the young
man on the right-hand side.  He didn't ask the question that they had been
putting the previous evening, and that was what villages we were from.
They recognised two people on the trailer.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Lazarevic.
MR. LAZAREVIC:  I believe that the main misunderstanding was about
the question that the soldier posed to these men.  We have here in
transcript the question allegedly posed was --
JUDGE AGIUS:  "Where are you from?"
MR. LAZAREVIC:  -- "Where are you from?"  But actually what I
heard is the question was:  "What is your father's name?"  And the witness
did not understand.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  This is why it is important that you
slow down as much as you can, Witness.  I know it's difficult sometimes.
It's difficult for me, too, but let's try a little bit better.  Make a
next try of it.
So the question by this Serb soldier was not -- to this young man
was not:  "Where are you from?"  But:  "What's your father's name?"
Do you agree to that?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  He asked him about either his
own name or his father's name.  That's why I'm not clear whether Omer was
his name or his father's name.  The questions differed in the evening from
those that were put in the morning.  In any case, I know that this soldier
recognised this man.
JUDGE AGIUS:  So this -- thank you.  This person was then taken
off the truck.  Is that correct?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And he was taken away.  Is that correct?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And then you had continued, saying that -- "and then
from the right-hand side they took another young man.  They had recognised
him.  I don't know who that Serbian soldier was.  I didn't know him, and
he took that young man -- and they took that young man away from the
trailer."
Do you agree to this?  Do you confirm this?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes.  He took him away just
like the previous one.  I don't know where he took them, I haven't a clue,
because we did not dare lift our heads over the trailer side to observe
what was going on.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And then we have another part in the transcript
which is very confusing and you need to clear it up for us, please.  And
then you continued stating:  "And then they started shouting:  Take them
to Fikret and Halija."  Then we have got something missing.  So what did
they say?  Take them to ...?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Take them to Halija and Fikret and
have them exchanged.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Did Fikret and Alija mean anything to you at the
time when --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] How could it mean anything?  We were
prisoners.  It didn't mean anything to us.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And then you are reported as saying here in the
transcript:  "The Serbs speak in a different way."  Did you say those
words?  And if you did, what did you mean --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  What do you mean by that?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] That's what I said.  I'm just
quoting what they said.  An educated person uses correct grammar.  If a
word starts with an A, then they will start their words with an A.  If
they are not educated, then they would add an H before that A, and the
other way around.  I lived all my life with the Serbs, and I know that the
Serb villagers talk like that.  If a person is educated, an educated Serb
would not say Halija if he is supposed to say Alija.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  I think the rest of the transcript does not
need any further clarification.  It's self-explanatory.
Let's proceed now.  Yes, Mr. Nicholls, he is all yours.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Now, remembering, please, try to speak slowly.  Tell me about how
you left Vihor's garages, where the truck -- trucks went.
A.   When we set off in the morning, the lorries started moving towards
an exit from Bratunac.  The column stopped at the moment, and at one point
we heard them shouting:  We're waiting for the UNPROFOR.  And this is
where we were sitting.  It was very hot.  The sides were made of metal.
The driver was very correct, he often brought us water, and he was joined
by a 15- or 16-year-old man from Bratunac, and he also brought us water.
And that young lad asked if there was an Ismet there, and I believe his
family name was Ramic.  He was a shoemaker from Bratunac.  Some people who
were imprisoned with us asked him:  Why are you asking after Ismet?  And
he said:  He is my neighbour.  And while we were standing there, a lorry
that was in Srebrenica that was transporting humanitarian aid - it was an
old truck - a group of elderly Serbs appeared.  Their average age was over
60.  Some of them wore uniforms.  They wore the uniforms of the former
JNA, and the others did not wear uniforms.  They were all standing there,
and since the sides of the lorry were very tall, as they started passing
by the lorry, they started shouting:  These are our people.  What did they
mean by that, I don't know.  And then that lorry went away.  We probably
waited there for two or three hours.  I don't know.  At the time I didn't
have a watch.  And then the column started moving on towards Konjevic
Polje.
As we drove by the -- by Avdaga's field and we started climbing up
the hill, then I could see how long the column of vehicles was.  After
that we were not stopped anywhere.  We passed Konjevic Polje and Drinjaca,
and when we arrived at Josanica, where there is the stone quarry, some
people saw, either before the tunnel or after the tunnel --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Slow down.  Because even I who don't understand your
language can sense the speed that you are going at.  So please slow down.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Let me ask you a question, sir.  You said you were stopped for two
to three hours, and you said in the beginning of your answer that this was
at an exit near Bratunac.  I want to be clear:  Is that where you
waited --
A.   Yes, yes, from Bratunac.
Q.   So you waited for two to three hours at the exit from Bratunac?
A.   Yes.  That's where we were stopped and that's where we waited all
that time.  They said that they were waiting for UNPROFOR; that's what we
heard.
Q.   Okay.  Now, you talked about how at one point during this journey
you could see, because you were going up a hill, how long the convoy of
lorries or trucks was.  How many -- if you remember, about how many trucks
were there in this convoy?
A.   There was also a column of buses -- or rather, there were buses in
the column, and there must have been at least 20 vehicles in the column,
as it was very long, even 30.
Q.   Now, you were just starting to tell us about something that
happened when you got to -- I think you said to a tunnel by Zvornik.
Could you explain where you were and what happened.
A.   As we reached Josevac on the road to Josanica, there's a large
quarry there and we set out for Divic.  As we came out of the tunnel
someone saw that there was an APC near the Vidikovac Hotel, which was
about 800 metres away from where we were.  We continued our journey, went
through Divic.  We reached Zvornik.  In Zvornik we could only see two
persons going down there toward the Drina, and they were using a
pedestrian passageway towards Drina, and we continued our journey toward
Karakaj.  When we reached Karakaj, the lorries and buses turned left
toward Tuzla.  I was still hopeful that the exchange would take place,
that we would be taken in between the lines, and that we would be listed,
because we had not been listed up to that point.  I was still hopeful as
we were setting out toward Tuzla that we would be exchanged.  We -- the
drive was a short one, for maybe five or six minutes, and the vehicles
turned right.
At that point, it immediately dawned on me that we were not going
in the direction of Tuzla but in the direction of Krizevici.  Next, the
vehicles pulled up.  As soon as the vehicle was emptied, it went back.  As
we were getting close, we could see a school playground or a school yard
there, and there were between 30 and 50 Serb soldiers there.  And then we
realised that this was indeed a UN APC, but it had been captured by the
Serbs.  It was parked in the yard to the left side.  There were two
soldiers in the UN blue uniforms and two Serb soldiers there, and there
was a civilian who was aged above 50 and he was walking with them.  They
removed the UNPROFOR insignia, but they had the C in the insignia, which
stands for S in Cyrillic, and this was the only thing that was visible on
the APC plates.
As we were -- as people were getting out of the vehicles, they had
to run toward the school.  I was wearing a leather jacket, and as I went
out of the lorry I was told by a man there that I should take the jacket
off and just throw it there on the ground, and I did.  As I entered the
building, the school building, we turned left along the corridor, which
was about 10 metres.  We had to run through the corridor, and then one
reached a door leading to a large hall.  People there were mostly from
Potocari.  They were elderly people; the average age was 70.  I knew them.
We were filling up the ranks, and so it went along.  When the place was
filled up, there were four young boys there and there was a grey blanket
there.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.  Let me ask you a few questions about what
you've been telling us, and then you can continue to tell us what happened
to you.
You said earlier that while you were on this journey and you
thought, hopefully, that you were heading towards Tuzla to be exchanged
that you hadn't been listed yet and no one had been listed.  What did you
mean by that?
A.   I meant to say that no exchange could be carried out before people
were listed because the Serbs didn't know how many people they had.  Not a
single one of us was registered by them.  They can't even know our
numbers.  Only if they counted the dead bodies could they know how many
people there were.  They can't know how many people they killed, and it's
true, they can't know, because nobody asked for our names.  There was this
one person, there were probably officers among them, who asked whether
there was anyone from the Zvornik municipality amongst us.  But nobody
responded to that call and they asked no further questions.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Again, please slow down.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Thank you.  I think you answered my question.  Then you said --
JUDGE AGIUS:  And if -- having gone through the transcript, I
don't think there is an indication in it where we are, where is this
building where they happened to --
MR. NICHOLLS:  You're correct, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  So if you could address that --
MR. NICHOLLS:  Yes.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   That's where we're going.  Could you tell us -- well, first of
all, this area you've been describing, you've described the journey from
Bratunac to Zvornik to Karakaj and then left and ended up at this place
where you saw a school building.  Which village were you in when the truck
stopped and you saw the school?
A.   This was Grbavci or Orahovac, whichever way you want it.  I know
that previously this place was called Grbavci; now it is called Orahovac.
I don't know whether the area now called Orahovac is larger than it was
previously, but I know that before this was called the Grbavci elementary
school.
Q.   Thank you.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And if he could also confirm the date for us,
please, now.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Yes.
A.   It was Friday, the 14th of July, I believe.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Next question I want to ask you is about the soldiers that you
said were in UN uniforms.  Who were they?  Were those UN soldiers?
A.   No, they were Serb soldiers.
Q.   How could you tell that?
A.   I know that because they didn't tell us anything, and they wore
automatic rifles produced by Zastava, from Kragujevac.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Incidentally, while we are at this, this is
something that we discussed this morning and which I was meant to
communicate to you at some point in time in anticipation of several
mentions.  We will be, in the course of this trial, have -- be referring
to various kinds of weaponry and other military equipment.  What I would
like you to do as Prosecution is to compile a -- a document, a dossier,
which would indicate a picture or a diagram of the various weapons and
kinds of weaponry and tanks or armoured vehicles, whatever was in use in
the former Yugoslavia at the time, and to which witnesses will be
referring as we go along.  Please, before you hand it over to the Trial
Chamber, make it available to all the Defence teams so that we ascertain
that they agree.  I see Mr. McCloskey on his toes.  Is there already such
a document?
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Your Honour, as you know, you will soon see a
video of many of these events, and we have a book of video stills that
goes along with it that have the APCs, the weapons, but we will -- as you
say, we will get a nice list for you.  But for your knowledge, the -- the
classic Zastava automatic weapon that is used is recognisable worldwide.
You will -- it's an AK-47.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Right.  But we have no military background in the
least, and although of course from other cases I know what an APC is and
I've heard about Zastava and so on and so forth, we will be coming across
various descriptions.  And in the past there have also been some
disagreement between Prosecution and Defence on the correct nomenclature
and description of some weapons.  So if there is agreement on this, it
will make everyone's life much easier.
Yes, Mr. Bourgon.
MR. BOURGON:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Of course when I hear the
word "dossier" I get scared because it's not something I'm familiar with
and I don't like very much.  But if my colleague wants to produce a
listing with pictures of weapons and types of weapons, I think that could
indeed be useful, however, I wouldn't like that he would say who was using
whatever weapon.
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, no.
MR. BOURGON:  But to know it, to have a picture and a name of a
weapon, I think that may be useful.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I have a specimen myself which I can show you, let
you have, and see whether you will agree to something similar to that, and
you can bring it up-to-date or work on it.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  We can bring weapons in the courtroom, if you
would like.
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, I don't think we need tanks and helicopters.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  I mean handguns, but there's very clear video of
all this.  I think if we can leave weapons out of the courtroom, that
would be nice.  But we do have this weapon down in evidence if there is
any need.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I don't think there is any need for that.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  You have a weapon as well, Your Honour?  It's nice
to be aware of that.  Thank you.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.  So let's -- sorry for that interruption,
Mr. Nicholls.  You may proceed.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Were you able to observe how these soldiers with Zastavas were
interacting with the Serb soldiers you saw there who were in Serb -- who
were in normal army uniforms?
A.   Let me tell you, there was no difference there because the Serb
soldiers -- the other Serb soldiers also carried Zastava weapons, and they
were good-quality weapons.  Of course they only had side-arms - none of
them had Howitzers or anything else - because they were confronted with
people who were unarmed.
Q.   Maybe I didn't ask the question well.  Thank you.  That helps to
clarify, but were the UN -- were the soldiers dressed in UN uniforms
behaving any differently than the other soldiers there or were they all
acting kind of the same way?
A.   They reacted in no way whatsoever, and there was a civilian there
who was an interpreter, but there was no reaction on their part
whatsoever.
Q.   How many soldiers total at the school did you see, speaking now
about when you got off the truck?
A.   Between 30 and 50 soldiers; quite a few of them.
Q.   All right.  Now, I was going to get to it a little bit later, but
I'll try to do it now.
JUDGE AGIUS:  One moment.  If I may interrupt you, Mr. Nicholls.
I'm curious about this interpreter reference.  Answering your question, he
said that these soldiers, which previously he said were Serbs dressed in
UN uniforms, were not behaving or reacting in any way whatsoever.  And
then he mentions:  "And there was a civilian there who was an
interpreter."  What's the significance of that?  Because if we're talking
of Serb soldiers wearing UN uniforms and Bosnian Muslim captives, what's
the purpose of having an interpreter there?
MR. NICHOLLS:  Yes.  Yes, Your Honour.
Q.   How did you know this person was an interpreter?  Can you describe
this civilian; what they were doing and who they were?
A.   Let me tell you how I knew that.  That's the way the UNPROFOR
works.  They always have a civilian who interprets for them, but these
were people impersonating UN personnel, and that's why they had this
person there who posed as an interpreter.  But he was not an interpreter,
in fact, he was a Serb just as all the other Serbs there, even those who
were there to force us out of the truck.  They parked the APC there, took
the UNPROFOR insignia off.  Instead of an UNPROFOR registration plate,
there was just a plate with the letter C there, because Serbs using
Cyrillic, C stands for S.
Q.   All right.  So -- just so I'm clear, there was a civilian there,
and your impression was that this person was there to look as though there
was an interpreter?
A.   It was just -- he was just there for pretense.
Q.   All right.  I'd like to now show you four photos and see if you
recognise the place in the photos.  And we're going to try to do this on
e-court.
MR. NICHOLLS:  If I could ask the court officer for 1691 is the
first number.
Q.   Sir, this will - or should - appear on the screen in front of you.
It's not there yet; it may be there in a minute.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I do have hard copies, Your Honour.  Not for
everybody, but in case we need them.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is the school at Grbavci or
Orahovac.  This here is the sports hall.  In this part here, the lorries
were parked where people were taken off.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Okay.  Just wait a minute, Witness.  Thank you for that.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Could we blow this up and is there some way he can
then -- he was pointing at the screen, but so that we can see what he is
pointing at when he describes these places?  And I'm sorry, I don't know
how that -- I've been trained, but I don't quite remember what I need to
do there to make that happen.
Q.   I'm sorry, sir, just wait.  We're trying to find a way for you to
point on the image.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Let's see how it can be done.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Do I need to change my screen?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This is the sports hall, and this is
the auxiliary building where we were taken to.  At the time I was there,
it was not walled up as it is now with concrete blocks --
MR. NICHOLLS:  I'm very sorry.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I don't think it's going to work like that.  If you
have a hard copy, we can put it on the ELMO and I think it will solve our
problems.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   You're not doing anything wrong, sir --
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, no, of course not.
MR. NICHOLLS:  -- up to you.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, I think that's the way to go about it.
Yes, Mr. Meek.
MR. MEEK:  Well, Your Honour, at least on my screen it appeared
that the witness did in fact touch the screen, and I see a red mark.  I
think perhaps the witness just after that was not touching the screen.  If
he just touched the screen and was shown how to do that, I think we could
probably proceed.
MR. NICHOLLS:  We can try it once more, but the witness needs to
know how --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Let's try it once more first.  I see a red mark on
the screen, but I don't know if that's the result of --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This red line?
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Yes.  What I want you to do is you were describing this area very
well on the building.  What I want you to do is first of all -- you've
made one red mark.  Tell me, if you can see it there, under the windows,
what were you indicating with that red mark?
A.   No, I wasn't showing you this top of the hall.  I was showing this
other auxiliary part of the building.  I don't know actually how I made
that red mark up there.
Q.   That's no problem.  Let's try it this way:  Please draw the number
1 on the auxiliary building with that pointer thing they've given you.
A.   [Marks].
Q.   Thank you.  Please draw the number 2 on the building you called
the sports hall.
A.   [Marks].
Q.   That looks good.  Thank you.  And I think you -- I may be wrong,
but I think I heard you saying where you went into the building.  If you
can see on here where you entered, put a number 3 at the entrance.
A.   I think it was somewhere here, around number 3.
Q.   All right.  Thank you very much.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  Will you be requiring him to make more
markings on this?
MR. NICHOLLS:  Just one.
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  Go ahead.  And then I tell you what the
problem will be.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Okay.
Q.   The last one, Witness, you said the trucks were parked "here," and
I couldn't see where you were saying the trucks were parked.  If you could
just maybe draw an oval in the area where the trucks were parked.
A.   Somewhere here in front of the school and inside the yard.
Q.   All right.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Sorry, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.  Now, the problem that I need solved is the
following:  Previously when we were -- we didn't have e-court in place,
this kind of photo would be on the ELMO, you will make the marks on it,
and then he will initialise it.  Of course he can initialise what we have
here.  However, since this is a protected witness and normally the photo
on the ELMO would then immediately go into a sealed envelope and marked as
a sealed document, we need to see how we are going to do the same,
protecting the witness, giving this photo a new exhibit number, separate
exhibit number from that we had discussed when we had the lessons or
training.  So you tell us how we are going to go about this.  I need his
initials on this photo without the initials appearing on the screen.
Yes.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Your Honour, I don't know if this is acceptable:  I
would suggest, maybe just for today, that we put -- that he write his
witness number, PW-110, if that's okay, and we can figure something else
out later.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  If you're happy with that.
Are you happy with that?  I see Mr. Haynes tempted to say
something, but ...
MR. HAYNES:  Not really.  Just in case there's another PW-110,
perhaps he should put the indictment number on it as well, but no, I'm
happy.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Meek.
MR. MEEK:  No problem, Your Honour --
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.  Let's do that.
So, Witness, could you please, the top left-hand corner put P --
write "PW-110."
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Here?
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.  Yeah, yeah, that's good.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] W --
MR. NICHOLLS:  Maybe just P --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  110.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] 110?
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you very much.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Dobro.  Thank you.  And we can mark this document as
Prosecution Exhibit -- next number, 20 --
THE REGISTRAR:  Sorry, Your Honour.  That will be Exhibit Number
P2102, under seal -- I'm sorry.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Does it have to be under seal at this point in time?
THE REGISTRAR:  No.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  So it's P2102.  Thank you.  So we've solved
that problem.
[Trial Chamber and registrar confer]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  All right.  Good point.  You haven't
tendered, as yet, the clean picture, Mr. Jones -- not Mr. Jones,
Mr. Nicholls.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Excuse me for the interruption, Your Honour.
Perhaps it would save time if at the end of the witness's cross we could
just offer the ones that we --
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  -- think are appropriate.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  Thank you.  For the record, however, we'd
just like to point out that the witness made his marks on a photograph
that carries ERN number 0046-1633.  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   The next photo I would like to show you, sir, is number 1692.
Sorry, before we do that -- before we do that.  The photo I showed you
that you've made markings on, it's still up there, not the one you marked.
But is that a fair, accurate, representation of the Grbavci school as you
remember it in July, 1995?  Is there anything major that's different that
you want to point out?
A.   I don't know what the school building looked like from the
outside.  I know that I was there during the on-site investigation.  The
building was the same.  A couple of old cabinets had been thrown away, and
the area where the trucks were, the -- this part was walled up in the
meantime.  But all the rest was just the same as before.
Q.   All right.  Everything was the same other than some cabinets
missing and some kind of wall where the trucks were parked.  Is that
right?
A.   Yes.  At the spot where we were taken out from the room, there was
a lorry parked there.  It was like with a ramp waiting for us to board it.
When I returned four years later, I believe, this particular part where we
came up from was walled up.  All the rest was the same.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.  And we'll talk about that ramp a little bit
later.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Could I have 1692 now, please?
Q.   All right, sir -- now don't touch the screen yet -- but again do
you recognise the building here we've just been -- the building in front
of you?
A.   Yes, I do.  This is the sports hall and the auxiliary building
that we all had to go through.
Q.   And is there anything on this photo which you would like to draw
our attention to?  Otherwise, you don't need to mark anything on it if
you've already explained this well.
A.   No.  I just wanted to say that this was -- that this is a sports
hall and the auxiliary room.  This was all there.  At the front was the
place where we exited from that building.  There is nothing special to say
about this picture.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Meek.
MR. MEEK:  Mr. President, I don't know if this is important, but
before we took the last exhibit away from the witness - I'm looking at
page 68, line 21 and 22 - the witness indicated, "This particular part
where we came up from was walled up."  And he didn't mark that -- 67, page
67, line 21, 22.  That was never marked before the previous exhibit, 1691,
was taken away from the witness.  So perhaps he could mark it on this
photograph, if it is in fact visible.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
Thank you, Mr. Meek.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I didn't think that was necessary because he'd
indicated where the trucks were parked, if I recall by the number 3, he
said that was where the wall was --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah.
MR. NICHOLLS:  -- so I thought the record was fairly clear.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I think there are no walls here anyway, so let's
proceed.
For the record, however, the last photo that the witness has
referred to was 0040-9640.  Thank you.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.  We all agree that it is not necessary to go
back to this photo and see where the wall is.  Let's proceed.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Let me -- just to be -- let me ask one question about that wall
then.  Was it directly at the same place where the trucks were parked on
the outside or was it somewhere else in relation to this school building?
Was the wall where the trucks were parked or was it somewhere else?
A.   No, no.  As we were taken away blindfolded, in this corner the TAM
lorry was parked.  I know the lorry very well.  This is where it was
parked, and I don't know how they had done that.  I believe that the
podium is somewhat higher, as we climbed on the lorry we did not have to
take a large step.  A TAM lorry is some metre from the ground, so if we
had to climb in from the ground, we would have had to take a long step.
Since we didn't have to do that, I believe they had built something like a
podium.
Q.   Okay.  So I think that was perhaps a translation, interpretation.
There was a ramp there or a podium to help people get onto the truck, but
not a wall.  Is that right?
A.   I don't know whether in the meantime this thing has been destroyed
in the meantime.  This was walled up later on.  This wall or podium had
been built before we arrived, and then it was all walled up.  In 1992, it
was walled -- it was -- in 1998 it was walled up, but it was just the
bricks.  So I believe that that podium had existed before for us to climb
on the vehicle.
Q.   Okay.  Can we go back to 1691 just --
MR. NICHOLLS:  I think I do need to clear this up, Your Honour.
Q.   Let me ask you this:  The ramp or podium, what was that made out
of?
A.   You know what?  This was something as high as your desk.  It was a
structure.  I believe this was not done at the moment when the building
was built.  This may have been done a day two before, and that's why they
had destroyed that part of the wall.  They just broke through one part of
the wall, and this is where the lorry was parked to facilitate the
climbing up.  If you're blindfolded, how are you supposed to climb onto a
lorry, if the lorry is high, if there is no construction to help you get
onto the lorry?
Q.   All right.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Could we go now to the next photo, which is 1694.
We have 1697.
JUDGE AGIUS:  1694 or 1697?
MR. NICHOLLS:  Oh, you do have 1694, can we bring that up, please?
JUDGE AGIUS:  One moment, because I think we have -- okay.  Now
it's changing.
MR. NICHOLLS:  And I'll say for the record, this photograph has
the ERN number 00409650.
Q.   Sir, take your time, take a look at that photo.  Do you recognise
what is depicted in this photograph?
A.   You can see the windows of the sports hall, and you can see
something like a basket for basketball.
Q.   Is there any difference that jumps out to you of what you see in
this photograph that you remember from the sports hall in July 14th, 1995?
A.   Let me put it this way:  I can describe the entrance into the
sports hall.  On the right-hand side there was a wall with the windows at
the top.  Then on the left-hand side there was an opening leading into the
auxiliary room.  This is the opening that we had to go through
blindfolded.  The easiest for me is to look at a photo, but when I look at
this picture, I can only tell you that this is a sports hall with windows
and the basket, which is either drawn onto the fall or fixed onto the
wall.  At the time when I was there, I don't remember this basket being
there.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Now could we assign this an exhibit number and give
it 169 -- and then go to the next photo, 1697.  Actually, sorry, he didn't
mark it, so --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Are you going to mark this one now or are you going
to stick to what you said earlier, that you will tender everything or
whatever later on?
MR. NICHOLLS:  We will tender it later.  I'm sorry, Your Honour,
I'd forgotten.  If we could go to 1697.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, one moment because I recognise Mr. Bourgon.
MR. BOURGON:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Now, the witness has
indicated that this is a gym --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Sports hall, he said.
MR. BOURGON:  -- and windows --
JUDGE AGIUS:  The word I heard in the translation was sports hall.
MR. BOURGON:  Or -- yes, sports hall, sorry, but he indicated that
this is -- I'm not sure if he used it, I don't have the transcript here,
he used sports hall, but he did not recognise this as being the sports
hall he was in.  If later on my colleague asks for this photo to be given
an exhibit number, we would not object, but we would like the witness to
know whether he recognises this - yes or no - as the place where he was
held.  Thank you, Mr. President.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls, could you --
MR. NICHOLLS:  I think he explained his reaction to it, but I will
ask again.
Q.   Do you recognise this photo?  Can you tell from the photo whether
it's the same sports hall you were held in on July 14th, 1995?  And if you
can't, just say you can't.
A.   Yes, yes.  This is where I was.  I was in no other sports hall.
That's where I was.  They did not take me all over Zvornik to see some
other sports hall.  This was the sports hall where we were kept as cattle,
sitting on the floor, on the wooden floor.  I don't know what was on the
floor.  I did not dare look around -- what was around me.  This is the
sports hall where I was held.
Q.   Do you remember, if you do, where you sat in relation to these
large windows we can see in the photo?
A.   I was the closest to the auxiliary building, to the entrance into
that auxiliary building that everybody had to go through.  I was not
sitting close to the big wall, but I was closer to the other, smaller
wall.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Last one, then; 1697.
Q.   Again, Witness, take a look.  Take your time and tell me if you
recognise this place.
A.   Yes, that's the sports hall in the school where we were kept.
MR. NICHOLLS:  That's 00816804 [Realtime transcript read in error
"00816801"] is the ERN number.
Q.   All right.  Now, I briefly want to ask you some questions,
Witness, about your experiences in the sports hall at the Grbavci school.
You started off saying that you were forced to run into the school from
the lorry.
A.   Yes.
Q.   What happened when you went into the school?  I think you said
your jacket was taken from you.  What was taken from you and what was the
process as you entered the school?
A.   They took the jacket, and previously, when I was captured, they
took away the rucksack.  And when I arrived at the school there was
nothing left to take away from me.  The only thing that they could -- that
they could have taken away was my soul, but fortunately enough, they
didn't do that.
Q.   Was anything taken from other prisoners as they entered the
school?
A.   The clothes.  Some had to take their shirts off.  They were
probably not allowed to put their shirts back on.  There was nobody like
that in our lorry, but there was a very thin, elderly man who was
shirtless.  There were a number of shirtless men, but we were not forced
-- the others were not forced to take their shirts off.  They only told
me to take my leather jacket off.
JUDGE AGIUS:  One moment, Mr. Nicholls, and again apologies for
interrupting you, but line 14 on the previous page, page 73.  The ERN
number of the document is wrong.  It's not 00816801, but it is 00816804.
That's just for the record.  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you.
Q.   Now, we've seen pictures of the room.  How full was the sports
hall when you entered it?
A.   When I entered, over half of it was full.  And when everybody
entered, there was very little space left.  But we all sat down crunched
and squeezed.  We were sitting so tight that we could not move from the
place that we were assigned.
Q.   From the time that you entered the sports hall, how long did
prisoners continue to arrive?
A.   Five, six minutes, maybe even more.  We were towards the back of
the column, but all this happened very fast.  As you jumped off the
vehicle from either the lorry or the bus, before us there was a
Centrotrans Sarajevo bus with the registration plates that I saw for the
first time in the Cyrillic.  We had never had Cyrillic registration plates
before.  It was then that I saw that Sarajevo registration with two C's,
and also a Zvornik bus.  At the time, they had special registration plates
in Cyrillic, and it was only later on that we were all ordered to use the
same Latinic registration plates.
Q.   And once all the prisoners, as far as you could tell, had arrived
and had been -- and had run into the school, how many prisoners do you
think were in the sports hall, approximately?
A.   Anything between 500 and a thousand.
Q.   Where were the --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Can we be more precise?  Because anything between
500 and 1.000, 1.000 is double of 500, so ...
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Yes.  Just think about it for one moment and see if you can be
more precise.  If you can't, then that's fine.
A.   Let me tell you this:  If I had known what would happen and what
-- that I would survive, I could count people.  I could add up the width
of every person times the number of heads, but just like with the Serbs,
the Serbs didn't know exactly how many we were.  They never made our list.
They didn't know how many we were.  We don't know how many we were.  Maybe
somebody was counting in secret.  I can only draw my conclusion on the
length of the convoy.  If everybody from the convoy had been put there,
then there must have been a thousand.  But if people were separated, then
they -- there were fewer of us.  But a lot of elderly people who arrived
before us filled up half of the room, and then the rest of us who had
arrived on the lorries on that day, we filled the sports hall up.  There
were a lot of vehicles parked ahead of our vehicle, and a lot stopped
after our vehicle.  I don't know how many.
Q.   Thank you.  You said there was some elderly people.  Can you tell
us the approximate age range of the prisoners in the room, from the
youngest to the oldest, people that you saw.
A.   The youngest was 15 and the oldest around 70.  And that person,
the oldest person, was from my village and he was aged 70 at the time.
Q.   Let me ask you to think about that.  How young was the youngest
person in the room?
A.   Save for the four children who were there, the four children that
were there, one child was 10 and the oldest of the children was 14.  But
they were separated from us.
Q.   How were they separated, these four children?
A.   We were sitting in lines, and they were sitting next to the
entrance door.  And they faced the rest of us.  The whole crowd was facing
these four children who were sat by the main door.
Q.   Now, during this time you were there, these hours, were there
guards at the door at the entrance?
A.   Yes.  Very young lads who were holding rifles in their hands.
Somebody addressed them as soldiers, and they said they were not soldiers.
They said that they were Karadzic's Chetniks, Young Chetniks.  That's --
they took pride in that.  When somebody addressed them as soldiers, this
is what they said.  Sometimes they would shoot in the air when there was
commotion among the people, then they would shoot into the walls and into
the ceilings.  And we could still see the traces of those bullets when we
went to the sports hall later on for field inspection.
Q.   All right.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I'm sorry, Your Honour, are we stopping now or are
we going another five minutes?
JUDGE AGIUS:  It's up to you.  If it's more convenient for you to
break now, we can break now.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I'll continue.
JUDGE AGIUS:  We've got another five minutes to go.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Okay.
JUDGE AGIUS:  This inspection that he's just referred to, field
inspection, could he tell us when it occurred.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I'll -- I was going to get to that.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   When you said this field inspection, you said "we," can you tell
us now, after leaving the Grbavci school on the 14th of July, 1995, when
did you go back to the school and who did you go with?
A.   I apologise.  I did not understand your question.
Q.   I'm sorry.  You said a field inspection.  When you came back to
the school you could still see traces of bullet holes from when the
soldiers had fired into the walls of the school.  When was that you went
back to the school?
A.   Oh, yes.  This happened in 1999, sometime in the autumn of that
year.  I don't know the exact date.  I believe that there is a record of
that.  There were two Campagnolas, the United Nations Campagnolas, and a
big transporter and SFOR troops, and the person who took -- who made the
record, and there was an interpreter as well.
Q.   Now, again, similar question I've asked you before:  While you
were in the school, was any food provided, was any medical care provided
while you were a prisoner, and to the other prisoners?
A.   No.  Nobody offered us any food.  Some prisoners were asked to
bring water, but there were just too many of us.  If they started from one
end, they could only give water to two lines of people.  So we were always
thirsty.  If you didn't experience that, then you can never know that
water is the most beautiful thing in the world.  Nobody wanted bread, but
if somebody had brought you water, I believe that we would have drank 2
litres at once.  That's how important water is, and that's why I'm saying
today that water is more important than bread.  We were thirsty, and if
you've never been thirsty, you don't know the feeling.  You cannot imagine
the feeling.
Q.   What was the temperature like in the school that day?
A.   I don't know.  It was the 14th of July, the hottest period of the
year.  It was very difficult to tell, but you know when you enter a room
full of people, even if it had been cold outside, the room would have been
heated up by the bodies of all of us in the room.  And I believe that the
outside temperature was well in its 30s.
Q.   And did any of the prisoners appear to you to need medical care?
A.   Yes.  People were complaining about feeling faint.  I also wanted
to have more water.  I -- but if anybody was feeling faint or sick, the
only thing that they would do was for that person to move a bit further
where they could be given water, and that's all the assistance we ever got
from them.
Q.   Okay.  So my last question before we take a little break, sir:
What kind of toilet facilities were provided for all the people in this
room?
A.   They gave us a bucket, but it was hot so nobody really felt the
urge to relieve themselves.  It was just too hot.  There were maybe a few
elderly people and a woman, maybe they used the bucket.  The rest of us
didn't.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I think it's time for the break, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you, Mr. Nicholls.
We'll have --
MR. ZIVANOVIC:  Excuse me, not "and a woman."  It is not good
translated.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.
MR. ZIVANOVIC:  It is line 10.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.
MR. ZIVANOVIC:  Elderly people and -- "elderly people and a
woman."
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah.
MR. ZIVANOVIC:  No, the women are mentioned in the -- in another
context.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.
Witness, if you could -- I'll read it out to you.  If there is a
mistake -- if there is a mistake, please point it out to us.
"They gave us a bucket, but it was so hot so nobody really felt
the urge to relieve themselves.  It was just too hot.  There were maybe a
few elderly people --" and then we have in the transcript "... and a
woman.  Maybe they used the bucket."
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.
JUDGE AGIUS:  So what is the correct testimony?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No.  I apologise to the women who
are here in the room.  I didn't say that there was a woman.  I just
apologised to the women in the room for mentioning that there were people
who did relieve themselves in the bucket, because I mentioned that action.
I wanted to apologise to the women in the courtroom.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, sir.
We'll have a 20-minute break starting from now.  Thank you.
Same precaution as before.  If the guard could kindly ask -- all
right.  The lady is leaving.
--- Recess taken at 12.29 p.m.
--- On resuming at 12.53 p.m.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you.
Q.   Sir, while you were in the sports hall, could you see whether
there was any physical abuse of the prisoners?  And ...
A.   No.  Only one man was slapped about.  Why, I don't know.
Q.   At any time while you were there, did any officers, senior
officers, arrive at the school that you could see?
A.   At the time I was there, some people arrived in civilian clothes.
They stood on one side, observing us.  When the time came for us to set
out, a group of them gathered - I don't know whether they were civilians
or soldiers - and one of them asked, as I said previously, whether there
was anyone from the Zvornik municipality among us.  Later on, I don't know
whether it was this same person who put the question before someone else,
when there was commotion in the hall, he said:  Shut up, everyone.  And we
did.  And then he said:  Four rows in the hall stand up.  These were
mostly the elderly people I talked to you about.  They stood up.  He told
them to take the right turn and face the wall, turning their back to the
entrance.  The next four rows had to do the same thing.  This way they
faced the exit they were supposed to take.
As they approached my row, they issued the following order:  Four
rows stand up, and we were supposed to face the other wall, adjacent to
the previous one.  And in this way they lined us up.  As you enter the
hall, somewhere to the right in the middle of the hall, a person said:
These people should not be killed.  One of the Serb guards standing at the
entrance replied by saying:  Who says so?  And then this same person
repeated:  These people should not be killed.  This person wore only black
trousers and, I believe, a shirt.  Nothing else.  The soldier retorted:
Well, we'll see whether they should be killed or not.  He said:  Come
along.  He took the person, the man, out of the school building.  We heard
a rifle shot.  The man started moaning.  They took out another man, a
younger man than the previous one.  He was maybe 30 years old.  He was
also taken out, we could hear a rifle shot, and the man never returned.
The persons carrying water were also prisoners, and they were at
that point prohibited from going out to fetch water, probably because this
was an attempt to conceal the crime.
At a certain point later on a man wearing a red beret showed up --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Stop, stop, stop.  It's running out of hand,
Mr. Nicholls.  Unless you control your own witness, we'll have to control
him ourselves.  The question was a very simple, straightforward one:  At
any time while you were there, did any officers, senior officers, arrive
at the school that you could see?  And instead of answering that question,
he has given us an entire description of events that he was not asked to
describe.  So this is something that we cannot -- we cannot -- I'm not --
sir, one moment --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] This other person was supposed to
say that I should stand up, too.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Be patient, be patient.  We will get there when the
time arrives.  But in the meantime, please try to answer the questions
that are put to you and not answer questions that are not put to you.
Mr. Meek.
MR. MEEK:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Again, I would just renew my
objection I made earlier today, and if you would look at page 82, line 3
and 4, the witness again is speculating on why someone did something.
It's pure speculation.  He should leave that out, those extraneous
comments like that.  That's my objection, Your Honour.  "Probably because
this was an attempt to conceal the crime."
JUDGE AGIUS:  But he is an --
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE AGIUS:  We don't agree with your objection, Mr. Meek.  He is
-- if that is the impression he formed at the time and he wants to relate
it to us the way he considered it to be, he has every right to do so.
However, what we definitely want rectified is the mode -- system we are
proceeding with.  At least we will try to interrupt as least -- the least
we can, but at the same time try to control your own witness.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. McCloskey.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  And just a brief statement, and it's -- when we --
when this witness first testified many years ago, it was under a different
system.  The -- the Judge preferred not to hear much from the lawyers, and
they were pretty much just allowed to tell their story, and that's, I
think, partly what this witness is doing.  We got closer to the question
and answer the last time, and so I think he understands this, but --
JUDGE AGIUS:  All right.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  -- that's part of the problem here.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, I appreciate that, Mr. McCloskey, and that is
-- provides a reasonable answer.  But at the same time, the truth of the
matter is that he has not answered the question.  Of course, what he has
been telling us is important, and we will need to come to it, but he also
needs to answer the question.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I understand that, Your Honour, and I can certainly
break it up more.  I was letting the witness go a little bit longer
because I thought it was easier for him to explain things that way and I
was going to come back, but I will try to break this up a little bit more.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.  Thank you.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   So, Witness, please try to have a little bit shorter answers, and
we'll go through this step by step, what happened to you.  I understand
you are trying to tell us what you think is important that happened to you
that day.  Now, I had asked you about whether any officers appeared, and I
believe - it's off my screen - but you said:  No, but some people dressed
in civilian clothes came and started giving orders to the prisoners.  Is
that right, that you didn't see any senior officers?
A.   No.  No.  It wasn't people in civilian clothes who arrived.
Actually, the civilian people came into the room before the military men
were to come.  Of course there were officers coming in, because after they
came in, the process of taking people out started.  Because from the
auxiliary building a bag of rags was brought in, rags that were used to
blindfold us.  And of course there must have been a command issued,
because otherwise they would not have proceeded to do that.  It was after
their arrival that the people were being taken out.
Q.   When the officers came, did you see them inside the sports hall or
were they looking in?  Can you just describe how you could tell these
officers had arrived.
A.   It was after they issued an order to that effect, because it was
them who lined the people up, and they lined it up so that they faced in
the other direction.  They had their backs turned to the door and their
face to the other end of the hall.  When the soldiers went away, probably
the people who were left behind there had received orders from them to
take the people out.
Q.   Okay.  Let me just be clear, and I think this will be the last
question on this topic:  It was the officers who made the orders [Realtime
transcript read in error "officers"] for the people to line up and which
way they should face.  Is that right?
A.   Whether they were officers, probably yes.  I didn't observe their
ranks, but they regulated the whole matter, and once they went away, the
process of taking people out started.
Q.   And were --
JUDGE AGIUS:  One moment.  Is he capable of distinguishing between
an officer and a soldier?
MR. NICHOLLS:  That's what I was going to ask.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Okay.
MR. NICHOLLS:  If they were wearing --
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yeah, one moment.
Mr. Bourgon.
MR. BOURGON:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Just because the -- what
is on the transcript at line 6, page 85, line 6, "It was the officers who
made the officers for the people to line up."  I heard something like it
was the officers who gave the orders, but I'm not sure that this is not
clear.  "The officers who made the officers for the people to line up."
Could you clarify this, please.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, Mr. Bourgon.
Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Yeah, I believe I said it was the officers who made
the orders for the people to line up.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I think so, too, but I think Mr. Bourgon is also
right, so let's proceed.  I think it's clear enough, but let's proceed.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Could you see the uniforms of the -- these men who you said you
thought were giving these orders and -- I'll just ask that for now.
A.   You see, in wartime, all people wore camouflage uniforms and one
could not distinguish between ordinary soldiers and officers, save for the
fact that the officers had ranks.  I wasn't able to observe the ranks.  I
know that previously the uniforms worn by officers were different from
those of ordinary soldiers, whereas in this particular period they all
wore equal camouflage uniforms.  I know that their officers wore rank
insignia on top of their shoulders, and I know that these others had some
sort of insignia on their jacket pockets.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I think that clears it, Your Honour, that he --
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, no, he's your witness, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Now, you started talking about this, about some blindfolds
earlier.  I want you to describe how you and the other prisoners left the
gym.  What happened?  What was the process of leaving?  And now I'm just
talking about how you leave the gym and go outside of the gym or sports
hall.
A.   When the order came, they brought a bag of rags or strips of cloth
that were maybe some 50 centimetres wide -- some 5 centimetres wide -- or
rather, 15 centimetres wide.  And they asked prisoners to put these
blindfolds on each other.  Near to the entrance there were two armed
soldiers wearing camouflage uniforms and there was one woman wearing a
camouflage uniform.  And the woman gave every prisoner a glass of water
after they had put a blindfold on.  Why, I don't know.  Anyway, they had
guards, two guards, placed at the entrance so that they may control the
flow of people.  It all went along very quickly.
Q.   A little bit slower, please.  Continue.
A.   The person who escorted people to be executed wore a red beret, he
was quite young, and he didn't speak to anyone.  He would go away with the
lorry.  I don't know whether he was in the cabin of the lorry or under the
tarpaulin.  I only know that he escorted people to be executed.  When my
turn came, at this point we were told that all of us had to pass through.
And this was sometime in the evening that I stood up.  I was blindfolded.
I was given water by the woman.  I boarded a lorry, and it was -- I was on
the right-hand side close to the cabin, the driver's cabin.  There was a
bench -- or actually, there were two benches running along the two sides,
and the lorry was full of people.  I don't know whether there were 30, 40,
or 20 of them.
Q.   Just one moment, please.  Thank you.  That's very clear.  I wanted
to ask you a couple of questions.  You talked earlier about a ramp or
something that was used by the prisoners to get on the lorry.  Can you
describe how high --
A.   Yes.
Q.   [Previous translation continues] ... this TAM truck was?
A.   I can't tell you how long the ramp was or how high it was, but it
may have been a metre above the ground, although we did not have the
impression of climbing high.  I did -- of course didn't have occasion to
measure the height, but it was -- the ramp lay more or less at the height
of the TAM truck.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Bourgon.
MR. BOURGON:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Now, of course the
witness now has just mentioned the word "TAM truck," but the first time
that this was ever mentioned was by counsel, and I think in this way we
are leading the witnesses in terms of describing.  He always referred to
that truck as being a lorry and he never said the word "TAM truck,"
Mr. President.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I recall having on my transcript "TAM truck" much
earlier on in the day.
MR. NICHOLLS:  That's my recollection, too, Your Honour --
JUDGE AGIUS:  No, definitely.
But I can assure you, Mr. Bourgon, that it has been mentioned
earlier on.
Yes, Mr. Krgovic.
MR. KRGOVIC: [Interpretation] Your Honour, if I may be of
assistance, the witness mentioned the term "TAMic," small TAM, but it was
at a different point in time and in a different context.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Thank you.
Let's continue.  Yes, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:  One moment.
Just for your record, Your Honour, page 69, line 17, the witness
talks about being taken away blindfolded, and in the corner there was a
TAM lorry, T-A-M, and it was parked, and then he starts talking about the
podium.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, Mr. Nicholls.
Let's proceed.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   All right.  Please describe now how many men were sitting in the
back of the TAM lorry and where they sat once you had been placed on your
blindfold.
A.   I told you that there were two benches.  I can't tell you how many
people can be seated on these benches.  While people were boarding, we
still had our blindfolds on, and then as people -- other people got on,
there was no space on the benches.  They occupied the floor between the
benches.  People asked where these people were being taken, and the answer
was to the camp at Bijeljina, and after that no further questions were
asked.
Q.   Okay.  Just to be clear here, who asked where the people were
being taken?  Was that the prisoners or somebody else?
A.   Yes, yes.  The prisoners themselves.  As soon as they started
boarding these people, the question was put as to where the people were
being taken, and the answer was to the Bijeljina camp.  After that, nobody
asked any more questions.
Q.   Okay.  Are you familiar with TAM trucks from before the war or
before you were placed on this one?  Had you seen one before?
A.   TAM lorries were small lorries normally owned by farmers to
transport agricultural products, and TAMic is what we use to refer to a
2-ton lorry.
Q.   Now, the one you were on, how many men do you think would fit in
the back with you at the time you were there?
A.   At least 30 people; ten on each of the benches and ten of them on
the floor between the benches.  I think 30 of them can fit.
Q.   Okay.  How far did the truck travel once you'd been -- once you
had gotten into the back with these other men?
A.   The trip was quite short.  I didn't know where we were being taken
to at the time.  We had our blindfolds on.  In my estimate, the lorry
headed to the left and it drove for a while along the gravel road.  We
shook quite hard at the beginning, and then at a certain point it
pulled up.  We could hear the voices of people outside.  We were then
ordered to get off the bus.  We did.  We were then lined up.  I don't know
whether we were lined up in one or two rows.  Shooting started.  I could
hear a burst of fire from the right-hand side, and I was positioned at the
left.  And the shots came from the right-hand side.  People started
falling over, and I fell down with them and I had my arm over the chest of
the man next to me.  Then there was one person saying:  We should finish
them off.  And the other person saying:  Take it easy, take it easy.  Then
shots were fired again upon people lying down.  I have a scar here, which
was probably just a piece of gravel that hit me, and then the shooting
stopped.  Then I could hear shouts to the effect that:  We should start
taking their watches off, and so on and so forth.  Then others saying:
No, we are not going to do that.  At any rate, I didn't have a watch on me
at that time.
Then there was another lorry that arrived.  The shooting was heard
again, and some 10 to 15 minutes later there was another truck arriving.
It was getting dark at that point.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Stop here for the time being.  I didn't want --
Mr. Lazarevic, that's why I asked you to wait, because I didn't want to
interrupt the witness at such a crucial moment.  But perhaps you could now
tell us --
MR. LAZAREVIC:  Yes.  I notice something in the transcript that I
haven't heard from the witness, actually, it is rather different, and it
deals with this moment when certain person asked the soldier to finish him
off.  Here it says that -- well, allegedly one of the soldiers said:
Finish them off.  What I heard was the person was begging.  If
Mr. Nicholls could clarify this.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls, you've been able to follow.
Perhaps you can put a direct question on this.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   Let me go back over a little bit of what you said, sir.
JUDGE AGIUS:  It does make a difference, obviously, because one
would be a Serb, the other one would not be a Serb.
JUDGE KWON:  Line 20, 21.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you.
MR. LAZAREVIC:  Perhaps I can assist Mr. Nicholls.  It's on page
90, line 20, 21.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I've got it.
JUDGE AGIUS:  20, 21.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   You said, sir, after the shooting had taken place and you'd fallen
down, that there was one person saying, and this is what the transcript
says:  We should finish them off.  And another -- and the other person was
saying:  Take it easy, take it easy.
Can you tell me what you heard when you were lying on the ground
at that time.
A.   No.  There was one person who had been hit that said:  Finish me
off.  And then the other person saying:  Take it easy, take it easy.  So
it wasn't the persons who were shooting at people who said that; it was
rather the person who was shot that said that, and then the other person
telling him:  Take it easy, take it easy.
JUDGE AGIUS:  So that clarifies the matter.  I thank you,
Mr. Lazarevic, for pointing it out.  Thank you.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE AGIUS:  And again, I mean, our attention is being drawn that
he is going too fast.  He needs to slow down a little bit further.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you, Your Honour.  I'm told that was a
translation error.
Q.   Now, you said you heard somebody saying:  Take it easy, take it
easy.  Is that right?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Who was that?  Is that a --
A.   It was the Serb soldier who was performing the killing.
Q.   Just so this is clear, he was saying that in response to the
person saying:  Finish me off?  Are these statements connected?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   Now, you said that you were slightly injured and you pointed at a
part of your body.  Could you show the Court where you were injured and,
just to make it clear, tell us what that injury was.
A.   Yes.  Right here between the fingers.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Okay.  So for the record, he pointed to his right
hand, just between the first and second finger.
JUDGE AGIUS:  I thank you, Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   And that wasn't a severe injury from what -- if I gather you
correctly?
A.   Most probably a stone was set in motion by a burst of fire and got
me on my hand, and I was lucky that it was just that slight wound.
Q.   Now, you described hearing trucks coming, gun-fire, trucks leaving
every ten minutes or so.  How long did that continue for, you could hear
these -- these trucks moving and then gun-fire?
A.   Let me tell you, this was in the early evening and went on until
it was completely dark.  I don't know whether it took two hours or
thereabouts.  The people gathered next to the excavator that was
excavating a pit there,
Q.   Stop.
MR. NICHOLLS:  I'd ask for a redaction, actually, Your Honour, of
lines 20 through 22.  I think it will be clear why I'm asking for that a
little bit later.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Let's redact lines 21 and 22, please, thank you.
After -- actually, we can start from after the words "excavating a pit
there," and you redact the rest from those two lines.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Thank you.
JUDGE AGIUS:  And that will need us -- require us to have a
30-minute break when you finish, of course.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   When -- now, you've described laying there for a few hours and
hearing these things.  At any point did you take your blindfold off or
were you still blindfolded while you were hearing these shots and trucks
coming and going?
A.   When it got really dark and when they went to a different meadow,
I took the blindfold off.  The man who was lying over me, I didn't mind
that so much while it was still day-time.  When it got dark and his body
got really cold and rigid, I couldn't feel my legs, they went numb
Q.   Stop.
JUDGE AGIUS:  [Microphone not activated].
MR. NICHOLLS:  If we could just take that name out, Your Honour,
and I will take care of this part --
JUDGE AGIUS:  [Microphone not activated].
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone for the President, please.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.  Sorry about that.  Lines 16 and 17, we redact
everything that goes after the words "they went numb."
[Trial Chamber confers]
MR. NICHOLLS:  Can we perhaps go into private session?
JUDGE AGIUS:  I think it will be safer to do that because I can
see where you're going, so it will be easier for him because he can't
distinguish --
MR. NICHOLLS:  Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE AGIUS:  -- really between one question and what he's
anticipated to answer in the next one.  So let's go into --
[Private session]
Pages 718-719 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
JUDGE AGIUS:  We are in open session, Mr. Nicholls, and please
make sure that the witness understands you.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Yes.
Q.   And I'll say it again, Witness:  Please don't mention the names of
the people that we just finished talking about or their nicknames while we
were in private session.
All right.  Tell me what happened next after you said these --
there was a discussion which you had overheard.  What happened next?  What
did you do?
A.   They left to this other meadow.  The three men stayed behind.
Later on some -- at a distance from me to there was some 300 metres.  I
could hear shooting.  In the meantime, a lorry came under light, and it
shone its lights on us, and all of them who had been killed were clearly
visible, and it parked next to the person excavating the pit and they
started talking amongst each other, and I couldn't hear them because both
machines' engines were on.  And when that person with the lorry arrived --
Q.   Sorry.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Sorry, Your Honour, could we go back into private
session for one minute?
JUDGE AGIUS:  Let's go back to private session, please.
[Private session]
[Open session]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, we are back in open session.
Mr. Nicholls.
MR. NICHOLLS:
Q.   I'm sorry I interrupted you, sir.  You were telling us that some
of the men left, and then a lorry came and shone its lights on the area.
A.   It was not a lorry.  It was a loader truck.
Q.   Okay.  A loader came.  Please continue telling the Court what
happened when the loader truck came.
A.   When this lorry came, there was a person alive next to the
excavator.  He jumped on his feet, started running towards the woods.
Shots were fired after him.  The person who came with the loader truck
turned his lights on the area of the forest where that person had fled
into.  I moved at that moment and I heard the words to the effect of:
There is another person running away.  Luckily enough, nobody heard him
and maybe he thought that he had just imagined, as his lights were shining
across the bodies.  I looked around.  Nobody was walking towards me.  I
moved just twice, and I started crawling.  I turned around to see if
anybody was following me, and then I jumped on my feet.  I saw a stone --
Q.   Thank you for stopping.  The transcript said:  "Luckily enough,
nobody heard him."  I'm not sure, is that right?  Did you mean nobody
heard you, or did you mean nobody heard somebody else?
A.   Those who were standing guard, the Serb soldiers who had been
killing, did not hear him say that there was somebody else alive.
Q.   Okay.  I understand.  And just one follow-up question.  The
transcript said "loader truck" and I used that word "loader truck."  Can
you describe what a loader is, what it looks like.
A.   It's a construction machine that loads material onto lorries.  It
has a hoe the capacity of which is 2 cubic metres.  It's a very good
machine that is used in construction.  It's not used for anything else but
for loading construction material onto -- onto trucks.  And this is a very
good machine for loading trucks.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, if you could please continue.  Tell us in your
own words how you escaped from this field, from where you were.
A.   And then when I stood up, I started running along the stone -- I
didn't know where I was.  I didn't know what was there.  And when I
climbed onto that stone, there was a rail track.  I crossed the rail
track.  I fell down the bank.  Luckily enough, I ended up in a cornfield.
I ran through -- halfway into the cornfield.  And then I realised that the
corn was moving, and I was afraid that they would see me.  Then I started
crawling and I hid in a little thicket.  I could hear the water, but I
couldn't see any water.  The Serb soldiers who were standing guard ran
around the cornfield.  They fired shots but probably in the air.  I could
hear the bullets and I could hear the bullets breaking branches.  But then
they returned.
I was there all that time.  And when all the shots stopped, I -- I
was thinking I know where I had been taken to, but when I was blindfolded,
I no longer knew where I was taken, whether towards Zvornik or where.  And
when everything was quiet, I stood up, I started walking, and I was most
afraid when I left the cornfield that I would be awaited there by
somebody.  Luckily enough, there was nobody there.  I climbed onto the
railroad.  I didn't know whether to go down the railroad or up the
railroad.  I decided to go down the railroad.
And then I arrived in the same place.  I arrived at a railway
station.  The door was open, leading to a room.  There was nothing there,
nobody there.  I saw a village there which I didn't recognise, and I knew
I was not supposed to go there.  I returned the same way:  I went down to
the road by a well that was in the other meadow, and I saw the other group
of people that had been killed.  That was the other meadow where the
soldiers had gone previously to kill the rest of the people.
Q.   Thank you.  We've got to finish in a few minutes.  Witness, if I
understand, you left and ended up back at the same place, at the same area
and saw another field with dead bodies in it.  Is that right?
A.   That is right, yes.
Q.   How far apart were these two fields?
A.   Some 300 metres, not more.
Q.   Difficult to say maybe, but how many bodies did you see in this
field?
A.   Let me tell you, the bodies were prostrated across the meadow.
Most of the area was covered.  I don't know how many bodies were there.
There was a man who was barely alive who was separated away from the rest
of the bodies.  And the sounds he produced were not human sounds.  They
were more like animal sounds.  And he was the only person who was a bit
away from the rest of the group.  The people -- the bodies that were there
prostrated on that ground were either on their backs or on their bellies,
but they were spread out.  That's how they had fallen when they were shot.
Q.   And you said there was a well or something like that by the road
by this field.  Did I understand you right?
A.   Yes.  It was a source of water, ever-running water that people
used to water their cattle.  It was like a well that was taking care of
the people.
MR. NICHOLLS:  Your Honour, I have very little more, but I think
maybe if I could just finish that up in the first ten minutes tomorrow.
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes.  I think that will be better.
MR. NICHOLLS:  It's virtually finished.
JUDGE AGIUS:  That will be better because this has been a long
session.
So I think the witness can be escorted out of the courtroom.
Sir, you will return tomorrow.  We haven't finished as yet.  There
will be a few minutes more when Mr. Nicholls, hopefully, will conclude his
examination-in-chief; and after that, we will start with the various
cross-examinations.  I'll explain to you tomorrow.  In the meantime, you
will be attended to.  Important thing is that you're not to communicate
with anyone on the matters that you are testifying upon.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you.
[The witness stands down]
JUDGE AGIUS:  Yes, Mr. Nicholls and various Defence teams.  I
mean, I've made a rough calculation.  Two hours and a half has -- have
already become three hours and 35 minutes.  So I'm not pushing you, of
course, because this is just the beginning and one understands that we
will need to be as flexible as possible, but at the same time try to
conclude, because obviously then we will need to ask the various Defence
teams whether they stand by their time schedule for cross-examination or
whether they would like it revised.  So we will deal with all this
tomorrow morning at 9.00.  Thank you.
--- Whereupon the hearing adjourned at 1.45 p.m.,
to be reconvened on Friday, the 25th day of
August, 2006, at 9.00 a.m.
