Friday,  19 September 2008
[Closed session]
<span lang="FR" style='font-size:10.0pt;line-height:200%;font-family:"Courier New"'>11  Pages 1914-1948 redacted. Closed session.
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we're in open session.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Ms. Sartorio, we will be able to conclude this
witness's testimony today?  That's a question.
MS. SARTORIO:  I'm -- I'm confident -- hopeful that we can, and I
think we can, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  Thank you.
[The witness entered court]
WITNESS:  NURKO DERVISEVIC
[Witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Madam Usher, you may read the declaration to the
witness.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I solemnly declare that I will
speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You may sit.  You may have a seat.  You may
begin, Ms. Sartorio.
MS. SARTORIO:  I'll just wait a moment while they adjust his
seat, Your Honour, or do you want me to begin?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let the seat be adjusted first, and he should be
brought closer to the microphone.
Examination by Ms. Sartorio:
Q.   Good morning, Mr. Witness.
A.   Good morning to you too.
Q.   Could you please tell us your full name.
.
Q.   Thank you.  And how many years did you go to school?
A.   Seven years.  Four elementary school and three occupational
school.  I studied to become a joiner.
Visegrad?
A.   Yes, that's right.  I was born there, and I spent my entire life
there.
Q.   Now, Mr. Dervisevic, I'm going to ask you some questions about
some statements that you gave to the ICTY investigators, if I may ask you
some questions.
A.   Sure.
MR. CEPIC:  I apologise for interrupting.  Just related to
protective measures for this witness.  No measures.  Okay.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] No, no.  I never requested
measures.
MR. CEPIC:  Thank you very much.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  It doesn't arise.  Thanks.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Sir, do you remember giving a statement to ICTY investigators in
February of 1998?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And do you also remember giving another statement in April of
2008 in which you made some corrections to your 1998 statement?  Do you
remember that?
A.   Yes.  Maybe I didn't go through every single detail, but I think
I corrected a lot of mistakes that were there in terms of place, names,
people's names and that kind of thing.
in the last
couple of days, have these two statements been read to you in the Bosnian
language?
A.   Yes.  There was a lady who proofed me for my appearance, and we
checked the statement for veracity.
Q.   Okay.  And we did make a couple of additional changes --
A.   Just a minute, please.
Q.   It's too loud?
A.   A little softer, please.  It's too loud.  The sound is very loud,
and I don't like noise.  Thank you.
Q.   I'll try to speak a little softer.  Now, we made a couple of more
changes to your 1998 statement, and I'm going to ask you about those
little changes in a minute, but other than those changes everything else
in the statement is still true; is that right?
A.   I think so.
MS. SARTORIO:  May we bring up -- it doesn't have a 65 ter
number.  It's the statement, 1998 statement, ERN 00584654 to 4669.  I
would like to go to page 2 in both versions, and it's second paragraph
down on the page.
Q.   In just a moment, sir, you'll see your statement come up on the
screen, and then I'm going to ask you a question.
Okay.  Now, sir, on the left side of your screen, do you see part
of your statement in the Bosnian language?  On the left side of the
screen.  Is that yes?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And you see that -- in the statement you say the date of your
arrest was 9 of June of 1992.  Now, would you like to change that date?
A.   Maybe this is a small inaccuracy.  It was sometime in June.  The
9th, the 19th.  I tend to get confused about dates.  It might have been
the 19th.  Maybe it was recorded as the 9th, but I'm actually quite
certain that it was the 19th.
Q.   Okay.  Now, also in this statement when we read down a little bit
further, you talk about the badges that were on the Serb police or army
persons who took you into custody, and you describe an SDS badge with two
eagles and also a three-coloured flag.  Now, would you like to make a
correction to that?
A.   In the barracks there was an SDS flag.  The sign belonged to the
SDS, and then the two eagles and the cross, that was for the whole thing.
It was some sort of a formation.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.  But with particular focus on what these men
were wearing, you told me that you -- it was not possible that two badges
be together.  Didn't you tell me that?
A.   I don't think that could have been the case, not two at the same
time.  There were several signs, different signs that were turning up,
and there were these radical parties with two eagles and a cross.
Q.   Okay.  I just want you to focus on the badge.  Can you remember,
sitting here today, what -- what badges these men were wearing, and if
you can, would you please tell us?
A.   The civilians, you mean?
Q.   No, no.
A.   The civilians weren't wearing anything at all.
Q.   No.  Just the two -- the Serb police or army that arrested you in
June of 1992.  Do you remember the emblems?  Okay.  Could you tell us,
please?
A.   The people who arrested me had something blue on them.  The car
said "Police," and the insignia belonged to the SDS, if I remember
correctly.  They were members of the SDS.  It was a party symbol.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.  Now, I would like to go to page 7 in the
English and page 6 in the B/C/S.  In the B/C/S, it's the last paragraph
on the page.  In English, it's the first paragraph.
Sir, I'd like you to take a look, again, on the left side of the
screen and look at the last paragraph, the first sentence.  It says that
you saw Milan Lukic take away more than 20 people.  Is that what it says?
A.   I heard his voice, but there were five or six persons involved.
I don't think he could have handled this on his own.  As for
mistreatment, he was the one who came most frequently.
Q.   And I'll ask you about that in a minute, but my question is, with
reference to this, you did not actually see Mr. Lukic do this, did you?
A.   It was night-time.  It was dark.  I didn't know what time it was.
All the people who did that, I couldn't see them, but I heard voices and
I recognised the voices --
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.
A.   -- because he came several times and I saw him personally.  I met
him then.  I hadn't known him before.
Q.   Okay.  So I asked you a minute ago, other than these corrections
to your statement, everything else is still true; is that -- to the best
of your knowledge.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.  The indictees themselves should tell us whether it was like
this or not.  I think they should be free to say what they have to say.
MS. SARTORIO:  Your Honour, I ask that this witness's 1998 and
2008 statement be admitted in evidence.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  We admit it.
MS. SARTORIO:  Thank you.
THE REGISTRAR:  It is admitted as Exhibit P111, Your Honours.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Now, just some more questions, sir.  In 1992 were you a member of
any army?
A.   No.
Q.   And were you ever a member of any army?
A.   Never.
Q.   In June -- okay.  In June of 1992, did you wear any type of
military clothing at all?
A.   No, never.  I was a civilian throughout.  Normally, I would wear
a jacket such as the one I'm wearing now.
Q.   And did you carry a firearm or any other type of weapon in June
of 1992?
A.   No.  I never owned a weapon.  I hated weapons.  I hated even to
look at a weapon.  I would have thrown it away.  I never carried a
weapon, and if someone can prove otherwise, they're welcome to have a go.
Q.   Okay.  Now, I'd like to draw your attention to June of 1992 and
ask you, do you recall being arrested or taken into custody at some
point?
A.   Yes, I recall that.  I was on my way out.  There were civilians
leaving.  I didn't join that convoy.  I wasn't able to.  My family left
on that convoy, my wife and our four children who were underage at that
time.  I headed down the Rzava river to this village close to Visegrad.
The distance may be about one and a half kilometres, and then I came
close to this place Boista [phoen] on the Rzava river, on the right-hand
river bank.  This was day-time.  It wasn't night-time.  It might have
been 9 or 10.00 in the morning.
There was this - what should I call it - an ambush or whatever.
I stopped right there.  There was some weapons.  You've got to stop.
They said, Cross, and I surrendered.  They took me to the MUP building.
I handed over my ID.  There were these lads over there, soldiers, I
suppose.  They were drinking a little.  They gave me some, so I had some
too.  It was a bit like that, and then Lukic Milan emerged, and he said,
Where are your sons?  And then he slapped me over the head, the left side
of my head, and that's why I still can't hear.  I thought my eardrum --
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.
A.   -- had been shattered, and that's when I fell down, and then they
took me away.  They'd probably been ordered to take me away, and that's
what the --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much, witness.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Thank you, Witness for that answer.  Just one follow-up question
on this.  Now, you say "they."  Were these army men or policemen if you
know?
A.   It appears that they were Special Police.  The car certainly had
a writing on it saying "Police," meaning they were police.
Q.   Now, at some point you were taken to another facility.  Do you
remember that?
A.   When I woke up, I was drunk.  I looked around myself, and I
appeared to be in some sort of warehouse, maybe a military one, maybe not
a military warehouse, the JNA in this place called Uzamnica.  I saw six
persons standing in front of me, and they were all familiar.
Q.   Thank you.
MS. SARTORIO:  May we -- may the court usher please bring up on
the screen 65 ter number 178.63.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness.  Witness, you said when you woke up you
were drunk.  Can you tell us what made you drunk?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] The brandy.  I'd downed some
outside the MUP building.  It was given to me, and I accepted because I
was feeling quite depressed.  By this time, I would have drank poison if
I had been given poison let alone brandy.  That's how it was.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.  Yes, Ms. Sartorio.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] It's not that they did anything
particular to me, same as though we were in a pub or something, and they
gave me some brandy, and that was that.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Mr. Witness, okay.  Thank you.  Please try to wait for the
question, and then you answer the question.  Thank you.
Okay.  Could you look at the picture that's on your screen.
MS. SARTORIO:  Mr. Cepic is on his feet here.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  Your Honour, I apologise for interrupting.  Just one
intervene.  In transcript, I think that the witness said lines -- page
43, lines 18 and 19, the previous one, from -- from 19 to 21 that he said
like a friends, like friends in a pub.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] They weren't being unpleasant to me
or anything.  So after I'd been slapped, they sort of rued that.  They
felt bad about me.  Those people, as far as I remember, never --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you, Mr. Cepic.
MS. SARTORIO:  May I proceed, Your Honour?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   So I'd ask you to look at the photograph that's on the screen and
ask if you can tell us what this photograph is.  What's in the
photograph?
A.   This is Uzamnica.  Down here is the JNA barracks, and these are
the warehouses.  This one over here was the first one.  There 's a path
there to an outpost, a military outpost --
Q.   Thank you.
A.   -- and that's where we were detained, and this one had three
partitions inside, and we were in the mid-section, so to speak.
MS. SARTORIO:  Your Honour, I ask that the photograph be admitted
in evidence.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  It's admitted.
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, the photograph will be admitted as
Exhibit P113; and just for the record, the 2008 witness statement with
ERN number 0634 through 03947 will be admitted as P112.
MS. SARTORIO:  And the statement of April 2008?
THE REGISTRAR:  It's Exhibit P111.
MS. SARTORIO:  Thank you.
Q.   Now, may we bring up 65 ter number 178.41, please.
Sir, do you recognise the building that is in this photograph?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you tell us what it is?
A.   This is the warehouse, the military storage facility for their
military equipment, and we were in the mid section.  Here is where the
women were, and over here, well, we didn't know.  We were in no position
to know who was there.
Q.   So how many months were you in detention at Uzamnica?
A.   Twenty-eight months.  It was in June that I was detained, and
then there was an exchange on the 10th of October at the brotherhood and
unity bridge.  There were ten of us that got exchanged and eight ladies
as well.
Q.   Now, so for the 28 months that you were detained, were you always
in this building?
A.   Throughout.
Q.   Can you tell me how many other detainees were in the middle
section as you described it with you?
A.   Up to 26, and then some people would be taken away, some new
people brought in.  So this varied, but the maximum, to my knowledge, was
26, perhaps 27.  Some only stayed briefly.  Some stayed all the way until
the exchange took place.  Some mothers were taken away.  There were some
private exchanges going on, as well, that sort of thing.
Q.   Your Honour, may --
A.   There were ten men left and eight women, and that was the final
exchange.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
MS. SARTORIO:  May the photograph be admitted in evidence, Your
Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  It is admitted as Exhibit P114.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Sir, do you know the ethnicity of the other detainees with which
you were detained?
A.   All Muslims.  In January, when I first -- or rather, the first
month I came there, there was among them a man named Pero Gacic from
Gorazde.  He said he was a member of the Gorazde Territorial Defence.
Maybe he was lying to us, but I'm just telling you what he told me.
Q.   Now, were there guards guarding the place in which you were
detained?
A.   There were guards, two guards in a group.  We were locked up with
a chain and padlock, and they were in charge of the prison or guarding,
but either they didn't want to or they could not prevent outsiders from
coming into the prison and beating people.
Q.   I just want you to focus right now on the guards, and tell us if
you can tell us what they were wearing and if you knew any of them by
name.
A.   I know quite a lot of them.  Their clothing was blue, but I also
saw them in civilian clothes.  But if you want me to talk about guards,
I'll start -- do you want me to talk about guards?
Q.   No.  I just wanted to ask you a question about what you recall
them wearing.
You did name these guards in your statement, didn't you?
A.   Yes, I did, but I can repeat it.  Do you want me?
Q.   No, thank you.
A.   I stand by the statement.
Q.   Do you know the ethnicity of these guards?
A.   Serbs.
Q.   Can you tell the Judges what the living conditions were like at
Uzamnica; and by this, I mean food, sleeping conditions, water, bathing,
et cetera.
A.   It was a warehouse, not a house, not a hotel.  There was hay
under the windows and some army blankets we used to cover ourselves, and
for 26 people the food could not be sufficient.  One loaf of bread was
divided into nine pieces.  We got tea, some marmalade to spread on bread,
and boiled eggs.  That was the first month and the second month, and as
the number of us decreased, the food increased in amount.  We bathed
outside the hangar, behind the warehouse.
Q.   Can you tell me how much you weighed when you were released from
detention?
A.   42.
Q.   42 what?
Sarajevoat the exchange, after the exchange.
Before detention, I weighed 62 kilos.
Q.   Now, sir, I'm going to direct your attention now to ask about
Milan Lukic and Sredoje Lukic, okay?
A.   Please go ahead.
Milan
Lukic?  That's --
A.   I did not.  Maybe he knew me, but I didn't know him.  I never
knew him before that camp.
Q.   When was the first time that you met Milan Lukic?
A.   That time when I was taken into custody to the MUP and when he
attacked me, slapping me over the head.  Maybe I had run into him before
the war, but I had never noticed him.  I had my own business to attend
to.
Q.   Now, when you were at the detention facility, did you ever see
Milan Lukic there?
A.   Milan Lukic came occasionally.  He would beat a couple of people
and then tell them, "Now get some rest," and then he would go.
Q.   Did you ever beat you?
A.   Yes.  He pressed me against the pillar in the warehouse, and he
kicked me from behind.  One time he chased me across the warehouse.  He
put his foot on my back.  When I fell, I tried to crawl forward, and he
did the same thing to some other people as well.
Q.   Now, you said you didn't know him before the war, so how did you
come to learn that his name was Milan Lukic?
A.   It was another man in detention, Saban Muratagic, who told me.  I
Milanis
Milan
didn't beat that man, and I was wondering why he was spared.
Q.   Now, did anyone else beat you other than Milan Lukic during your
time in detention?
A.   Yes.  Once there was Milan Spasojevic, called Mico, and he took
out me and Mustafa Cuprija, a neighbour of mine.  He was four years older
than I.  He gave us some sticks to beat each other with three times each.
He hit me three times, and it was very painful, and I hit him three
times, but this man, "You're not doing it well enough.  You don't want to
beat each other?"  He took the sticks from us and beat us.  This man was
sick.  He had trouble with his blood sugar, and he was peeing blood.
This same Mico --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much, Witness.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Okay.  Just -- now, before the war, did you know a person by the
name of Sredoje Lukic?
A.   Yes, I did.  He was an employee of the MUP, the Visegrad station
of the MUP.
Q.   And did you ever see Sredoje Lukic at the Uzamnica detention
facility?
A.   I recognised him only once.  It was in the later months.  It
could have been July or perhaps August.  He came once when there were few
of us.  Actually, at that time I was alone in that prison.  He came with
Milan.  And when I saw him with
look to me like a man of that kind.
took that man, Semso Poljo, a
retired man from Bijeli Potok who was at that time was over 70, and he
took that man away, and again, I stayed alone.
Q.   Okay.  So when you say, he -- he hit me several times, do you
mean Sredoje Lukic hit you several times?
MR. CEPIC:  Leading.  Leading.  I'm sorry, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, that's very leading.
took that man and
said, "Hit him.  Hit him."  I don't know how he felt about it.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Who beat you several times?  Who was it that hit
you several times?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Sredoje.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Ms. Sartorio.
MS. SARTORIO:  I'm sorry, Your Honour, about that.
Q.   Now, sir, when you saw Milan Lukic at the detention facility, did
you see him -- other than beating detainees, did you see him doing
anything else?
A.   He probably knew those detainees by name.  He called out Enes
Dzaferovic and his brother and another young man, Omerovic, the son of
Himzo Omerovic, and said, "You are going for the weekend to Bajina
Basta," and he took those three men away.
Q.   Did you know these three men personally?
A.   Yes, I did.
Q.   And since --
A.   They're from -- Enes Dzaferovic and his brother lived close to
the MUP.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you, sir.
A.   Whereas Himzo Omerovic's son was from --
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter didn't hear from where.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Okay.  Sir, you knew these -- the answer was yes, you knew these
three men personally, right?  Okay.  Now --
A.   I knew them.
Q.   -- since --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Let us just find out where the son was from.
MS. SARTORIO:  Okay.
Q.   Can you tell us again, sir, where the son was from?
A.   He was detained with his father.  The brothers, fathers, and sons
were locked up together.
Q.   I think the question is, do you know what village or municipality
they were from?
Visegrad.  But this Omerovic was from
Dusce, a suburb of Visegrad where the furniture factory is.
Milantook out these men, did you -- have you ever
seen these men again?
A.   Never.
Q.   Have you spoken with their family members?
Sarajevo, perhaps a year later I ran
into his father - because he was a driver for the furniture company Varda
- , and I asked him, "Did your sons come back?"  He had
heard stories that they were alive, but he said, "Never.  Never, Nurko."
MilanLukic take -- no.  Don't -- wait for the
question, please.  Did you see Milan Lukic take other people away?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And on how many occasions did you see this?
A.   He took away -- there were two more occasions after this one.
Q.   And did you know the people whom he took away?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And have you ever seen any of these people since that time he
took them away?
A.   No.
Q.   Do you know anyone who has ever seen the people whom he took
away?
A.   No one has ever said that those people have come back to their
families or that they were alive.
Q.   Now, you grew up in the Visegrad area.  You said that earlier.
Is that correct?
A.   Yes, always.  That's the municipality where I was born and where
I spent all my life until all this happened.
Q.   Did you know anyone before this happened?  Did you know anyone by
the name of Milan Lukic, who went by the name Milan Lukic?
A.   No.  I mean, no.
Q.   Thank you, sir.
A.   I know about the guards and the movement of commanders.  One only
was from Zenica, and the other three guard commanders were from Visegrad.
Q.   None of those guards were called Milan Lukic, were they?
A.   No.  There was one Milan Zecevic and Ilija Zecevic.  Those two
were brothers.
Q.   All right.  Thank you.  Thank you.
A.   I even know them.
Q.   Okay.  Are you familiar with the area in Visegrad known as
Mahala?
A.   Of course.  I grew up there.  It's a part of Visegrad.  Some
people say it's a suburb, but it's a town unto itself.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you.
A.   Nova Mahala and my street was Dobrinska number 6.  Perhaps it has
been renamed since.
Q.   And the next question is, are you familiar with an area known as
Bikavac?
A.   How would I not know it?  There's a sports centre with bungalows
and catering facilities, a hotel.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  Your Honour, my learned friend Mr. Dieckmann hasn't
found anything in 65 ter submission for this witness related to those
questions, previous two questions, Mahala, Bikavac.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Ms. Sartorio.
MS. SARTORIO:  Well, Your Honour, this witness is born and raised
in Visegrad and can testify about the area of Visegrad, and I think
it's -- it's background information about this witness, and --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I agree.  I agree.
What would your point be?
MR. CEPIC:  We must be informed, Your Honour, in submission -- in
65 submission about what will that witness testify, just to know what we
have to prepare for cross-examination.  If he opens some new topics, we
are little bit surprised.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Is this a new topic?  Isn't this in Visegrad?
Isn't the area in Visegrad?
MR. CEPIC:  Your Honour, nothing in the statements and in the 65
ter summary is related to those two locations.
[Trial Chamber confers]
MS. SARTORIO:  Your Honours, if I may.  I'm not going to ask him
about the Pionirska or the Bikavac incidents.  I'm simply going to ask
him if he knows how long it would take him to drive from one area to the
next area, if he knows.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  The question may be asked, and Mr. Cepic, if you
can persuade us that you're in any way prejudiced, then you may do that,
but not now.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Sir, can you tell us how long it would take to drive from the
Mahala area to the Bikavac area?
A.   Well, it's a ten minutes' walk, and by car you don't need more
than five minutes.  Visegrad is a small municipality.  You can drive from
one end to another and around it in just half an hour.  It had a
population of no more than 10.000.
Q.   Now, at some point during your detention at Uzamnica, did the Red
Cross visit the detainees?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And did --
A.   We were registered by the Red Cross a little too late, but after
that they continued to care for us, and probably to the extent of their
abilities they visited us, sometimes once in 15 days, sometimes once a
month or once in two months.  They asked us about hygiene, food, general
conditions, and we told them.
Q.   Did you ever --
A.   And one of us was always put forward to emphasise that everything
was excellent.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   My question -- the next question would be, did you ever tell them
about the beatings?
A.   We didn't dare to.  Detainees would tell one another, "Shut up.
Don't you dare tell them.  We'll get more if they hear that we've
complained."
Q.   Okay.  Now, sir, I'm going to ask you, if you would, to please
look around the courtroom in just a minute and take your time and look at
everyone very carefully, and other than myself and Mr. Groome, I ask if
you can tell me if you recognise anyone else in this courtroom today.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.  Mr. Alarid.
MR. ALARID:  Standard objection, Your Honour.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  We note it.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I think the accused, right?
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Can you tell us if you recognise anyone by name and, if so, what
are their names?
A.   You mean in the service of the Tribunal or among the accused?
Milanand Sredoje.  We can stand up and
look each other in the face.
Q.   Okay.  Can I just ask you, sir, to please, for the record -- you
have to tell the record because they have to take it down, type it, which
Milanand which one --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Will the accused who is standing sit.
MS. SARTORIO:
Milan, and if you can tell us what he is wearing,
what colour he is wearing.
A.   He's sitting.  Sredoje had just gotten up and sat back down
again.  He's now wearing glasses; he didn't used to wear them before.
Milanis not even looking at me.
Q.   Can you tell me if you can distinguish between the colour of
suits of these two men?
A.   Their jackets are similar.  Sredoje has a white shirt and a tie,
Milanhas a blue shirt and a tie.
Q.   As you're looking at these two men, can you tell me which one is
on the left and which one is on the right as you look at them?
is on the
left.
Q.   And are these the two men that you saw at the Uzamnica detention
camp and, as you testified to, who beat you?
A.   Milan Lukic, and Sredoje I saw only once when he came together
Milan.  I hadn't seen Sredoje before.  I am saying here without any
coercion, and there were no secret conversations.  I want to say this
forthrightly here, the whole truth and nothing but truth.
Q.   Just a few more questions, sir.
MS. SARTORIO:  And, Your Honour, may the record reflect that the
witness has identified the accused correctly?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Sir, can you tell the Chamber how -- what kind of physical or
emotional or mental injuries did you suffer as a result of your detention
and beatings?
A.   Before medical and specialist panels, I was pronounced to have
70-percent invalidity, so they sent me to retirement in Zenica.  And when
I applied for remuneration on account of being a civilian victim of war,
I started receiving some assistance as a former camp inmate and a
civilian victim.  That's something that they started paying out later on
account of damage to my health, et cetera.  The canton -- the cantonal
authorities provided that.
Q.   Can you tell us what your health was like before 1992?
A.   I was healthy like a bull, one the best workers at the furniture
factory.  I was the one who best dealt with the strain of night-shifts,
and people even wondered how at my age I was so fit.
Q.   Okay, sir, a few more questions.  In 1992, did you have any
children and, if so, how many?
A.   I had nine children, six sons and three daughters.  Out of those
children, two were twins.
Q.   And after the war started, did anything happen to any of your
sons?
A.   Yes, it did.  One of the twins, Samir, was taken away.  That's
what I heard.  At the time when they told me, I couldn't believe it, but
I wasn't an eyewitness to that.  But I heard that there is a witness,
another boy who was then 14 or 15 who was taken away with my son together
Drina
Bridge, and I would actually forgive him a lot if I could only get the
remains of my son back, but they were never found.
Q.   Can you tell us --
A.   My child is gone.
Q.   Can you tell us how old Samir was?
A.   He was not yet 15.
Q.   And can you tell us who told you that your boy had been taken
River?
A.   This boy didn't dare tell me for a long time.  It was only five
or six days after the event that he told the mother - my wife, that is -
Samir was killed, it's very hard for me to tell you, and my wife fainted.
He told us that he had been taken there and then taken back to the MUP to
Milankilled our boy together with another man and
killed Said Herceglic, another worker from my company, and I know all the
workers in our company.  I don't know that boy.
Q.   Thank you.  Thank you, Witness.
A.   That man was called Lempa.
MS. SARTORIO:  May we go into closed session for one last
question, please.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, yes, of course.
[Private session]
<span lang="FR" style='font-size:10.0pt;line-height:200%;font-family:"Courier New"'>11  Page 1973 redacted. Private session.
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we are back in open session.
Cross-examination by Mr. Alarid:
Q.   Sir, my name is Jason Alarid, and I represent Milan Lukic.  Good
morning.
Now, I'd like to ask you a couple of questions, and I was unclear
about just what you said.  You mentioned a gentleman Lempa that was --
worked at the factory.  Did you say that --
A.   The furniture factory.  Varda, it was called, Varda.
Q.   And did you say that Lempa was killed with your son?  Is -- that
was your understanding, but I was confused.
A.   There was this witness who testified about Samir my son, and he
said that Said was killed then too.  They called him Lenda, but his real
name was Said Herceglic, the former employee of the furniture factory.
He used to live in Nova Mahala.  I can't remember the street, but that
was the neighbourhood there.
Q.   How old was Lenda?
A.   I was born in 1940, and he might have been born sometime around
1936, roughly speaking.  He was several years older than me, quite
powerfully built.  In the basement of his home he used to store some
drinks.  His wife, Stana, and then he had two sons who were grownups.
Q.   Can I ask you another question?  The boy that told you about --
A.   [No interpretation]
Q.   The boy who told you about your son and Lenda, did he tell you
about his stay at the -- at the MUP and what happened to him there?  And
please tell us what he told you if he did.
A.   He says he was sent back to the MUP building and then he spent
some time there.  I can't remember what he said, a day or so, and that's
where the story ends.  He never said he had been beaten.  I can't say
that.  And he was released.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, you say that you lived in Visegrad area your
entire life.  Is that true?
A.   That's true.  It was only in the last war, the first war back in
Sarajevo,
and we stayed there until we were able to return to our homes in 1945
Yugoslaviawas free again.
Q.   And during your -- your life in Visegrad, did you know or hear of
Milan Lukic's family, Mile Lukic, his father?
A.   I didn't know his father.  I know some people from Rujiste.
There is a man named Ivanovic Jovan who worked in my department, and he
for some time,
this man named Jovan.  And Rujiste, Rujiste -- I know there is a family
named Liska.  I think they moved to Visegrad at some point.  They bought
some land or something and built a house.
Q.   Sir --
A.   At Rujiste maybe -- there -- there weren't too many people there,
not too many households.
Q.   Now, you were asked by the Prosecutor on direct examination if
you knew any other persons by the name of Milan Lukic in the area of
Visegrad, and it's my understanding that you said no.  Is that true?
A.   My apologies.  There is no Milan Lukic in Visegrad itself.  It
could be one of the other municipalities around.  There are names that
MilanKrsmanovic.
, Sredoje,
and Dragan were the only three Lukics around, Dragan being the youngest.
Q.   So Lukic itself is not a very common last name, or is it a common
name?
A.   Very common.  I'm not sure.  We might be talking at
cross-purposes.  Can you repeat that, please.
Q.   Is -- is Lukic a common last name around where you're from?
A.   No, not really.  Not in Visegrad municipality.  Maybe further
afield in another municipality or even republic, but not in Visegrad.
Whoever knows many people named Lukic they should perhaps come up and say
so.  Maybe you mean Lucic.  Those are a bit thick on the ground.  Yes,
that's true, but that's different.  That's Lucic.  Over at my
daughter-in-law's place, there was a worker at one of the local
factories.  His name was Lucic, but I don't think that particular man
named Lucic is in any way related to this Lukic.  Maybe it's just mix-up,
,
Milan's name is Lukic.  It is similar, but then again, it's not quite the
same thing and it's not the same family name, is it?
Q.   No, sir, and I don't mean to interrupt you, but please try and
answer my questions a little shorter because I want to get you home
today, okay?
Now, did you know a Milan Lukic, though, from Turgovaca, about 45
[Realtime transcript read in error, "35"] years old at the time in 1992?
Turgovaca?
A.   Turgovaca.
Q.   And 45 years old, not 35 as the transcript reads.
A.   No.  The place is Glogova.  That's one stop away from the railway
station.  You take a train, and it's the next stop.  It might be -- the
distance might be a kilometre from those buildings there, and that's on
the right-hand riverbank of the Rzava.  Glogova, I don't know.  Also,
maybe a correction.  Dubrava, the place was Dobruna.  I made that
correction there, and then --
Milan
Lukic, 45 years old.  Is that true?
A.   Right.
Q.   Now, sir when you were detained at the Uzamnica barracks, did
police bring --
A.   I didn't know anyone else aside from the person I met at the
camp, Milan Lukic or Lukic Milan.  Lucic, yes.  There were many of those
around, but that was Lucic and this is Lukic and then --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much, Witness.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Somebody might get these two mixed
up, but then we have to know what is what.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, sir, when you were there in the barracks, when you were
detained there, is it true that police would bring the new detainees to
the prison?
A.   Can I just please get the volume up because I can't hear
properly.  It's very low now.  Just the tiniest bit.
Q.   Is that better, sir?
A.   A little bit more, please.  Yes, this is fine now.  Please go
ahead with your question.
Q.   Now, during your stay there -- you were there for 28 months,
correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And your last day there was October 1994, in there somewhere?
A.   I think so.
Q.   And so during your 28 months there, did you see police bring new
detainees and take new -- and old detainees away?
A.   Two people would be brought in at a time, for example, and then
there was this military warehouse, and we couldn't see who it was that
they were bringing.  They would just throw the person inside, slam the
door shut, and that was that.  It's not like we could actually see much.
I can't really say.  But new people kept arriving all the time, and some
people had been taken away.  Actually, new people being brought there.
That's what I meant.
Q.   And is it true that sometimes those people would be taken away to
the police station for interrogation?
A.   I myself was interrogated at the barracks.  There was Ramiz Kulo.
There was me, Muharem Samardzic, and Adem Beberovic, over at the
barracks.
Q.   And you were interrogate --
A.   But I don't know about the MUP building.  I wasn't taken there
for interrogation.  Was anyone else?  I can't really say.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Now, before you were in the prison and before
you were arrested, you worked at the Varda factory, correct?
A.   Correct.  Yes, the furniture factory --
Q.   And --
A.   -- I was a joiner working with joinery machinery.
Q.   And would you tell us when your last day at the factory was, your
last day of work?
A.   The salaries were distributed.  It was payroll day, maybe the 1st
of June, the 2nd of June, the May salaries; and then in my department I
was the only Muslim.
Q.   And your last day of work, if it was the May salaries paid June
?
MS. SARTORIO:  Objection, Your Honour.  The witness has already
testified to what he believed the date was.
MR. ALARID:  And, Your Honour, I'm simply going off the
statement, which was admitted under the 92.
MS. SARTORIO:  Then you should -- I would suggest that he ask
about the statement because in his direct testimony that's not what he
said.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Reformulate the question.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Could you please clarify because your statement says you were
.  Is that true?
A.   I believe that that might be the day of my arrest, or the 19th.
I'm not sure about the date, but I'm sure about the month.  It was June.
But I'm not exactly positive, and I can't say, but the -- I think no
later than the 19th of June.  Maybe it was my mistake.  Maybe I said the
9th at the time, and maybe I said the 19th and it was simply misrecorded.
You know, errors can always occur because I did personally correct some
of those.
Q.   Now -- now, the one other --
A.   Don't hold it against me, please.
Q.   I do not, sir.  One the other things that I'd like to ask you,
though, is -- is because you indicate that before you were arrested you
put your family on a convoy, and so I'm just trying to figure out, how
long before you were arrested did you put your family on a convoy?  And
I'd ask you to name the members of your family at that went on the
convoy, please.
A.   Four of my children and my wife and my two daughters-in-law, and
then maybe there was another lady neighbour of mine.  They went to the
Red Cross, and then I was there at the Rzava river, and I wasn't allowed
to get onto that convoy.  I heard that people were getting off the
convoy; I have no idea why, and then I started working down the Rzava
river in order to reach a village called Okrugla because that was
probably where the convoy stopped, and then the civilians assembled there
in a bid to go through the woods and reach Gorazde.  I didn't --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much, Witness.  Thank you very
much.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, sir, can you remember simply the date of the convoy, and
maybe referring to how long after your last day of work was the convoy.
A.   Some left before my family left.  Where they left for is not
something that I can say.  It was something that was organised by the Red
Cross, the convoys.  There were just regular lorries, sometimes buses.
Q.   Sir.  Sir --
A.   And then my wife told me when I came eventually that they had
been put on a lorry.  Luga [phoen] Gladanac was the driver and --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, thank you very much.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   And, sir, can you tell me why your twin sons were not on that
convoy?
A.   Well -- well, they couldn't leave because it was taken away.  He
never got to the convoy.  Only those that survived left on that convoy.
My wife, my youngest daughter, and three sons, Almir, Dervis, and Enes.
Enes was my youngest child, youngest male child.  And they were married,
the two elder daughters, and then the oldest son was somewhere -- or,
rather, along the front line, Crni Vrh or someplace like that, and then
my two eldest sons, they were elsewhere engaged in the fighting.
Q.   And so you're saying today that Almir was on that convoy?
A.   Yes.  Someone caught him.  He was taken to the MUP building but
they released him.  He said, I have a farm; I have to go and feed my
cattle; it's under a half kilometre from the town itself; and then after
working hours I have to go there; I have to provide for my family,
financially, I mean, and that sort of thing.
Q.   Now, you were exchanged from the -- ultimately, you were part of
an exchange from the Uzamnica barracks.  Isn't that true?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And --
A.   The barracks, those of us who were there, they assembled us, and
then further down some other people joined --
Q.   Thank you, sir.
A.   -- I don't know, and then they took us -- I don't know where we
were taken through exactly because this was night-time.  I couldn't
follow the route, and then at the entrance we spent the night there, and
then they took as far as the Vrbanja bridge, and there was this exchange
with the --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, please try to make your answers as
brief as possible.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Oh, well.  Wouldn't I like that, as
well, but I need to explain.  I need to make it clear, and then you'll
understand.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, sir, isn't it true that some people that were taken away
from the Uzamnica barracks were taken away as part of exchanges?
A.   There was a private exchange.  This was not the regular Red Cross
exchange or organised by UNPROFOR, the United Nations, or whoever was in
charge of organising those.  Hasan Balic was exchanged, and Ahmet
Pergirudina [phoen] and Ilijas Cuprija.  It's like they were exchanged
for some women.  Hajrudin, I saw at Visoko.  Ilijas, I saw later on
twice.  He was arrested.  I saw him in detention and then after that,
Sarajevowhen we came there.  And Hasim Balic, well, quite
probably at the time he was -- he left or something.  I don't know.  I
didn't see him, really, and then there was another exchange --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
THE WITNESS: [In English] Yeah.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   [Interpretation] And isn't it true that on the day you were
arrested, you were brought to the police station along with many other
men that day by police who were arresting Muslims?
A.   Well, there probably were a couple of people, not that I saw them
myself, because this incident outside the station at the door or itself,
that's something that I experienced myself, Lukic slapping me.  I was
brought there by Todorovic Nebojsa and Popovic Goran, and they took me
from there all the way out to the military warehouse, the one that you
saw with the three doors.
Q.   And at the time of your arrest your two eldest sons were --
A.   I'm telling you what I saw.  If I didn't see something, I say it
clearly I didn't see it.
Q.   Just for the record, the transcript did not get the last part of
my question, which is at the time of your arrest your two eldest sons
were fighting.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  We see that.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   And, sir, at the time that you were arrested was the first time
that you --
A.   In May.  In May.  The war began in May.  There were houses
burning up in the hills, and then the MUP broke up.  How should I put it?
People left, and then there was a lot of friction.  There were civilians.
People were fleeing.  Some people were arrested, and some people left.
This all began in May.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  No, thank you very much --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] And in June --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
MR. ALARID:
Milan
Lukic coming occasionally except for an 8-month period.  Can you tell us
what that 8-month period was?
A.   Well, I don't really know how long that period was.  For quite
some time he wouldn't turn up.  When did he turn up, there was this once
he brought a pistol.  He stood in front of me.  I didn't know if he
wanted to kill me or to protect me, and then the commander tried to
protect me, and he said, Well, kill me but don't kill him.  It's like
something was totally wrong there.  I can't really complain -- I'm not
complaining about the specific people.  I'm just complaining about the
events, about what actually happened.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  And if I were to tell you that Milan Lukic was
in gaol from February 1993 through July 1994, would that help orientate
you?
A.   Well, I'll try and answer that one.  In 1993, Guso Ramo and Gojak
Ahmo were brought.  Gojak Ahmo was not from my municipality.  He was from
Prijepolje, and Guso Ramo was from my municipality.  He was an employee
of Varda, and he lived over at Banpolje.
Gojak -- what did you say?  You were saying something about us
Belgrade, and he said, No, I never said that.
Well, there you go.  That's what Almir said, and that's as much as he
said, and then Ahmo said, Okay, if you -- 2.000.  He gave him 2.000 marks
Milanto --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, thank you very much.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] -- to let him live, and then there
were other people from --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  And we take the adjournment now.
.11 p.m.
.46 p.m.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] If you could please fix my headset.
It's falling off my head.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Mr. Alarid, please continue.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I'd like it to be tighter.  Yes.
It was loose.  Thank you.  It's good now.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Sir, before we left, you know, one of the things I was trying to
get an exact answer on or as exact an answer as you can give, is the date
that you put your family -- I need to know the date you put your family
onto the convoy.  And even if you can't remember the date, if you could
tell me in relation to your last day of work or maybe how many days
before you were arrested or something that can help us understand the
exact date of that convoy.  Can you do that?
A.   I don't know exactly.  It seems it was the 14th of June.
Q.   And so you took your family, including Almir, to the convoy on --
A.   My wife remembers everything better than I do.  She can tell you
the hour, if necessary.  I should have taken her with me.  I think it was
the beginning of June.  I can't remember the day.
Q.   Do you remember how many days before the date of your arrest that
was?
A.   Well, they left with the convoy, and from that time on I went up
the river where my feet took me.  I didn't dare to go with them on the
convoy because I heard people being taken off.
Q.   And when you were arrested, is it true that the soldiers had
signs of the SDS on them?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And is it true --
A.   Most of them, they elected that party, that democratic party.
Q.   Now, is it true that the police that arrested you had sniper
rifles?
A.   It was automatic weapons, not ordinary weapons, but those
automatic weapons were of varying calibre.  They were automatic, but I
could not distinguish because I was never familiar with weapons.  I never
served in the army, and I never got a weapon myself.  An automatic rifle
is better than an ordinary rifle.
Q.   Sir, if I were to tell you in your statement in 1998 you
indicated that the men arrested you had sniper rifles, would that help --
would you defer to your statement?
A.   Once at the barracks, this Dragan said it has this thing on top
so you can see far and clearly.  I was never able to distinguish between
weapons myself because I never handled them.
Q.   Dragan who, sir?
A.   Dragan Popovic, the one who captured me, and Nebojsa Todorovic.
Q.   Okay.  And so that is -- that is the person that you were
arrested by, correct?
A.   Yes.  Those two arrested me.
Q.   And these -- and these rifles had a telescopic sight, correct?
A.   It had something like a small mirror.  You look into it, and far
away things seem much closer up.  You can hit anyone.  If that's what a
sniper is.
Q.   And in your statement you indicated that they had camouflage
uniforms, but you couldn't tell if they were army or police.  Could you
tell me the colour of the camouflage?
A.   One group was in blue uniforms, not light blue, and another group
was in camouflage.  I cannot tell you very exactly now, but the blueish
uniforms were the kind of blue like my shirt.
Q.   And when you first saw Milan Lukic, isn't it true that he was
wearing a blue uniform?
A.   Whether it was their blue police colour, yes.  He wasn't wearing
a camouflage uniform.  He was wearing what looked like a police uniform,
not a camouflage one.
Q.   And when you would see him at other times, did he have a blue
police uniform on?
A.   Sometimes he wore even a tracksuit.
Q.   Now, before you were captured, when did the aggression start
between the SDS and the Muslims?
A.   It could be the end of May.  I don't know which day.  The army of
the Uzice Corps left in the end of May, and after their departure those
so-called Eagles came to the company in some sort of uniform, although
some were wearing civilian clothes.
Q.   And is it true that the Uzice Corps came to disarm the Muslim
people and help the SDS take control of Visegrad?
A.   It wasn't clear to us, for instance -- I asked one of the
soldiers of the corps why the corps had come, and he said to protect the
dam from Alija's extremists.  Somebody might close the dam and cause a
flood.  But they did not act in a hostile manner.  Shells were falling,
people dispersed, and this man said to me, "We are not touching
civilians."  There were very few people, and they said people can return
to work.  I did go back to work in order not to lose my job.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Isn't it -- isn't it true that during this time the Uzice Corps
were there they plundered the goods -- completely plundered the goods of
Visegrad?
A.   You mean the corps.  The corps did not take anything.  They were
just there to stabilise peace.  They had suspicions that something might
happen.  So when we went to work, we would encounter these three men from
the corps.  We would pass through and then come to a point where we would
have to show our IDs, and on the way back another group might check our
IDs.  They did not act in any hostile manner.  According to some sort of
agreement, they had to leave; and after their departure, chaos returned.
These Eagles came.  Who they were, I have no clue.  When I asked other
people, they said they were paramilitaries.
Q.   Sir, do you remember giving a statement on the 23rd of December,
1994, after your release from the Uzamnica barracks?
A.   Later I gave some statements in Nedzarici when some lawyers,
people from the court came.  I don't know their exact profession.  I gave
them the lists of people I made, people who had been in the camp and who
had been taken away.  No one knows where.  A few people were exchanged,
and ten --
Q.   Sir --
A.   -- remained.
Q.   Do you recall in that 1994 statement indicating that Medo Smajic
and his wife as well as Safet Cavkusic and his wife were killed by the
Uzice Corps as well as others?
A.   I did not give that particular statement, and I am not familiar
with their killing.  I know about Smajic, the employee of Varda.  When
his son came to work, he said, "You say there are no killings, but I
found my mother and father dead."  And a woman from Donja Mahala said
Safet Cavkusic and his wife were killed in their own home.  It's --
Q.   And, sir, is it true --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Ms. Sartorio.
MS. SARTORIO:  Your Honour, I don't want to interrupt the flow,
but if -- since Defence counsel to going to refer to a prior statement it
would be helpful if he directs my attention to that section because the
way I read the statement, he didn't say anything about the Uzice Corps
killing them.
MR. ALARID:  Page -- page -- page 3 of the December 23rd
statement, middle paragraph.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.  Just a minute.
Ms. Sartorio is right.  You must direct us to the page.
MS. SARTORIO:  Yes.  Thank you.
MR. ALARID:  Yes, sir.  And we could even upload -- bring up
1D10-1916.  The B/C/S version is 1D10-1925.  It's page 3, middle
paragraph; and on the B/C/S version, I'm not quite sure to be honest.  It
would be top third of page 2, I believe.
Q.   Can you see that, sir?
A.   It's scrolling too fast.  I can't ... I think this date is
correct.
Q.   And did you -- and you did give this statement in 1994 after your
release?
A.   This part which I'm seeing right now, when the water was
released, it says here in April, the water level increased and people
left for Gorazde.  Later, little by little people came back, but when
they left again some never came back.
Q.   Now -- now, sir --
THE INTERPRETER:  The witness is talking to the side of the
microphone.  If he could please lean back in his chair.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, sir can I ask you --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   Now, can I ask you a couple of other questions, please.  In your
statement, a little bit earlier on page 2 of the English version, you
say:  "I also know that Serbs in Visegrad were armed and that the SDS
with its Crisis Staff armed them."  Is that true?
A.   I don't think people had weapons.  Maybe individuals had one or
two, but those people were very well armed, and it couldn't have been any
other weapons than those provided by the army.  If you ask me about this,
I have an answer.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You have about ten minutes left.
MR. ALARID:  Thank you, Your Honour.
Q.   Do you know the members of the Crisis Staff in Visegrad?
A.   You mean soldiers?
Q.   The SDS.
A.   Well, in Visegrad most of them were members.
Q.   Do you know --
A.   It was a party that they established, I believe.  It was called
SDS, and all of them in the Visegrad municipality were members of that
party.  I don't know that they had any other party.
Q.   And did the SDS extremists push the violence against the Muslims
in Visegrad?
A.   As I heard, they raised fears and encouraged the building of
bunkers.  They said there was a threat.  I don't know why, why they
needed to sow discord among people.  I suppose they didn't like that
proclaimed its independence.  I wasn't there to
see who clashed with whom.  I didn't see it, and I don't know how all
this started.  When the corps left, it was then that --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you, Witness.
MR. ALARID:
Q.   One more question.  Are you certain that it's Milan Lukic that
came to you in September of 1993 and beat you?
MS. SARTORIO:  Objection, Your Honour.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] In 1993, yes.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Ms. Sartorio.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Not only me.  He beat a number of
other people, and he kicked me.  He had trainers on his feet when he
kicked me and pressed me to the floor with his foot.  It was not only
once, it was several times.  He beat other people and tortured them much
worse than he did me.
MR. ALARID:  Thank you.  No further questions.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.  Mr. Cepic.
Cross-examination by Mr. Dieckmann:
Q.   Thank you, Your Honours.  Good afternoon, Mr. Dervisevic.
A.   Good afternoon.
Q.   My name is Jens Dieckmann.  I'm Defence counsel for Mr. Sredoje
Lukic, and I have just a few number of questions to you, and --
A.   May you be greeted.  Go ahead.
Q.   In my questions, I will try to be as short and precise as
possible, and I would really appreciate if you also could try to be
precise and short so that you could finish for all of us as soon as
possible.  Did you understand me?
A.   I understand.  It's clear.
Q.   Before I start, please let me offer you condolences for your
children lost in the war and behalf of the whole Defence team, and we are
well aware of the pain and suffer you have gone through, and when I put
my questions to you I will do it with all respect to your situation.
A.   Thank you.
Q.   Sorry.  Mr. Witness, in the course of the further questions, I
would highly appreciate if you and myself just use the first numbers of
this person and do not call them by their names.  Do you understand this?
A.   All right.
Q.   So if I refer to the person in the first line, I will call this
person VG-25.  And if you refer to this person, I would be grateful if
you could also say VG-25.
A.   Okay.
Q.   Thank you.  Mr. Dervisevic, do you know VG-25?
A.   Yes.
Q.   VG-25 was together with you in the Uzamnica camp?
A.   Yes, he was.
Q.   Now, do you remember how many months you have been together
there?
A.   Five or six months, not much.
Q.   Is it perhaps even possible for you to remember the specific time
period, from which month and which year to the other month?
A.   June 1992.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   No, no, no.  I'm sorry.  It could be -- it was in the summer
period, maybe August.  Yes, he was there, and he was sent to be
exchanged.  He was there for a couple of months.
Q.   So he arrives there in the summer 1992?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  Do you know VG-3?
A.   I know.
Q.   And again I ask you, have you been together with him in the
Uzamnica camp?
A.   Yes.  He even survived to the exchange when we were exchanged
together on the 10th of October.  I know him.
Q.   And could you also specify how many months you have been together
in the camp?
A.   He was captured in June, and he was with us all the time.  He had
been brought wounded.  His leg was bandaged.  I think he was wounded.
How, I don't know.  Maybe he was a fighting man of Ahmet Sejdic.  Those
first two were fighting men.
Q.   Is it June 1992 that he has been brought to the camp?
A.   I think -- I don't think July has passed.  I can't be exact to a
day, but the rest is all accurate.  I guarantee for that.  It's just the
dates that I am not sure about.  Both of them are still alive.
Q.   You have said that VG-3 was with you all the time.  What -- what
do you mean by this?  Does it mean that he was with you together up to
1994?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  And at least I would like to ask you the same
questions regarding VG-8.  Do you know him?
Q.   Thank you.  And he arrived also in summer '92 or later?
A.   August, '92, late anyway.  You see, I said about '93, how they
brought Ramo Guso and Ahmo Gojak.  Ramo Guso is from our municipality,
from Banpolje.  And then he said all those houses up there in the hill
were abandoned, those Serbs there.  People would go and pick up some
fruit to eat.  Yeah, so he survived.  He's very thin, very thin and
blonde.
Q.   Thank you.  I'm very grateful.  Thank you very much.  All of you
have been -- or have been forced to live together in one hangar, in one
barrack?  Is it true?
A.   We were all in one hangar.  That's what some people called them,
but these were military warehouses and storage facilities.  We were all
in one of those.  You saw that in the photograph with the door.  We were
in the middle section.
Q.   So you have had the opportunity to realise that when something
happened to one of you, the other realised what happened to him.  Is it
true?
MS. SARTORIO:  Objection, Your Honour.  It doesn't --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
MS. SARTORIO:  I think the question doesn't make -- isn't clear.
MR. DIECKMANN:  I'm sorry.  I will rephrase my question.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Very well, yes.
MR. DIECKMANN:  Sorry.
Q.   So when you live together in one room, you have had the
opportunity to see if something happened to one of you.  If one of you
has been mistreated or beaten, the other ones notices this.  Is it true?
A.   Well, that's as long as it's something happening in this prison,
but we didn't know about anything else.  For example, some -- somebody
was taken away and we knew nothing about that.  The door slams shut.
They take him somewhere.  If he's still alive, maybe he'll get in touch.
He is no longer alive, okay, those who are in the know should say so.
There are just these two persons who were brought in 1993.  They were
there for, how long, maybe up to two months, Guso Ramo and Gojak Ahmo.
That's as far as I know.
All the time -- well, actually whoever was there had to be in
that warehouse, and some people were taken away, and then the exchange
came.
Q.   Thank you.  One last question to this topics.  Is it fair to say
that in comparison to the other three people that you have spent the
longest time in Uzamnica camp?  Have you spent there the longest time
from you four with 28 months?
A.   Yes.  Yes.  I have documents showing that.  Were there other
camps elsewhere?  No, not in Visegrad municipality.  Maybe there was that
school building or whatever else they're saying, people being locked up,
but this was a real military camp, the warehouse, and that's all I know
about.  I don't know about elsewhere.  I'm telling you about what I went
through and the people who were there.  How on earth am I supposed to
know what happened elsewhere?
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Mr. Dervisevic, you know Sredoje Lukic?  You
know Sredoje Lukic before the war?
A.   Yes.  Yes.  It's that man over there on the right.  I know him.
We --
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Thank you.  In the document tendered into
evidence as P112, you said that you know -- knew him approximately 15
years before the war as a policeman in Visegrad.  Is it true?  Is it is
it your statement that you know him such a long time?
MS. SARTORIO:  Again, Your Honour, could we have the reference in
the statement, please?
MR. DIECKMANN:  Yes.  Yes.  It is -- I'm sorry.  Is this page 2
of this document, and it's from -- from the -- from the bottom one, two,
three four -- the fifth from the bottom.  I can read it out.  "I had
known Sredoje Lukic for approximately 15 years prior to 1992."
Q.   This is correct?  This is your statement, that you know Sredoje
Lukic for such a long time?
A.   Yes.  He worked there.  He had a permanent job at the time there.
We would see each other in the Mirzalem [phoen] pub, and they would have
drinks and that sort of thing.  He knows me better than I know him.  Yes.
Yes.  We simply know each other.  He had a job there, and I worked in the
furniture factory.
Q.   If you think back to this time before the war, what colour of
hair -- what colour has -- the hair of Sredoje Lukic?
A.   Sredoje Lukic has brown hair.
Q.   Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you, sir.  Mr. Witness, I
put it to you that Sredoje Lukic never mistreated or beat you in the
Uzamnica camp during the time you have been there.  Do you understand me?
Milan, the
two of them.  I was alone, and another man was brought over who was over
beat him.  He slapped me a
couple of times, and then that man was taken away, and I remained alone
in the camp.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Thank you very much.
I would ask the Court usher to call up the document.  I'm sorry.
I don't know if the other Defence team tendered the statement from 1994
into evidence, so I would call our Defence number.  I would ask the court
usher to call 2D01-0288.  It is an interview to the Ministry of Interior,
.  And I would ask to go
to the page -- to page 5 in the B/C/S version.
Mr. Witness, in this interview you have had the opportunity to
give all names of victims or perpetrators you have been aware of and you
know, correct?
A.   Yes.  I named the people.  When I gave statements, I named the
people who went through the camp, some people who were exchanged
privately, and then the people who came there for an exchange, and the
rest I simply don't know about.  Some people were taken away, and I have
no idea what became of them, and I don't know who does.
Q.   Thank you.  Thank you, sir.  And isn't it true that this
statement was done just two months after your release from the Uzamnica
camp, roughly?
A.   Well, I couldn't have made this statement.  We used nothing in
the camp.  There was no music, no letters, no newspapers, no -- I think
that is nonsense.  It was later, after the camp, after my stay at the
camp, and then I remember later because those people who went missing
from Visegrad municipality, they were no longer there, but I knew about
that, and I wrote down the names, and may somebody tell me I didn't.  I
know what I know, and I'll say what I know.  About 60 people --
Q.   Thank you, sir.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you.
MR. DIECKMANN:
Q.   Thank you very much.  If you have a look to the screen in front
you and look on the left side of the screen, is it your signature you can
see on the left side?
A.   There, right there.  Yes, it's my signature.
Q.   Thank you.  And you have been aware that with this signature you
declared that this statement is the truth and nothing but the truth?
A.   Yes.  I am certain about that.
Q.   Thank you very much.  And isn't it true that you did not mention
Sredoje Lukic in this statement done two months after your release at
all?  You didn't mention him at all in this statement?  Isn't it true?
A.   I may have left his name out because he was there once.  I may
have left that out.  Let me just have a look and see if this is the list
that I provided in my statement.  It's possible that I left something out
but -- well, he was there.  He can tell you himself.  He can look me in
brought him there.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   And then we know what happened.
MR. DIECKMANN:  May I tender this statement into evidence.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  It is admitted as Exhibit number 2D15, Your
Honours.
MR. DIECKMANN:
Q.   May I now ask the court usher to bring up the document 2D01-0707.
This is the second interview to Ministry of Interior, Visoko department,
January 1995.
A.   Yes.  They called me to the MUP in Visoko, and then I told them
, this was given to
the United -- the Nedzarici FCOC or whatever.
Q.   Could we scroll down to page 5 of the B/C/S version.  Is it
already down?  Oh, sorry.
Sir, again, is it on the left side of the screen, is it your
?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  Thank you.  And isn't it true that you did not
mention Sredoje at all, also, in this statement from the 6th January,
1995, being asked questions about your situation in the camp during the
last month?
A.   I don't think I left him out.  I'm just telling you what
happened, and I stated that on the record to the best of my ability.  He
slapped me, slapped Semso,
and then this man was with them.  There was something going on there, and
then I was left alone.
Q.   Thank you, Mr. Witness.  Thank you very much.
MR. DIECKMANN:  Could we also tender this document into evidence.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes.
THE REGISTRAR:  It is admitted as Exhibit number 2D16, Your
Honours.
MR. DIECKMANN:  Could the court usher please call up the document
2D01-0728.  This is the witness interview to Ministry of Security,
.  And it must also be the
fifth -- page 5 of the B/C/S version.
Perhaps could you scroll down to the end.  Yes.  Thank you very
much.
Q.   Mr. Witness, could you identify your signature under this
document on the screen in front of you?
A.   There, right there.  It's printed right there.  I wrote this, but
my hands were shaking at the time, and I couldn't do any better than
this.  And then over time, my hand became steadier.  Given my condition
at the time, even this was a decent job, and I have to use my glasses to
do this, you know.
Q.   Thank you very much, Mr. Witness.  Isn't it true that also in
this interview you had had the opportunity to give all names of victims
and perpetrators you have been aware of and you know during the time you
have had in the Uzamnica camp?  Isn't it true?
A.   I have a brochure about that.  I keep it in my home, but I have
it on me right now just in case, and I have my papers, documents showing
that I was a victim of war.  If you want me to, I can bring that to you.
You want me to count this, but one thing I can tell you for sure is that
I have a list of those people who were in that camp.  Maybe some people
were taken away.  Maybe someone is alive somewhere out there --
Q.   I'm very well aware.  Thank you very much.  I'm very well aware
what you have suffered during this time.  Thank you.  Thank you very
much.
But again, sir, isn't it true that also in this third statement
from 2007, you did not mention Sredoje at all regarding the situation in
Uzamnica camp during the time you have been there?
Milanand not
Sredoje if that's how it happened?  I don't know.  You're asking me this.
Is there another man named Lukic?  I don't know.  I know there are plenty
named Lucic, but I don't think so.  You know, mistakes are always
possible.  People leave stuff out, you know, but that's what I'm looking
at, and this is what I'm telling you now.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.
Sir, today you have been asked by the Prosecution, and I refer to
page 49, line 10 up to 17, and I may quote:  "Did anyone else beat you
other than Milan Lukic during your time in detention?"  And in your
answer, again, you did not mention Sredoje at all.  Isn't it your
statement under oath today?
A.   I only saw Sredoje that once, and he only did that to me that
once.  Anything else would be a lie.  But there is something I got from
Spasojevic Milan or Mico Spasojevic.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Thank you very much.
MR. DIECKMANN:  Thank you very much.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Saban Murat Agic I got some from
him too.  Spasojevic took him along, and then they said --
MR. DIECKMANN:  Thank you.  You have answered my question.  I
don't have any further questions for the witness.  Thank you.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Ms. Sartorio.
MS. SARTORIO:  Yes.  A few re-direct, Your Honour.
Re-examination by Ms. Sartorio:
Q.   Witness, while you were in the detention camp, did you have a
calendar with you, or was there a calendar in the camp?
A.   None in the camp, nor did I have anything on me to write.  Once I
SarajevoI started writing things down
because --
Q.   I just wanted to know about in the camp, okay?  Did you have
anyway of keeping track of the days that went by?
A.   No.  No.  I had no way.  I wasn't allowed to have anything, to
keep anything.  If there had been a policy in place, maybe we would have
had music, newspapers, you know, but we had to leave everything outside
the camp --
Q.   Thank you, Witness.
A.   -- our clothes, our shoes, that sort of thing.
Q.   So are you able to tell us today the exact month that was the
last time you saw Milan Lukic when he disappeared for a period of time
and the exact month that he returned?  Are you able to tell us that?
A.   In 1992 he showed up maybe twice, three times, perhaps, and then
another time in 1993.  So he was seen less and less as time went on.  For
two or three or four months he would be gone, and he wasn't to be seen
anywhere around.
Q.   But you can't -- can you tell us today any -- and only if you
remember, any of the months that you saw him there?
A.   In 1994, I don't know the month, he came with a revolver.  He
came to prison.  He stood there right in front of me, and then the
commander was their Commander Jelkic, who was the last commander for the
guards there, and he sort of wanted to cover me with his own body just in
case the man fired so he would go too.  He wanted to protect me.
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter did not understand.
MS. SARTORIO:
Q.   Witness, just -- the question is really a yes or no question.  Do
you remember the exact months --
A.   Yes.
Q.   Which months did you see Milan Lukic?
A.   Yes, in 1994 when the most recent commander of the guards was
there.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  What month?  Witness --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] [No interpretation]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Witness, the question was whether you remembered
the month that you saw Milan Lukic.  Do you remember the month that you
saw him?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] The last time.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You can't take it any further.
MS. SARTORIO:  Yes, Your Honour.  Thank you.  Just a few more
questions.
Q.   Sir, on -- you -- sir, there's no question before you.
A.   [No interpretation]
Q.   Okay.  Just a few more questions, sir.  You did talk about seeing
Sredoje once at the detention camp.  Can you tell us if -- did he do
anything to you and what -- and if he did, what did he do?
MR. CEPIC:  Leading.
MS. SARTORIO:  That's --
MR. CEPIC:  And we already have answer, Your Honour, with your
leave.
MS. SARTORIO:  I think it was -- they confused the witness on
cross-examination, Your Honour, and I think --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  He answered that already, yes.
MS. SARTORIO:  Okay.
Q.   Just --
A.   He slapped me several times, hit me several times.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you, Witness.  Witness, there's no question.
Milanwas spurring him on.  He said hit him, hit him harder.
Q.   Okay.  Thank you, Witness.
A.   But I didn't.  You know, I can't say that he did.  He just hit me
several times.  He slapped me across the face.
Q.   Just a few more questions.  While you were at the detention camp,
sir, did you have any chores that you had to do?
A.   What do you mean?  I was milking the cows.
Q.   Can you --
A.   I was never taken back to town for maybe six months.  You know, I
took care of everything there.  I would clean the prison up, tidy up, and
then the facilities where we relieved ourselves, just to make sure that
everything was clean when the Red Cross came.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   And then later, I -- we did some farming, and then out in our
company and so on and so forth.
Q.   So do you know if other detainees did any work outside of the
barracks?  In other words, would detainees leave sometime during the day
and then return that same day later?
MR. CEPIC:  I think that --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, Mr. Cepic.
MR. CEPIC:  I think this is a leading question again.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Yes, it is partially leading.
MR. ALARID:  And beyond the scope of cross-examination.
MS. SARTORIO:  No, it isn't, Your Honour, because Mr. Dieckmann
asked -- tried to establish that all of the pseudonymed persons were all
--
JUDGE ROBINSON:  You have to reformulate it in a non-leading
manner.
MS. SARTORIO:  I will, Your Honour.  I will.  Thank you.
Q.   Sir, did you ever see any of the detainees leave the barracks
during the day and then return?
A.   Come and go.  They went out to work, they were divided in groups.
It wasn't all just one group.  There were several groups.  One of them
roughly speaking, a young man named Mirzet from Gostilje, named Bajic,
Bajic Mirzet, and then he left with Saban, that one, you know which one I
mean, Muratovic, and then they were off to do something, you know, and
then they --
Q.   Thank you.  Thank you.  No further --
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Ms. -- I wanted to find out whether you have any
evidence --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] [No interpretation]
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Just a minute.  Whether you have any evidence as
to whether the conflict had any effect on this witness, any -- whether
he's suffered any kind of injury or sustained any kind of a -- whatever
kind of damage.  Do you have any evidence as to that?
MS. SARTORIO:  I did ask him on direct, Your Honour, what -- but
he didn't provide details.  I can ask him again if you would like.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Maybe you might be able to get it independently,
independently of him, from somebody else.
MS. SARTORIO:  If Your Honour requests that, we can certainly do
that.
JUDGE ROBINSON:  I'm interested if it is a result of the
conflict.
MS. SARTORIO:  Yes.  I'll ask him one further question about --
Q.   Sir, are you currently taking medication?
A.   Of course.
MS. SARTORIO:  May we go into private session?
JUDGE ROBINSON:  Private session.
[Private session]
<span lang="FR" style='font-size:10.0pt;line-height:200%;font-family:"Courier New"'>11  Page 2011 redacted. Private session.
.47 p.m.,
to be reconvened on Monday, the 22nd day of
:15 p.m.
