Thursday, 18  March 2010
[Open session]
[The accused entered court]
.04 a.m.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Good morning to everybody in the courtroom.
Before the witness is being brought in, I would like to come back
to the question of admission of documents as exhibits.  I hope I can make
it clear for everybody in the courtroom.
In connection with its motion pursuant to Rule 92 ter, the
Prosecution submitted a number of exhibits associated with the witness's
prior testimony.  Some of these exhibits were admitted through the
witness in the prior proceeding, while others were simply used with the
witness during the prior testimony.  Of those exhibits which were only
used with the witness, some were admitted through other witnesses in
prior proceedings, while others were not admitted at all.
In the Chamber's Rule 92 ter decision of the 3rd of November,
2009, the Chamber stated that the a decision on the admission of exhibits
associated with the witness prior testimony would be made at the time the
relevant witness appears in court.
Additionally, the Chamber instructed the Prosecution to submit a
list of exhibits which it proposes to admit into evidence in association
with relevant witness, clearly indicating: first, which exhibits were
admitted through the relevant witness in previous trials; secondly, which
exhibits were discussed with the relevant witness, but admitted through
another in previous trials; and, thirdly, which exhibits were discussed
with the relevant witness, but were not admitted in previous trials.
The Chamber notes that the Prosecution has, indeed, provided a
list of exhibits which it proposes to use with the witness of today,
PW-017.  This list includes the 65 ter exhibit numbers for each proposed
exhibit, and indicates that all exhibits which the Prosecution proposes
to use with this witness were admitted through the witness in the Popovic
case.
The Chamber would like to emphasise that this trial is a trial
solely of the Accused Tolimir and is not part of the Popovic et al case
or any other case.  Therefore, the parties should consider the relevance
and probative value of each document in relation to this case before
seeking its admission.  In order to enable the parties and the Chamber to
identify each and every exhibit admitted in this case, the Chamber will
consider all statements, transcripts, and documents, whether admitted in
prior proceedings or not, individually, and not as part of a Rule 92 ter
package.  The admission of such exhibits may be sought prior to the
witness testimony or in the course of the examination-in-chief or
cross-examination.
I hope that will help everybody in the courtroom to deal with
this problem.
Could, then, the witness be brought in.
We're going into private session so that the witness can be
brought in.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we're now in open session.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Good morning, sir.
Before we come to you, I would like to ask the Prosecution for
appearances.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honours,
everybody.
My name is Rupert Elderkin, and I'm appearing this morning with
Mr. Peter McCloskey and Ms. Janet Stewart for the Prosecution.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.
Witness, good morning.  Welcome to the Tribunal.
Would you please read aloud the affirmation which is shown to you
now on the card.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Good morning.  Thank you for
welcoming me.  I'm going to read the solemn declaration.
I solemnly declare that I will speak the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth.
WITNESS:  PW-017
[The witness answered through interpreter]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.  Please sit down.
The Prosecution has, in examination-in-chief, some questions for
you.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Mr. President, if I may just confirm at the
beginning of the witness's testimony that his prior protective measures
of pseudonym and also face distortion are in place.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  They are.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Thank you very much.
Examination by Mr. Elderkin:
Q.   Good morning, Witness.  As you know, my name is --
A.   Good morning.
Q.   Before we get started, I just wanted to remind you to try to keep
your voice up, speak a little slowly, and I will do the same, so that the
interpreters are able to translate what we are saying.  If there's
anything that I ask you that's unclear, please let me know, and I will do
my best to rephrase what I'm saying.
A.   I understand, and I will do as you suggest.
Q.   I'd first like to show you 65 ter number 6191, which is a
pseudonym sheet.
Sir, please, without saying your name, can you confirm if you're
the person on that sheet of paper.
A.   Yes, I agree, that is my name.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, I request that that be admitted
under seal.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just a moment.  We would like to see it as well.
It will be received under seal.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P51, Your Honours, under seal.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Thank you.
in the
Krstic case in 2000 and in the Popovic case in 2006?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   And have you listened to all of that testimony in the past few
days?
A.   Yes, I have listened to it again.
Q.   Sir, having listened to your testimony, does it fairly and
accurately reflect what you would say if you were examined here today and
if you were asked the same questions again?
A.   Yes, it does reflect that, and I would give the same answers to
the same questions again.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, in light of your earlier reference
to the 92 ter situation, and also following discussions with Mr. Gajic,
General Tolimir's legal advisor, we propose only to seek the admission of
the witness's Krstic testimony.  That testimony, Your Honour, contains
the witness's evidence-in-chief and some cross-examination, whereas he
appeared in Popovic as a 92 bis witness and the Popovic transcript is
mostly cross-examination.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  The transcript in the Krstic case will be
received as an exhibit.
THE REGISTRAR:  As P52, under seal, Your Honours.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, in addition, I would like to
identify, for purposes of reference, that there were only four exhibits
used with this witness in the Krstic testimony.  Their 65 ter numbers in
the present case are:  1450 at page 24, and that was Exhibit 10/1 in
Krstic; 65 ter 1201, which was Exhibit 10/2 in Krstic; 65 ter 1202, which
was Exhibit 10/3 in Krstic; and 65 ter 1203, which was Exhibit 10/4 in
Krstic.  65 ter 1450 is a large book of photographs, and we'll seek to
admit that through a later witness.  However, I would request the
admission of the other three exhibits, along with the witness's Krstic
testimony.  But they don't need to be under seal.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Will you use these exhibits during the
examination of this witness?
MR. ELDERKIN:  I will do, sir.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  And you should do it at the relevant time.  We
will then make a decision.
MR. ELDERKIN:  And, Your Honours, if I may now read a summary of
the witness's Krstic testimony into the record, and this can be in open
session.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  We are in open session.
MR. ELDERKIN:  The witness is a Muslim by faith.  He grew up in
Srebrenica.  Before the war, he worked at the
bauxite mine company in Srebrenica.  At the beginning of the war, he was
wounded.
, the witness was at home at his house
in Srebrenica.  That day, the witness decided to go to Potocari with his
family.  The witness went to Potocari because he was afraid that he would
be killed by the advancing Serb Army if he stayed in his house.  He still
suffered from his wound, and he believed that as he had been wounded,
DutchBat would offer him some protection.
At Potocari, there was a huge crowd of people and no
noon, the witness and his family entered the
bus compound in Potocari.  This was a building used for maintenance of
buses.  The witness and his family found space in a corner of the
building, and he stayed in the bus compound the entire day.  His wife
went to her parents' house, which was nearby, to get some food.  She
spoke to her father while she was there.  This was the last time that she
ever saw her father.
The evening in the bus compound was horrible.  The people could
hear powerful detonations of shells, which the witness believed came from
shelling of the town centre and the surrounding area.  There was not
enough space in the bus compound.  It was crowded.  Children were crying,
and mothers had to try to bring in hay for the children to sleep on.
There was not enough food.  People needed to go to the toilet.  The
witness could not sleep at all that night because he was in a sitting
position.
By morning on the 12th of July, there was mounting panic inside
the bus compound.  Serb soldiers entered the bus compound, but they
behaved decently.  These soldiers checked the documents of men in the
compound.  The witness showed his identification to the soldiers, and
they asked him why he was there.  He told them he was wounded, and they
accepted this answer.
Towards dusk, the people in the compound heard that men were
being separated.  This frightened the witness.  The witness decided to
try to hide.  He and his family went and hid in one of several
broken-down buses which were in front of the bus compound.  The witness
spent the night of the 12th of July in this broken bus.  He spent all
night on the bus and didn't leave, because one could hear screams, loud
screams of women and children.  It was beyond description.  The witness
could hear people screaming things like, "Let me go.  Don't.  Please, let
me be.  Leave me alone."  Women were crying and screaming and asking for
help.
The next morning, 13th of July, at dawn the witness decided that
he and his family had to leave.  His wife left first to get some water
from a house across the street.  She came back and told the witness that
she'd seen a lot of blood on the ground floor of the house.  The witness
was shaken, but he picked up his child and headed for the group at the
exit, where two UN armoured personnel carriers, or APCs, were parked.  At
this point, the witness's mother was also with him.
The witness found himself in an even bigger crowd of people who
were all trying to get out.  There were women, children, and a few men.
It took a long time, but the witness finally got through the crowd to the
APCs.  He was still carrying his child.
At the APCs, the witness saw UN soldiers holding hands to control
the movement of the crowd towards the buses.  The witness also saw Serb
soldiers who had already reached the buses move away for a moment as if
they had been called away by someone else.  When the soldiers left for a
moment, the witness boarded a bus and hid on the floor from the Serb
soldiers.  He hid because he was afraid that if the soldiers saw him,
that he would be separated as they had done to the other men.  The bus
was extremely overcrowded, and finally left in the direction of Bratunac.
The bus went from Potocari to Bratunac, Glogova, Kravica,
Konjevic Polje, Nova Kasaba, Milici, Vlasenica, Tisca, and finally
stopped in Luke.
On the way to Luke, the bus was stopped several times and checked
for men.  The bus driver was very decent and said there were only women
and children on the bus.  At times, the front and rear doors of the bus
were opened to be checked, but no one saw the witness hiding.  At Luke,
the bus stopped and everyone got off.  The witness was still carrying his
five-year-old child.  The bus driver told people to proceed on foot from
this point.  After a few steps, the witness saw several Serb soldiers.
One of the soldiers told the witness, "Give your child to your wife, and
you come with us."  The witness handed the child to his wife.  He
believed that he would never see the child again, so he tried to say
something, but he couldn't speak.  He didn't have time.  The Serb soldier
pushed him with a rifle and said, "Move on."
The soldier asked a man in camouflage trousers and a sweater,
"Major, what do we do with him?"  The major pointed the way that they
should go down the road.  The soldier leading the witness away turned
down the road and asked him, "Did you work for bauxite?"  It turned out
that the witness and the Serb soldier recognised each other, as they had
both worked for bauxite.
They continued down the road as indicated by the major and
School.  The time was approximately
School, the witness recognised a prisoner with his
hands tied behind his back, Abdul Kadir, a young lab technician, a
medical technician from the hospital in Srebrenica.
Immediately after arriving at the school, the witness's hands
were tied behind his back with shoelaces.  There was one soldier there
who only answered a military telephone set up on the stairway leading
into the school.  This soldier was called "Zeljko" by the other soldiers,
and he would speak on the phone and say, "Yes, sir, I'll do that.  I'll
tell them."
The witness sat for most of the day outside the school with
Abdul Kadir.  Throughout the day, the witness observed prisoners
continuously being brought to the school.  He could hear trucks and buses
coming and going as the number of prisoners increased.  Eventually, there
School.  Serb soldiers
came and went during this time.  Many of them threatened the prisoners,
but the prisoners were not beaten.
A Serb soldier, Stanimir, asked the witness if he knew a Serb
soldier named Spomenko Garic, who also worked at bauxite.  The witness
replied that he did know Garic from work.  Stanimir told the witness that
Garic was the commander of a special intervention unit that was currently
in the field in Kravica, and said that Garic would probably be by the
school later in the evening.
Later towards the evening, the Serb soldiers brought a very
pretty Muslim girl of about 17 to the school to try to identify some of
the prisoners.  The soldiers called her "Turkish Girl," told her she was
she was pretty, and took her into the school.  Later, the same witness
heard a female screaming in the school, "Let me go.  Don't touch me."
, the 22 prisoners were
brought into the school.  As they were brought into the school, they were
searched and robbed of their money and valuables by the Serb soldiers.
In the classroom in the school, the prisoners were bound with telephone
wire.  Their hands were tied behind their backs.  The prisoners were
ordered to sit on the floor in a corner of the classroom and were guarded
by a soldier with a rifle.  Soon Spomenko Garic arrived.  He asked, "Who
is from bauxite here?"  The witness replied, and Garic asked the witness
what he was doing there.  The witness replied that he had been wounded
and had gone to Potocari, and that he had been taken into custody and
brought to the school.  Garic replied, "Well, this war hasn't been very
good to you or us, but what can we do?  Right.  Very well.  See you
tomorrow."  He gave the witness a friendly pat on the soldier and left.
Garic was dressed in coveralls and had a handkerchief tied around his
head.
Immediately after he left, Serb troops came into the classroom.
They were dressed in a similar fashion to Garic.  The guard asked them,
"How did you fare in Kravica?"  They replied, "Great.  We finished with
the balijas."  These soldiers then began to question and beat the
prisoners.
Beatings were brutal.  With each question, for example, how many
Serbs did you kill, a blow would fall.  Prisoners were beaten on their
heads with rifles.  They were kicked in the chest.  An old man being
beaten dropped his metal cane, and a soldier picked it up and beat him
with it.  One of the soldiers took a flag-pole which had been taken from
a mosque and began to beat the witness and other prisoners with it.  He
asked questions about the flag and then beat the prisoners, whatever
their answers may be.
The witness was scarred above his right eye, and his face was
covered with blood.  He was kicked to the floor.  The beatings lasted
about half an hour.  The prisoners were covered in blood.  The soldiers
inflicting the beatings had accents like those of the people of
Srebrenica.
The soldiers conducting the beatings left, and a group of five or
six other soldiers entered the building.  The prisoners were ordered to
stand against the wall.  Some of them managed to stand up by the wall,
but they could not stand for long and slid down the wall back onto the
floor.  The prisoners were then ordered out of the school and into a
truck.  There was a platform set up on the stairs outside the school
which led into the bed of the truck.  A soldier at the stairs told the
prisoners that they were going to a military prison and that it would be
quite nice there.  This soldier said, "Don't be afraid.  Everything will
be all right."
The prisoners were ordered to sit on the right-hand bench of the
truck and were told to keep the other bench free.  Two soldiers loaded
the beaten prisoners who could not walk into the bed of the truck.  They
threw the prisoners into the back of the truck and piled them in a heap.
There was no tarpaulin on the truck.  Four soldiers then took the free
left-hand bench, and three soldiers got into the cab of the truck.
The truck took the road towards Vlasenica.  Just at the entry of
Vlasenica, on a lit street, the truck turned left onto a dirt
road.  At some point, the truck reached a small stream or brook and
stopped briefly.  A Serb soldier in the back of the truck banged with his
fist on the roof of the cab, above the driver, and said, "Not here.  Take
them up there where they took the people before."  He said it very
loudly, and it was quite clear.  The driver understood him, and the truck
proceeded.
During the journey, the witness had been trying to loosen the
telephone wire binding his hands by working it against a screw attached
to the frame of the truck.  He succeeded in loosening it, although he
could not undo the knot.
The truck stopped as it was going up a hill.  There was a pasture
and a partly-demolished house there.  The truck stopped near the house
and turned off its engine, although the lights remained on.  The four
soldiers got off the back of the truck.  The three soldiers got out of
the cabin.  The three soldiers from the cabin were opposite from where
the witness was sitting on the other side of the truck.
One of the four soldiers from the back of the truck went over to
the front where the three soldiers from the cab were standing.  The three
remaining soldiers at the back of the truck immediately started killing
the prisoners.  They threw the prisoners off the back of the truck and
began shooting them.
Two men tried to escape.  They jumped off the truck and ran about
20 metres before they were shot down.  The witness managed to free one of
his hands.  He jumped off the truck, putting the truck between himself
and the soldiers, and he ran.  The soldiers fired at him, but it was
night-time and the soldiers had to fire over the truck.  The witness
managed to get to the edge of the forest, and he fell and rolled down a
steep slope and reached a brook at the bottom.  He could still hear
gun-fire.  The witness remained there until dawn the next day.
At dawn, the witness set out.  After seven days, approximately,
he met some fellow Muslims, who were also trying to escape.  After a
great deal of intense hunger, hardship, and a Serb Army ambush, the
the 27th of July, 1995.
That concludes my summary, and if I may proceed with a few
questions.
Q.   Sir, I'd like to start with the situation in Potocari.
And can I ask to see 65 ter number 1623, please.  This should not
be broadcast outside of the courtroom.  It has identifying features on
it, and -- well, the first page has B/C/S markings.  The second page
shows the same markings in English.
Sir, do you recognise this drawing?
A.   Yes, I do recognise this drawing.  I made it, myself, and in the
drawing I am actually presenting, as I saw things in those days, the area
where I was.  And now I will try to explain what it is that I actually
drew.
What I'm showing here now is the building -- I apologise.  I
don't have the picture before me.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Could the usher perhaps assist the witness.
I think we've zoomed in where he's touched the screen.
Q.   If you leave the electronic pen on the desk.  Otherwise, I think
it affects the images you're speaking about.
And please continue.
A.   Yes.  I see this rectangle here, and in Bosnian it says "Remont,"
which means repair and maintenance shop, and that's what I represent with
this rectangle.  That's where I was initially when I arrived in Potocari.
In front of this building, we see these small squares by which I tried to
show that there were buses there, there were quite a few in the
parking-lot, and they were in the immediate vicinity of the main road, an
asphalt road, connecting Srebrenica and Bratunac.  So what you see above
there, these two long lines, that's an asphalt road.  And the arrow on it
indicates two other rectangles that you can see on the road, itself.
They are two UN APCs.  They were, in other words, on the left- and
right-hand side of the road, and the arrow between the two APCs actually
shows the way where women and children and men had to walk between these
two APCs in order to reach the buses that you can see on the left-hand
side.  There are three rectangles there, three boxes.  Sometimes there
were more, but it is important to say that they were very close to these
UN vehicles.
We also see on this drawing a house on the left-hand side of the
road.  I pointed an arrow at it.  This is the house where the men who
would pass between these two APCs would be directed to go to.  Then they
would be made to get on a military truck, and the military truck I
depicted with this small square just in front of the house.  So when I'm
talking about the separation of the men from the other people, they were
all there, and I all -- and I had occasion to see all of that on that
day.  In the Bosnian, I wrote, next to the arrow, that this is the house
where the men were taken.
And then the road goes on to Bratunac.
Q.   What did this house look like?
A.   The house was new, relatively new.  He had concrete terraces and
concrete pillars.  It was rather large.  It had a large yard where groups
of people would linger, waiting for the truck to arrive, which would then
take those people in the direction of Bratunac.
Q.   And how far was the house from the road?
A.   The house was very close to the road, almost next to the road.
Perhaps some 10 metres or so from the road; 10 metres or so, maybe a
metre more or less.  In any case, it was very close to the road.
Q.   Do you remember now what colour the house was?
A.   I can't remember, really.  I don't think that it had the facade,
that the house was still unfinished.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, may I ask for this sketch now to be
admitted under seal.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It will be received under seal.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P53, Your Honours.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Could I ask next to see 65 ter number 6196, and
e-court page 10 of that document, please.  This shows a simplified map of
Bosnia.
If we could please scroll down so that Srebrenica and Potocari
are visible in the bottom right.  Thank you.
Q.   Sir, can you see Srebrenica and Potocari indicated on this map?
A.   Yes, I can see it very well.
Q.   With the Court Usher's help, I would ask you, please, to use the
pen to mark on the screen the route that you followed in the bus when you
left Potocari towards the free territory.
A.   Yes.  We can see here, where it's indicated that Potocari is.
[Marks].  The buses then went on towards Bratunac, and then from there
they went to Kravica and then on to Konjevic Polje [marks], from
Konjevic Polje to Milici, and then on to Vlasenica [marks], and then it
went on towards Kladanj.  And I can see a full line here, dark.  If
that's the separation line, then that would be Luke, which was close to
the separation line.  I can't see Tisca here.  That's an area before
Luke.  So Luke was the place where there was a school building which was
very close to the then line of separation [marks].  So that was the
way -- the route that the bus followed.
Q.   Sir, could I please ask if you'd mark with a small letter L the
location of Luke, as best you can.
A.   As I've just said, it was very close to the separation line, the
line that I will indicate [marks], and I've indicated with this dot.  So
I assume that that place was about there.
Q.   Sir, thank you, and that's all I need from you with thee pen.
And, Your Honours, may I ask that this be admitted, this single
page, as an in-court exhibit?
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It will be received.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P54, Your Honours.
MR. ELDERKIN:
Q.   Sir, what stopped you from going towards the free territory after
you got off the bus?
A.   The soldiers who were on the plateau or flat area, Serb soldiers,
they ordered, as soon as we got off the buses, and I had my daughter who
was almost five in my hands - I carried her because she was rather skinny
and small, and although I had difficulty walking, I was carrying my
daughter - and then one of the soldiers, as soon as I got off the bus,
ordered that I hand my daughter over to a woman.  And then he addressed
the person with the words, "Major, what are we going to do with him?"
And that man who was sitting on the edge of that plateau, who had a
camouflage -- who had camouflage pants and the sweater on top, he just
indicated with his hand which way I was to go, and then this soldier
said, "Will you move on, you balija fucker."  And then I walked in the
direction indicated towards an asphalt road.
As I was walking, this soldier recognised me, and he said, I know
you.  Did you work in the Srebrenica bauxite company?  And I said that I
did.  And then he introduced himself, and he said that he, too, had
worked in the Vlasenica bauxite company.  And it was a well-known fact
that these two municipalities had actually established two companies.
The Srebrenica municipality and the Vlasenica municipality, they had
established two companies, bauxite companies, but they also worked
together a lot.  So he said that he used to be a geometer at the company,
and I know that our company sometimes would hire people from that other
company so that they could do some work for our mine, bauxite mine.
Soon thereafter, we arrived at the school building, and outside I
saw a man who had already been brought there before me.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Could we please see 65 ter 1450 at page 24 in
e-court.
Q.   Sir, I'm now going to show you a series of photos, and I would
like to ask you, in respect of each one, to ask if you recognise this
location.  And if so, say where it is.
A.   Yes.  We can see the school building here.  It was the school
building in Luke.  That's the school building.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Could we see page 25 of the same exhibit now.
Q.   Where is this, sir?
A.   Here we see the same building, the front part of the building.
That's the side from which I was actually brought to the school.  And we
can see this tree on the right-hand side of the photograph, so that's
where we sat on this field, on this meadow, first the man who had been
brought before me, and then me, and then all the other people who were
brought there later on.  We sat under that tree.  So this is the
left-hand side of the school, and this is actually the view from where we
had been brought.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, as I indicated earlier, this is from
a much larger exhibit, and I won't be seeking the admission of those two
pages at this time.  But I note, again, that the first image at page 24
was used as Exhibit 10/1 in the Krstic trial.
Please, could we see 65 ter 1201.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  The two pages of the set of photographs will be
received.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P55, Your Honours.
MR. ELDERKIN:
Q.   Sir, does this show the same location?
A.   Yes.  Now here we can see the other side of the school clearly,
and I have to say something here.  When the Serb soldiers -- when we got
on the bus, the Serb soldiers took us via this road which -- to the
asphalt road which was behind the school building, and from there we were
taken in the direction of Vlasenica on that same evening.
Q.   So if I can just clarify one point.  I heard, in the English
translation, the word "bus."  Were you taken in a bus or another kind of
vehicle?
A.   No, I said "truck."  Maybe it was an error in interpretation.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Please, could we see now 1202.
Q.   Again, sir, where is this?
A.   Here we see, again, the wider area of the front of the school.
We can also see the steps, the staircase, leading to the school, where on
that day I noticed that there was a telephone there on the steps, and one
Serb soldier, who was called "Zeljko," he was in charge of the phone
line.  He was the only one who would take calls.  And we can see again
that same tree.  And all the way to the right in the upper-hand corner of
the photo, there was a path, a rather narrow dirt road, and that's where
we have been brought to the school, from that direction.
MR. ELDERKIN:  And now could I see, please, 1203.
Q.   Sir, do you recognise this photograph?
A.   Yes, I do.  That's one of the classrooms where we were taken in.
Here in this photo, I can also see some furniture, but there was nothing
there at the time.  This photo is probably taken later on.  So this is
the interior of the classroom that I can -- what I see on the photograph,
that's what it is.  The windows looked exactly the same way, and there
was this painted part of the wall.  That's the classroom where we were.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, I'd request the admission of those
three photographs, 1201, 1202, and 1203.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  They will be received as one exhibit.
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, that will be Exhibit P56.
MR. ELDERKIN:
Q.   Sir, can you describe the truck that took you away from the
school that night after the beatings?
A.   The truck was a military truck.  As I'm a mechanic, I know
different types of vehicles.  And I had also served in the army, so I
know that this was a military truck.  It didn't have a tarpaulin, but it
did have the frame for the tarp that were still on the truck.  The truck
also had two benches.  And the reason I mentioned them here is that on
the right-hand side, on that bench, that's where we sat; whereas the
left-hand side, that bench was used by four Serb soldiers, but they were
actually standing on top of that bench and holding on to the frame, to
the tarp frame, while we were taken on those buses to the execution site.
Q.   I heard again in the English translation the word "buses."  Sir,
could you please confirm that we're talking about a truck here and not a
bus?
A.   It's probably strange.  I'm using the word "truck," and this is
an interpretation error.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Please, could we see 65 ter 1624.  And this should
not be broadcast outside of the courtroom.
Q.   Sir, do you recognise this picture?
A.   Yes.  This is a picture that was made of me as soon as I reached
the free territory.  This picture was made 17 days after the fall of
Srebrenica.  I reached that free territory 17 days after the fall of
Srebrenica.  And I would like to describe this photo a bit.
We can see well here that I have a scar above my right eye.  This
was the consequence of beatings that I received.  I was beaten by a metal
rod, and you can clearly see the scar there.  What you can't see is that
I still had bruises both on my face and all over my body.  But this shirt
is something that I got from a young man to put on, because my clothes
were all torn and still wet.  So I'm wearing this white T-shirt which I
received as soon as I arrived there.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, I'd ask for this photograph also to
be admitted under seal.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It will be received under seal.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit P57, Your Honours, under seal.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Sir, thank you very much.  I have no further
questions for you at this time.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.
Sir, now we come to the cross-examination by the accused.  He has
the right to put questions to you as well.
Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
I'm going to address the witness as "sir," in order not to
interfere with the measures requested by the Prosecution.
Cross-examination by Mr. Tolimir:
Q.   [Interpretation] I would first like to talk to the witness about
statement 0041159, which he gave on record on the 26th of September,
1996.  This is 1D08.
Do you have that on the screen?
A.   I don't see anything on the screen yet.
Q.   Can we please look at page 2 of this document?
THE INTERPRETER:  Interpreters note:  There's a lot of rustling
of paper, making it a bit difficult to hear what is being said.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation]
Q.   Now do you see anything?
A.   I don't see anything other than the translation which is going on
the small monitor.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Tolimir, it takes some time to call up that
document.  You have to wait.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Now we can see it.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   If you can see, on page 2, lines 3, 4, and 5 -- do you see that?
A.   Page 2, lines 3, 4, and 5?  Well, it appeared there for a second,
but then it got lost again on the monitor.  I can see two pages.  I don't
see, actually, those relevant pages.  This was the cover to the document.
Now I can see it.  At the top, it says "Record," and then I have
underneath that it says, "Statement."  Now I can look at the second page.
Q.   All right.  Please look at page 2, the first paragraph, and you
can look at lines 3, 4, and 5.
A.   This is a mistake.  I have the first page in the Bosnian, and I
have second page in the English.
Right now.
Q.   All right.  And there you say, in line 3, that:
"I was supposed to go to Ljubovija to buy milk at a discount
shop.  And I crossed a bridge.  There was Serbian police on the other
side of the bridge.  They entered and checked the identity of every
passenger.  Anyone who was Muslim was ordered out of the bus."
My question is, is it correct, what you have said?
A.   I have to clarify to the Court here that this is a statement that
I gave a long time ago, and it included the pre-war period.  And what we
are talking about here is the period prior to the war, before the war
began.
Q.   Did you state that at the time?
A.   I said there that I went to buy milk for the child.
; is that
correct?
A.   Yes, the statement was provided at that time.  But what I'm
saying is that the statement refers to the time before the war.
Q.   Well, we know that.  We know that from your statement.  Can you
please tell me if it's correct, what you said in that statement?
A.   It's quite correct that I went to buy milk.
Q.   Can you remember when this was?  When was the month?  Are you
talking about 1992?  I think you're talking about April.
A.   Yes, we're talking about 1992.  This could be early April, which
means that the conflict had not broken out yet in that area.  It means
that the war had not started yet.
Q.   And was this perhaps on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, the 6th, the
7th; what was the date?
A.   Well, it's hard for me to remember the date, but definitely it
was very, very close to the time that the conflict broke out, perhaps a
month or less than a month.  And as I said, this was the time when the
conflict had not broken out yet.
, during the war, citizens
Serbia, was
conducted by Serbian police; is that normal?
A.   Yes, it was quite normal.  Tensions were already abundant, and
the police on the Serbian side initiated these controls.  Not only did I
Serbiabefore that, I went to
that, a month or two or three before that.  I remember that there was
such a control on the Serbian side.
Q.   Thank you.  Can you please tell the Trial Chamber whether the
bridge between Ljubovija and Bratunac is the border crossing between
Serbiaand
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you, thank you.
Can you please tell us, more or less, whether this was at the
beginning of April.  Because you say, at the end of your statement, that
that is when you went to the village, to your mother.
A.   This happened much later, much later.  The statement actually
includes -- and the people who drafted the statement wanted to know
here --
Q.   All right.  Thank you, thank you.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
declared its independence?
A.   Bosnia-Herzegovina received its statehood on the 12th of March,
1992.
Q.   All right.  But these events are from April, aren't they?
A.   The events are most probably --
Q.   You are saying that --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  You should pause before you put your next
question, until the answer of the witness is stated, and --
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  -- you see it on the screen.
Please carry on.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I don't see the English text, where
I am.
Q.   All right.  Since this is the beginning of April, as you said in
declared itself an independent
Serbia, for
Bosniainto
Serbiainstigated these checks even
before.
Q.   All right.  I am asking you.  Please answer the question.  I
heard what you said.  Is it customary for controls to be carried out
between two states and for citizens to return to their own state?
A.   Well, it used to be normal to cross the bridge, because Ljubovija
and Srebrenica were quite close.  People would come from Ljubovija to
Bratunac and Srebrenica, and people from Srebrenica and Bratunac would go
there.  We were just separated by some 10 kilometres or so, or even less.
If you know that area, I don't see that there would be anything strange
for people from either side to cross over for visits.  I'm talking about
the pre-war period here.
Bosnia
was an independent state.  Well, I would like to put a different question
to you now.
In this statement, you say that you saw Arkan's men in Bratunac,
and that you concluded that on the basis of the uniforms.  Would you be
able to answer to me here -- or would you answer my question, which is:
who had put
on Arkan's uniforms?
A.   It was quite precise and clear who these people were.  From what
I was able to find out from my friends who that day participated in a
meeting in the Bratunac Hotel, and I remember what I heard at that time,
and that was that it is correct that soldiers with special uniforms were
already in Bratunac on that day, and they applied such pressure, and the
people had the impression, all the people who lived in Bratunac and the
environs, there was a meeting where an alleged agreement was reached to
de-militarise the Bratunac area.
Q.   Thank you.  I'm kindly asking you to answer my questions.  The
uniforms worn by Arkan's men, could Bosnian citizens of Serb ethnicity be
able to wear the same uniforms?
A.   I don't know that.
Q.   All right.  Thank you, thank you.  I'm satisfied with your
answer.
Can you please just tell me, why did you provide this statement
in 1995, in August, when the events relate to the pre-war period?  Thank
you.
A.   Well, this is a very strange question.  Of course, I could not
have provided such a statement during the actual wartime events in
Srebrenica.  In 1995, in July, I was in the liberated free territory.
July -- well, August is the following month, so I was already in the free
territory.  And at the time, there was a lot of interest among all those
who had survived the Srebrenica genocide.  These people wanted to be
heard, those people who had survived the genocide, and at the time I can
see that the statement was provided properly.  It was a long time ago.
At that time, I was living under a lot of burden of hate because of the
things that had happened to me.  In subsequent months and years, I had to
struggle to free myself of this hatred.  And I see now that this
statement that I gave was a proper statement, given properly.
Q.   Thank you.  I have finished on the statement, and I thank you for
your answers and the question -- I do not have -- well, I have some more
questions now.
Sir, since you have been preparing to testify here for a few
days, as the Prosecutor said a little bit earlier, you probably read all
the statements that you provided to this Tribunal so that we can talk
about them.  I'm going to remind you of those parts which you -- of the
parts of those statements that relate to my questions in case you do not
remember those bits.
Can we proceed on that basis?
A.   Yes.
Q.   When you testified in the Krstic case, Mr. McCloskey said that
this was because -- well, that you had asked for protective measures, and
Mr. McCloskey said that this was because your family was asking this --
for you to do that.
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter did not catch the page
reference from the transcript.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Elderkin.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, I am concerned that if we're going
to get into the subject of protective measures and any reasons behind
them, this should be in private session.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  We'll go into private session.
[Private session]
[Open session]
THE REGISTRAR:  Your Honours, we're back in open session.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Please carry on, Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   You say here:
"Throughout the time, the Chetniks were attacking Srebrenica from
all sides.  Day after day, Srebrenica was exposed to a barrage of
shelling.  The number of dead could not be counted."
My question is this:  Now, where were all these dead buried?
There must be a lot of graves and mass graves, as you said here that the
number of dead could not be counted.  Could you please tell us three such
burial sites?
A.   Mr. Tolimir, I understand this as provocation, and I have to ask
you to refrain from provoking me when you ask about the dead and the
number of dead.
If you go to Srebrenica and visit all the burial sites, other
than the Memorial Centre, and just count the number of people who were
killed, most of them were killed at the Memorial Centre, or once they are
identified or found, they will be, but the number of burial sites is huge
and they're all over-filled.  And I would suggest that if you go to
Srebrenica, or if your -- someone can go for you, I suggest that you go
and see when these people -- or just read the dates on these graves and
burial sites.
Q.   Thank you.  I did not mean to provoke you in any way.  My
question --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Elderkin.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, excuse me.
When we're having quotations from statements or other documents
and they refer to a time-frame, but no year is even given, it would be
very helpful, I believe, for the record and for everyone in the
courtroom's understanding of the period we're talking about, to have that
reference made.  I couldn't see it, myself, on the page that was shown on
the screen.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Tolimir, did you understand the advice of
Mr. Elderkin?  Can you indicate from which document this was taken and
the date.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Well, the witness talks about
events of 1992 through 1995 in this statement.
My question was not intended as provocation, but only --
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just tell us -- we only see one page of a
document.  Which document is it?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] This is this witness's statement.
Could we just see the cover page, and then you will see all the
information there and the date.  Mr. President, as you can see, this
statement is dated 22nd of August, 1995.  Thank you.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I just have to clarify something.
This is the same statement that we discussed earlier today.  The
statement was provided at the same time, and we just need to say that the
question related to the period 1992 through 1995, and the question was
whether so many people had actually been killed in the shellings --
Serb shellings in Srebrenica.
It is true that there were many, many people who were killed in
the shelling, and it is true that there were many burial sites in
Srebrenica and around it.  I don't know the exact number.  But if
Mr. Tolimir does not believe this, perhaps he can send his
representative, who can then provide him with a precise report.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   The question I asked was to establish whether the number of the
people who were killed were also listed at the Memorial Centre in
Potocari.  Thank you.
A.   Well, that would never have been done, and the families would
never allow to -- the grave-sites of their loved ones to be disturbed.
It is well known that the memorial site actually has the bodies of the
people who were exhumed from mass sites, mass execution sites, and that
work is still ongoing and will be for a while yet.  The figure that is
mentioned here is a figure of around 8.000 that even the Serb government
recognised, plus an additional number of victims who were killed during
the war.
Q.   Thank you.  But let me just tell you that this was not something
that was recognised by the government, but rather by individuals and the
international community before this document was actually ever adopted by
the assembly and the government.
A.   Well, sir, I will just add that this was --
THE INTERPRETER:  Could the witness please repeat the last
answer.
THE WITNESS: [No interpretation]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Sorry, Mr. Tolimir, I have to interrupt you.  The
interpreters wanted to have the last sentence repeated of the answer.
You should avoid overlapping.
Sir, could you repeat the last portion of your answer.
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter cannot hear.  There is
overlapping speakers.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I don't know exactly the number
that was established by the government, but I know with certainty that
the number is between 7.000 and 8.000.  This number was established by
the government, and this is the number that was recognised by the
government, and this is the number of people who were killed during the
fall of Srebrenica.
And Mr. Tolimir had another question here that related to the
period throughout the war between 1992 and 1995 until the fall of
Srebrenica.  This is an additional number of victims.  These people have
already been buried, but in different sites.  And I've asked Mr. Tolimir
to send a representative of his own if he wants to have the exact figure,
because then he can get a report from that person.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Mr. President, may I resume, if you're satisfied with this
answer.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think, Mr. Tolimir, we must have the first
break now, on technical reasons, and we'll resume at five minutes past
11.00.
.35 a.m.
.08 a.m.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Tolimir, please carry on with your questions,
but please bear in mind to avoid overlapping with the answers of the
witness.
Go ahead.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Could we still have the same statement on the monitors, 1D0008,
please, ERN number 0044-1162 in the B/C/S, and in English that's
007-1632, third paragraph.
Q.   Can you see the statement, Witness, sir?
A.   Yes.  That's the statement that we've already discussed in the
first -- during the first session.
Q.   Yes.  Now, if you take a look at the fifth paragraph, you can see
that you say there the best-known place where people went -- my legal
counsellor says that we don't have the right page yet.  The statement
number is 1D0008, and the page number in the B/C/S, that's page 4,
ERN 0044-1162.  And in the English version, that's also on page 4,
ERN 007-1632.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Excuse me, Your Honours.  I apologise to
General Tolimir for interrupting.  It's simply to be sure that this isn't
being broadcast outside of the courtroom.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  The Registry is of that, that is not broadcast.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  I
believe that the document should remain confidential, whereas everything
else can be in public session.  Thank you.
Q.   You say in your statement, Witness, in paragraph 5, the
following:
"The best-known place to which people went to gather food was
Kravica, about 18 kilometres away from Srebrenica.  This was the greatest
blow."
My question:  Why do you say that this was the greatest blow to
the Serbs, and do you know when it was that the Muslims attacked Kravica?
Thank you.
A.   When you say here that the Srebrenica people went in search for
food, I have to first of all say why that was so.
Srebrenica was in full blockade, and you know that if someone is
in full blockade, people in there have to have food, water, medical
supplies, and so on.  Srebrenica never had that, so spontaneously or in
an organised manner, the people of Srebrenica went in search of food.
And one of those places was Kravica where they went, and I have already
mentioned that Kravica was important because it had a lot of food stocks.
Q.   Thank you.  Could the witness please just answer my question,
rather than explain the entire situation.  Could the witness just tell me
why he said this was the greatest blow to the Serbs.
A.   Well, I've already said that.  The reason was that Kravica had
large stocks of food, and the Srebrenica people just helped themselves to
the food.
Q.   Now, tell me, do you know when it was that Srebrenica was
attacked -- when the Srebrenica people attacked Kravica?
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter's not sure of the question that
the accused asked.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Tolimir, the interpreters don't catch your
question because you are not waiting for the answer and the translation
of the answer.  Look on the screen, and then you can see when the
transcript stops, and then the translation has finished.
Carry on, please.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  I just
had to change this microphone and my headset because the microphone was
switched on all the time.
Q.   Now, my question for the witness was this:  Whether he, himself,
had taken part in the attack on Kravica.
A.   No.  I've already said that I was wounded, and Kravica was rather
far away, and I couldn't really take part in this.
Q.   Thank you.  And can you now please tell me something about the
crimes committed in Kravica?  Have you heard of them?
A.   I can't tell you anything about that.  There were various
rumours, but I don't want to repeat them here.  I'm not really the person
who can give you any accurate or precise information regarding that.
Q.   Thank you.  Did you, yourself, ever go to Kravica to get some
food there, you or any member of your family?
A.   No.
Q.   Did the people from Srebrenica go to Kravica to gather food after
?  Thank you.
A.   I couldn't really tell you that.  I don't know.
Q.   Before you were wounded, did you take part in attacks on Serb
villages in the period between 1992 and 1995?
A.   No.  I was wounded on the 14th of May in 1992.
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter did not hear the first part of
the question because the microphone was off.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation]
Q.   Can you tell us, then, where you were wounded and how?
A.   The place where I was wounded is known under the name of Kazani,
and I was wounded by -- in a shelling, a Serb shelling.  And on that
occasion, another woman and another man were wounded, so three people
were injured, two were wounded and one killed, in the shelling.
Q.   Now, tell us, please, until you were wounded, were you a
conscript and did you have -- were you deployed in any of the units?
Now, in that
area there were a number of Serb houses as well.  The Serbs kept the
entire area under full control so that I didn't feel safe living there.
And a friend of mine, whose name I don't want to mention here --
Q.   Thank you.  No need for that.  You've already answered my
question, in part, and I'm quite satisfied with your answer.  Thank you.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, excuse me.
Given the witness's protective measures and the amount of detail
that's coming out here about his history, I'd ask for a redaction of the
reference to the area he lived in.  I think he put in very specific
areas.  If that could be redacted, that would be helpful.  It's on lines
14 to 19 -- I beg your pardon, Your Honours, 18 to 20.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Which page?
MR. ELDERKIN:  That's of page 42.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  You're talking about today's transcript?  We
don't have --
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, on LiveNote on today's transcript,
which is -- at least on the version I'm looking at, it's page 42, 18 to
20, and there's a reference to the name of the location of his house.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Sorry, I have different page numbers on my
screen.  There's a mistake.
We managed to identify the right portion.  It will be redacted.
Please carry on, Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
I would like the Registry to go back to page 0044-1161, to go
back one page, and I would like to ask the witness to look at the second
paragraph of his statement, where he says:
"The inhabitants of Potocari resisted fiercely with the few
weapons they had, which mainly consisted of hunting rifles.  After that
clash, they were pushed back to their original positions.  I went to my
."
Q.   Do you agree stating this in your statement?
A.   The statement was given quite a while ago, in 1995.  So if you
calculate the number of years, that was a long time ago.  I do remember
the events, and probably it's correct, what is stated there.
Q.   Thank you.  Can you please tell me how it's possible to put up
fierce resistance with few weapons, mainly hunting ones.  Can you clarify
that, please.
A.   I will.  I mentioned in the beginning that this was a request by
the Serbian people that all the Muslim people surrender their weapons,
and you are aware that some of those had legal, licensed hunting weapons.
These are people who organised themselves to put up a resistance to the
Srebrenica
through the Potocari area.  And it's correct that the first contact was
in Potocari.
Q.   Thank you.  I am satisfied.  Can you please tell us --
THE INTERPRETER:  Microphone.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] I apologise.
Q.   Can you tell us, how do you know that the resistance was fierce?
A.   When you use the word "fierce resistance," it means decisive
resistance that was put up with such poor weapons, but with a lot of
morale and the desire to defend the town.
Q.   Thank you.  Did you personally participate in that, or are you
saying this on the basis of what others told you?
A.   I heard this personally from people who talked about this event.
Q.   Did you participate in the defence of Potocari?
A.   No, I did not.
Q.   Thank you.  Sir, do you know anything about the attacks on Serb
villages by Muslim armed formations in the Srebrenica area?
A.   When you're talking about attacks and you use that word,
"attacks," we can say that it was actually in search of food.  We
mentioned that before.  In the total blockade of Srebrenica, the people,
women, even children, were attempting to find food in the closest Serbian
villages nearby.
Q.   Thank you.  Please, can you tell me, then, how it was that the
people were looking for food at night, and then it happened that in those
villages where they went, women, children, and others were killed?
A.   You asked the question why at night.  Well, of course, it seems
to me it would be easier to -- easier to go and steal food from Serbian
villages rather at night than during the day.
Q.   Is it necessary to kill those from whom you took the food?
A.   I don't know if there were any killings.  I can't really say
anything about that.  I didn't take part in anything like that.  But I
know for a fact that a large number of people had to find food in this
particular way.  As for killings or people killed by those people who
were looking for food, it's something that I really cannot talk about.  I
don't know why.
Q.   Thank you very much.  I plan to demonstrate during these
proceedings massacres, castrations, and the killing of the inhabitants
who were attacked by civilians allegedly because of food.  Thank you.
Can we now look at the next set of questions?  Can we look at
page 1D0008 in the Serbian?  The number is 044-1163, lines 13 to 14.  In
the English, it's ERN 0076-3277, lines 12 and 13 of paragraph 5.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Again, Your Honours, I believe that this is a
document that should not be broadcast.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Tolimir, are you tendering the last document
as an exhibit?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  I am not
tendering the next document.  I'm just indicating the page from the
statement that I would like to put questions to the witness from.  Thank
you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Carry on.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
The witness says:
"The de-militarisation was carried out in May 1993.  The army of
Srebrenica handed over all the confiscated weapons from the Chetniks who
had occupied our town and the environs.  The UN forces (the blue helmets)
guaranteed our security, as did Morillon, himself."
Q.   Sir, have you find that text?
A.   Yes, I have.
Q.   First of all, did you hand over the weapons that you had?
A.   I think that this was answered.  I did not have any weapons.  I
was wounded.
Q.   Thank you, thank you.  Can you please tell me, you state here
"weapons that had been confiscated from the Chetniks."
A.   I also noted that I gave this statement in 1995 and that I mostly
talked about while I was affected by hatred, and I tried to get rid of
this hatred later.  So instead of the term "Serbian Army," I'm using the
term "Chetniks" here.  What else is disputable here?  People in
Srebrenica, the people who participated in the defence of Srebrenica,
captured weapons from the Serbian Army too.  You are a general of an
army, and you know very well how one can capture weapons from the
opposing side.  I said at the beginning that some people had legal
hunting weapons.
Q.   Thank you.  It's clear to me.  What I want to know is whether
there were weapons there that were confiscated in sabotage actions
carried out on settlements that were attacked at night.
A.   Well, I don't know.  That would be a broader story.
Q.   Thank you.  Were you an eye-witness of this demilitarisation, or
did you hear that from others?
A.   The collection centres for the demilitarisation were set up and
cordoned off by three rows of barbed wire at a place where the football
field was nearby.  All the people who passed by that place could see all
the confiscated weapons, and later -- sometime later these weapons were
destroyed.
Q.   Earlier, you said "all the seized weapons," but you were supposed
to return the weapons, according to the agreement.  Is this a mistake in
the translation?
A.   Yes, it was seized.  The Canadian Battalion arrived in Srebrenica
first, and their role was to confiscate the weapons, and that all those
who had weapons hand it over to the Canadian Battalion.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.  Can we now please look
at the statement by Ramiz Becirovic, who is a military commander, who
says the following:  This is document --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] I think this really has nothing to
do with me.  If you wish to, you can do that, but it would be pointless.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] 1D00012.  The ERN in Serbian is
0185-4521.  That would be paragraph 4.  In the English, it would be
page 5, paragraph 2.
Can we see it on the screen, please.
Thank you.  I have been informed that you see it on the screen
now.
Q.   Please, can you look at the following paragraph:
"After we got these two agreements on the demilitarisation of
Srebrenica, we had to disarm completely.  We barely managed to secure
some older weapons in disrepair to had over to UNPROFOR, while the troops
hid the rest at their homes."
Thank you.
A.   I said earlier that I don't see that any -- this document has
anything to do with my statement or my testimony.  I would much prefer if
you dealt and asked me here about what I'm testifying here, and that is
the massacre.  And I would prefer if you directly asked me about matters
that I'm testifying to here and not about some self-proclaimed commanders
or people that I don't even know.  I think that there is no need for me
to comment on these lists, reports, or anything similar.  That has
nothing to do with my testimony here today.
Q.   I put the question on the basis of your statement.  You said that
there were no weapons, whereas your -- it then says that the fighters hid
their weapons at home.  Did you receive special instructions to say that
Srebrenica was demilitarised, but, in fact, it was not demilitarised, as
we can see from the statement of the commander?
A.   Well, you insist on an answer again, but I have nothing to do
with that.  If I mention the word "demilitarised zone," that was used,
but that has nothing to do with my appearance today before this
Trial Chamber.  And perhaps if you get some other witnesses or
collaborators, you can put these questions to them.
Q.   Thank you.  You refer to disarmament, and you mention Morillon,
and this was the period of demilitarisation.  Thank you.
A.   Well, this was just referred to in context, but I'm not really in
a position to put an interpretation on it.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. President, I would like to
tender this document, please, because it states quite the opposite of
what the witness says in his statement, and it relates to the
particular -- the same particular circumstances.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  You should deal with areas of the statement and
the testimony of this witness.  And think about your questions, if they
should be put to the relevant and the expert witnesses, if you want to
deal with these topics.  Perhaps some of your questions have nothing to
do with this witness.  Bear that in mind, please.
Which document you are tendering; the previous one, the statement
of this witness?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. President, I was specifically
saying this:  The witness referred to demilitarisation being carried out
in May 1993 in his statement.  That was in his statement.  The commander
actually said how this demilitarisation was carried out.  So I would like
to tender this document, this statement by Commander Ramiz Becirovic, who
talks about the manner in which this demilitarisation was carried out.
This is document --
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter did not catch the number of the
document.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Elderkin.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, the document that General Tolimir is
seeking to tender is a statement by a man who's dead.  The normal
procedure for putting in such a statement is Rule 92 quater.  That said,
although he's only referred to a brief part of one paragraph of the
document in this instance, we don't object to its admission without going
through the formalities of 92 quater.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  The document will be received.
THE REGISTRAR:  As Exhibit D1, Your Honours.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   Witness, sir, can you answer this:  What were you doing in July
1995?
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] First of all, I have to thank Their
Honours for noticing that Mr. Tolimir is putting a lot of questions that
have nothing to do with me.  Of course, I will do my best to respond to
each question, but I will also ask Mr. Tolimir to direct his questions to
the topics due to which I am here and to ask me directly about things
that I could be responsible for and answer directly.
Now, what was I doing in July 1995?  I came to the free territory
at the beginning of the war, and on the way to the free territory I was
wounded.  So I spent some time in treatment, I had two surgeries in the
Hospital.  And all of this, of course, is documented with the dates
and everything, if this should be required as proof.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation]
Q.   Thank you.  Based on this wounding, did you receive any benefits
as a fighter, or did you receive the status of a fighter in the B and H
Army?
A.   As for benefits, at that time I didn't have any benefits.  There
DaytonAccords, when that was concluded
later, created the conditions for providing benefits to certain
individuals.  Up until then, I didn't have any benefits.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  So you said "at that time," meaning that at some
time you did have benefits and you were a member of the B and H Army.
Could you please tell us which period of time that was?  Thank you.
A.   I can tell you here that I was treated in the area where I
happened to be, together with people who didn't have weapons, many of
them -- people had to be alert, on guard against incursions by Serbian
forces into villages.  Villages would be burned very quickly, people
would get killed very quickly.  There were local guard shifts.  So I'm
talking about the time from the 17th of April until the time I was
wounded on the 15th of May.  This is a month, only one month, were these
activities of mine.  There were no weapons.  People should not be
sleeping in the village.  They would be on guard against incursions by
the Serbian Army.
It's also well known that people did not put up resistance.  They
would just gather up their women and children and escape, making this
territory of -- the free territory narrower and narrower.  But they did
have to be on guard duty.
Q.   Thank you, thank you.  I think we can move on.  I believe the
interpreter has finished the interpretation.
You stated here, Witness, that you boarded a bus with your wife
and daughter at the Potocari camp, and that then you went into hiding.
Why were you in hiding?
A.   Well, I believe it is well known the Serb soldiers, and I
mentioned this at the very beginning of my testimony, as soon as men
appeared and were observed, the men were separated from the women, and it
was done in front of that house in the drawing that I had made.  They
were collecting people there, and then later on a truck came which
then -- where then the people were asked to get on the truck.  And I was
in hiding because I was trying to avoid being in that group that was
going on that truck, and I hid in the bus.  And because there were a lot
of women and children, I was able to hide by lying down on the bus floor.
And there were so many people on the bus, there were three times as many
people that the bus could actually carry, so it was possible to go into
hiding.  And, of course, I did want to remain hidden.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, tell me, please, at the time were you an
able-bodied individual?  In other words, fit for military service,
younger than 60 and over 16?  Thank you.
A.   Well, if I would have -- I could have been fit for military
service, but at the time I didn't really belong in that category because
I was wounded.  And as you know, the Geneva Conventions would exclude
wounded men from being counted in that category.  But I could also show
it and prove that, because my wound was inflamed because I wasn't given
any antibiotics, and there were even small maggots around the wound
coming out, it was in such a bad state.
Q.   Thank you.  But did you have any document -- any papers?  I do
understand that you are describing your wound here some three years after
the wounding, but did you have any documents showing that you were
wounded?  Because you were mentioning the Geneva Conventions here.
A.   Well, I wasn't really referring to what my face looked like.  I
was talking about my leg and my right knee.  By just taking a look at it,
you could see that my knee was badly wounded.  It was infected.  I was
wounded by shrapnel, and that wound was open and there were maggots
coming out of it.  And as for documents, I did have a document.  As you
may know, the Medicins Sans Frontieres were in Srebrenica at the time
when Srebrenica became a demilitarised zone.  And they tried to operate
on my knee, but they were unable to remove the piece of shrapnel because
it was deeply seated in the knee socket.  And to this day, I still have
that fragment -- that shrapnel fragment in my knee, and I'm prone to
frequent infections, when I have to take antibiotics, and I frequently
have to consult physicians.  And if you don't believe this, we can X-ray
my knee again and see that that shrapnel fragment is still there.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  My only purpose here is to ask questions.  I'm
not a doctor, and I cannot really examine you.
Now, could we please see statement D00010, ERN number 0079-8687.
That's in B/C/S, the third paragraph.  In English, that's ERN number
003D-6010, paragraph 2.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honour, I'm not sure if I need to do this
every single time, but again it is something that should not be
broadcast.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  I think everybody's aware of that.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   My question for the witness is this:
"A man by the name of Nasir called up 15 men and asked them to
follow him.  Nasir had a camouflage uniform and a Kalashnikov.  They
allowed me to follow him."
Do you recall this portion of your statement?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, my question will be this:  Who was Nasir, and
was this a military commander?
A.   Well, let me tell you this, and it's good that I should clarify
this for the benefit of the Trial Chamber:  This is at a time when I was
already able to -- when I had already managed to escape from the Serb
guards, and I had already been, for seven days, roaming the woods,
looking for the free territory.  I met these people in the woods, and it
is true that this man's name was Nasir and that he wore the uniform as
described here.  I didn't know much about him.  The truth is that for a
while I joined them, and then the group dispersed.  This gentleman never
appeared again living.
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  Now, you're talking about a group again, and
it is not clear to me.  Now, please clarify something.  The group of
people that you joined, was that the group that headed from Susnjari to
Tuzla-- or for
A.   Well, I can't tell you with certainty.  I met this group of men
in the woods.  Whether that was the same group as the one that you have
just mentioned, I don't know.  I didn't know what their plan was or how
they happened to be there.  I just asked if I could join them for a
while.  They agreed.  But then that group split up, and with a smaller
number of members of that group, I managed to reach the free territory,
but even -- but not all of us actually got there.  Four of the men from
that smaller group were killed.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, you say in the same statement "our group
dispersed."  Could you please describe for the Trial Chamber why it is
that this group broke up or dispersed, and what happened with the other
civilians who actually formed these two groups in this area?
A.   Well, people were panicking.  They were looking for the best
route to reach the free territory.  Some of those people were wounded,
they had no food, and they were in the woods.  And because some members
of the group thought that their idea of what the better route to reach
the free territory was, that is why they actually split with -- split
ways with us, but I joined the smaller group.  My opinion was that their
proposal was better, whereas the other group went some other way.
Q.   Thank you.  In the next paragraph in the document on the same
page, you said:
"One of the members of my group, Hazim Buljubasic, formed a
smaller group and decided that we should go in the direction --"
THE INTERPRETER:  The interpreter did not hear the name of the
direction.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Yes, that's the smaller group that
I was referring to.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.
Q.   Could you please tell us, how big was the group with which you
walked along the road in the direction of Kladanj, and how many men were
there?
A.   Well, at first there were six people in the group, but then we
were joined by two other people.  And on our way along the route that we
considered would take us to the free territory, we were joined by two
other people, so that there were eight people in the group at the end.
And close to the line where we were supposed to cross a minefield, one of
the members of the group actually stepped on a mine, on a land-mine, and
four people of the group were killed.  There was a Serb ambush.  They
opened fire with various weapons, hand-held launchers, and I don't know
what other weapons.  But, in any case, two people -- two
seriously-wounded people and I reached the free territory.  One of them
was badly wounded.  His arm and elbow were completely smashed.  And the
other person was also wounded and was saved a little later.  So we all
reached the free territory like that.  I was wounded as well, and four
people were killed, as I've already mentioned.
It's important to say here for the Trial Chamber that this route
actually meant a lot of people were killed on the way because of this
minefield, as they crossed the minefield, and there were also ambushes on
the hills around it.  And the route actually led along a small river, so
that it was very easy for the Serb soldiers to actually set ambushes
around.
Q.   Could you please tell us if the ambush and the minefields were
set up there for the purpose of actually catching you, or was it for the
needs and preparations of the combat positions of that unit that was
trying to build a blockade there?
A.   Well, you see, what I -- from what I saw and from what I knew
from the time when I served in the Yugoslav Army, and I knew about the
mines, you could even see the trip wires because they were visible, but
we tried to avoid all those land-mines.  But your question was whether
they were actually placed there in order to prevent anyone from passing
through, or maybe getting onto that territory, I don't know.  But it is
true that they were placed there, and I also know that much later, after
the war operations ceased, we still collected the remaining body parts of
the people who had remained -- which had remained there, those that
hadn't been washed away by the river.
Q.   Thank you.  But this was the area where you were actually
crossing the separation line where -- which separated two enemy sides,
and it was logical that there should be a minefield there in order to
protect the area that one side was protecting from the other?  It wasn't
there for the purpose of preventing you from crossing through?
A.   Well, I wouldn't agree with you because the Serb soldiers also
opened fire from ambush, and even if some of these people might have
survived after stepping on a mine, they were killed by additional fire
opened by these men in ambush.  There was a barrage of fire with all
kinds of weapons.  And we only needed to cross another 200 metres to
reach the free territory.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, tell me, please, the people who were deployed
there on the firing positions, did they know who you were and what your
intentions were?  Thank you.
A.   Well, of course they did.  We were all dressed in civilian
clothes, and it wasn't difficult to see that -- these people in rags, who
were weak and tired and exhausted, it was easily observable that they
weren't soldiers.
Q.   Thank you.  So if you say that these mines weren't meant for you,
how, then, could it be that you managed to escape, even in spite of all
those people in ambush who just allowed you to flee like that?
A.   Well, that's a very good question, how I happened to pull out.
The fact is -- the fortunate fact was that there were some rocks there,
and we hid ourselves behind the rocks.  And I think you can find that in
the statement, where I describe it in detail.  We used these large
boulders.  They were large, almost like a car, like a vehicle.  And we
tried to hide behind these boulders.  But every time we would run from
one to the other, they would open fire, there would be bursts of fire or
shells fired at us.  But we were lucky and managed to actually cover this
distance of 100 metres or so to the free territory, so that we managed to
actually reach the free territory, and also thanks to the fact that the
river -- there was a river bend there where it was flowing -- bending to
the left, so that we were able to be protected by that.  But they had a
very good view of us, and they would shoot at us as soon as we would be
in the open.  But some hundred metres from there, the river -- as I said,
there was a river bend, and that's where we managed to hide and cross
over to the free territory.
Q.   Thank you.  But you haven't really answered my question.  If you
so managed to escape and flee, was this a unit that was stationed there,
that was deployed there, or was it just a unit that happened to be in
that position when you arrived?
A.   Well, when I mentioned the mines and the mine that was activated
by one of the members of our group who stepped on it, these soldiers
could have heard this mine being activated and they opened fire as soon
as the mine exploded.  Now, how they happened to be there, whether they
were deployed there, whether they had some special equipment or so, I
really don't know any of those details.
Q.   Thank you.  Is it normal procedure to provide -- to secure lines
of separation by stationary units?  Do you know that, as a soldier?
A.   Well, believe me, I don't know anything about the army's
strategy.  I just -- when I explained the types of mines, I knew that
part because I served in the army.  But as for strategy, I really don't
know anything about that.
Q.   Well, I thought you did, because you mentioned that you could
tell where the mines were and that you were able to actually clear those
mines as you were walking across the field, that you even managed to run
across that field.  But, in any case, I believe that you did give me an
answer.
A.   Well, yes, I did.
Q.   Thank you.  Could we now please see document 1D0010, a statement
provided to the OTP, ERN number in B/C/S 007-968 [as interpreted], and in
English that's ERN 0039-6010, the fifth paragraph.
Thank you.  I see that we have it on the monitor.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Please indicate which kind of document it is.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.  This is a statement
that the witness gave to the Prosecution.  Thank you.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] What would you -- what are you
asking me here?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.  Well, I'm just waiting
for His Honour, the Presiding Judge, to let us know whether we can
proceed.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q.   You say in your statement, in this fifth paragraph, that a
.  My
question is:  Did you give any statement to the Red Cross representatives
about the events that you were a part of, and did the Red Cross draw your
attention to the fact that you can freely speak with them and tell them
what happened?  Thank you.
A.   I didn't give them a statement.  It's true that the events that
I've described earlier, the walking through or passage through the
minefield and the appearance on the asphalt road from Kladanj to
Vlasenica, but now this was on free territory.  We had already reached
the free territory, the territory under the control of the Army of the
.  We didn't even know that it was the
free territory, but we were met by these two vehicles, and they told us,
in the vehicle, that we already had reached this territory, and they
warned us -- since traces of blood and wounding were clear, they warned
us -- they helped us to transport us not far from there to the collection
centre for people who had come to that area from the Podrinje region.
First aid was provided there, our wounds were dressed.  We were taken
care of, given food.  That was the first contact that we had on the free
.
Q.   Thank you.
You said before that you were never a member of the B and H Army;
is that correct?
A.   I said that, except in the case that you wish to count in the
time from the 17th of April until the date that I was wounded.
I have to say something.  After my surgeries, work was already
being done on the Dayton Accords.  There were no combat actions at the
time.  I joined as a staff member, not somebody carrying a gun.  Since I
am a technician, engineering technician, I joined the Transport and
Traffic Service.  Due to my professional qualifications, I was employed
at the brigade as a professional staff member, not a soldier.  I note
that this was because at the time it was necessary to find a job to be
able to make a living, so it was important for me to make a living, to
get a job, to be able to support my family.
Q.   Thank you.
A.   But I have to add this as well:  Shortly afterwards, I had to go
for another surgery because of complications on my right knee.
Q.   Thank you for this information.  In your statement provided to
this Tribunal in the Krstic case, you state on several occasions that you
, and that you were a
member of a specific brigade?
A.   Yes, this is what I said.  This was Brigade 286, and it was
billeted -- I mean, I can give you this answer if you wish.  This brigade
was the brigade where I was working in the office, in the Transport and
Traffic Service, because of my qualifications as an engineering
technician.
Q.   In your statement, did you refer to the fact that you were
wounded?
A.   Yes, yes.
Q.   You also said that you had received some sort of assistance from
the B and H Army, a certain sum of money and some assistance.  This is
something you said in the Popovic case.  I wanted to ask you:  Did you
receive any assistance in Srebrenica?
A.   Yes.  It's a good question, it's a good question, I must say,
it's a proper question that you are putting.  I'm glad about that.  But
let me answer the one about the brigade first.
The brigade did make some sort of compensation; not monetary one,
but we received flour, oil.  All members of the brigade received that
kind of compensation.  You cannot call that a salary or anything else.
Members of that brigade received those goods to be able to survive, and
it applied to people who were carrying weapons and people who were
working in the office.
Let's go to the question on Srebrenica.  Until Srebrenica was
demilitarised, what happened there was that people were trying to get
some food from Serbian villages.  When Srebrenica was demilitarised,
there was an attempt made to deliver food to Srebrenica in convoys.
Now I'm going to talk about details that I'm very familiar with.
My house happened to be at the entrance --
Q.   Well, you've already answered the questions.  If you do have a
need to say that, you can.  I will let you say that.
A.   Well, perhaps you do have information about this, but if you
would like me to explain, I can.  If you don't want to, I don't have to,
but I would gladly explain some things that I am very familiar with.  If
the Trial Chamber would like to hear that, I will give that explanation.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It's your examination, Mr. Tolimir.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.  We will
move on.
Q.   You told us here, during your testimony now, that you were in
Potocari with your wife and daughter.  Were there any other B and H Army
members with you in Potocari at the time?  Thank you.
A.   Well, please believe me that it is quite correct that I didn't
know all of those people.  It wasn't possible.  I couldn't know if they
were members of the army or not.  What I can say with a great degree of
certainty is that I did see a large number of men, elderly men, younger
men, but there were also women, children.  I really cannot answer your
question about who was a member of the B and H Army or not.  I didn't
know all of those people.
Q.   Thank you.  You answered my question.  I would just like you to
keep in mind that your commands treated you as members of the B and H
Army in Potocari.
If possible, I would like to ask the Registry to show an interim
report sent to the B and H Army General Staff.  It was signed by
Brigadier General Talijan.  It's dated on the 12th of July, 1995, and it
states -- this is number 1D00013.
A.   Please, may I say, again we're going to a question that has
nothing to do with me.
Q.   Well, just one moment.  Perhaps it has nothing to do with you,
but it does have something to do with me.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Please wait until we have it on the screen.
[Trial Chamber and registrar confer]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  General, we are told that there is no English
translation.  If you want to deal with this document, you should read out
the portion of that or ask the witness if it is related to this witness.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you.  The document pertains
to all the people who were in Potocari, including the witness.  I am
going to quote.  The document has been provided or given for translation,
and it is in the system.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  But what is it, what we are looking at?
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] This is a report by his command
about --
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Excuse me, please.  I don't have a
command.  If the Trial Chamber will permit me, he said that he would like
to ask about things that have to do with my command.  Actually, I don't
have a command.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Just a moment.
Mr. Elderkin.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, if I may, there is an OTP
translation.  I have only one hard copy of it, but it is the document on
the screen.  I don't know if there's a way to put that before you, but
that's all I have.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  It would not help us, and all parties and other
people in the courtroom.
Please carry on, but bear in mind this is this witness.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Mr. President, I'm going to
quote -- quote exactly.  This is the combat zone in Potocari:
"Tonight, at around 2300 hours, we had 15.000 to 20.000 refugees
who were sitting in the combat zone together with 300 fighters of the
B and H Army at the Potocari camp."
The command is speaking here about the camp in Potocari, about
civilian population and fighters.  Thank you.
Q.   Have you understood me?
A.   I would just like to put a question to you.
Q.   Well, I haven't put a question to you yet.
Thank you.  My question is:  Were you considered by Hajrulahovic
as one of those 300 fighters in Potocari?
A.   No, not at all.  I was a wounded person in Potocari.  According
to all the rules, the Geneva Conventions and all the rest, I could not
have been considered that.  I described what sort of a state I was in
once I was wounded.  This meant that pursuant to any rules or in any
sense could I not have been considered a member of any army.
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Your Honours, thank you very much.
I would like to complete my cross-examination of this witness.
I would like to tender this document on Hajrulahovic which I plan
to use for other cross-examinations with other witnesses.  This is
document 1D00013, and I ask that it be tendered:  Thank you very much.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Mr. Elderkin.
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, the Prosecution has no objection to
that, and we can provide our English translation if it's going to help
get that into the system at some point.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Since we don't have a translation now in e-court,
it will be marked for identification.
THE REGISTRAR:  Yes, Your Honour.  That will be Exhibit D2,
marked for identification.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  If I'm not mistaken, that completes your --
THE ACCUSED: [Interpretation] Thank you, Mr. President.
I would like to thank to all those present for those -- for their
patience.  It was a long examination.  I would like to thank the witness
for his patient replies and, in my view, quite proper answers, because I
was trying to get answers to questions that I was interested in, and this
last thing I wish to have admitted, because the witness was an
eye-witness to the events that we are looking at.  Thank you.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much.
Mr. Elderkin, do you have any re-examination?
MR. ELDERKIN:  Your Honours, no, I don't.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Questions from the Chamber.
Questioned by the Court:
JUDGE MINDUA: [Interpretation] Witness, could you specify one
point.  When we look at the transcript, page 17, line 7 to 11, we noticed
that we had spoken of document 6196, 6196, of the 65 ter list.  You made
a comment about a small map showing the route followed by the bus you
took, starting at Potocari, through Bratunac, Konjevic Polje, Milici,
Vlasenica, and arriving at Kladanj.  The question I wish to ask is -- I
would like to know whether this bus, this transport, was organised by the
Serbian Army to evacuate you and bring you in the territory which you
call the free territory or whether it was a transport organised by the
Muslims, themselves, in order to go away.
A.   Thank you, Your Honour, for this question.  Of course, it's an
excellent question.
People in Srebrenica were not permitted to do anything of their
own will, and that applied to the organising of transport.  This
transport was exclusively organised by the Army of Republika Srpska.
Nobody asked those people whether they wanted to go here or there.
Simply, people were directed in the direction that these people wanted
them to go in.  They were the ones who set up the transport.  Trucks were
also used for this transport.  In my particular case, I was transported
by bus, but a large number of men, women, and children were transported
by trucks, large trailer-trucks.  People were treated inhumanely, loaded
onto those trucks, pushed into groups.  Children suffered a lot of trauma
because of that.  I know lots of children who are grown up now,
acquaintances, cousins, who are still suffering from the consequences of
being transported in that particular way.
And I would like to thank you for that question.
JUDGE MINDUA: [Interpretation] Witness, therefore, if I've
understood you correctly, the goal of this transportation was to take
this population and bring it in the territory which you called free
territory?
A.   Yes.  The objective was to completely purge Srebrenica of all the
population that had lived there up to then in this way, and through
elimination and killing.  There were many examples of men being
eliminated by killings, executions, deaths of different ways, and women
and children were transported in this way.  So the idea was to completely
eliminate the people of Srebrenica from that territory.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Sir, you told us something about your family,
including your child of five or six years.  What happened to them in that
relevant period?
A.   Thank you for the question.
My daughter at the time was less than five years old.  She was
separated from me.  I had to give her to my wife.  My greatest desire at
that moment was to know for sure that she was actually alive.  Later, it
did turn out to be true.  I found out she was alive when I reached the
free territory.  I met my daughter again 17 days later.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you very much, sir.
This concludes the questioning by the parties and the Chamber.
We all want to thank you for your assistance you gave us and that you
The Hagueas a witness.  Thank you very much, again.
And I think that could be an appropriate time for the second
break.  The Court Officer will help you and assist you, but please be
seated.  We rise now, and when we have left, the necessary arrangements
for your safety will be made.  Thank you very much.
We adjourn and resume 10 minutes to 1.00.  Thank you very much
again.
THE WITNESS: [Interpretation] Thank you.
.21 p.m.
.56 p.m.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Before we continue, the Chamber would like to
make some comments.  The first is related to the witness summary of this
morning.  In fact, that was not a summary; it was a very lengthy and --
yeah, description of the whole evidence of that witness from a previous
trial.  And the Chamber would appreciate if, in future cases, the summary
would really be a summary.  This would be much more in accordance with
the Rules 92 ter of our Rules of Procedure and Evidence.  It is to save
time and to shorten the examination-in-chief.  Please bear that in mind.
And another remark.  We have received one exhibit during the
cross-examination.  That was a statement of a certain person who was not
here yet as a witness.  In future cases, I think the Chamber will only
mark them for identification, because this witness of today was not in
the position to say anything about the content of the statement, only
saying something about his personal experience and his personal
knowledge.  And in future cases, we only would mark these documents for
identification so that it can be used in the future of the trial and with
other witnesses, for instance.  Thank you.
Mr. McCloskey, we have learned that the next witness is not
available today, but you have some proposals how to proceed.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Yes, Mr. President, thank you.  And we understand
fully your ruling.
Yes, as I think you've been informed, the witness had a tough day
yesterday, was not feeling well, and is just finishing up his review of
his previous testimony for the 92 ter part of it.  But we have the
continuing video, and that will allow us to reduce Mr. Ruez' trial time
by three hours and hopefully finish him in those three days.  So I would
propose we continue to play the trial video which we left off.  We're
still at 11 July, and it's self-explanatory.  And there's about a
40-minute section, so it gets into the first meeting at the Hotel Fontana
and then ends, and, if we're lucky, we can get that done today.
And I've been assured that the witness tomorrow, his 92 ter
summary will be shorter, and he will have to finish tomorrow.  And we
can't imagine that we'd need -- or that the general would need any more
time.  In fact, we'll have more video to play if he finishes early, which
is what we would expect, that we might have, you know, the last session
to play more video.  So we're ready to go.
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Here's a question for you.
JUDGE NYAMBE:  Yes.  I just want some clarification.
The videos that you are giving us now will be videos relevant to
a witness you are going to call later?
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Yes, there will be witnesses that will speak to
various parts of the video.  In fact, we normally play this video with
Mr. Ruez, the investigating officer, and we stop it and he says, This is
so-and-so and that is so-and-so, and he's always open to the Court to
answer any questions that they might have during that time.  That's just
one example.
Other times, for example, you'll see the Hotel Fontana meetings
which are set out in the indictment.  We have one of the -- or, actually,
two of the witnesses that were actually at the Hotel Fontana meetings,
and they will be testifying, and we'll show them bits of the video to ask
them what was going on then, and what did they mean.  But in addition to
that, the specific witnesses that are in the video, or people that can
talk about who's in the video or what's going on, they're just a very
basic historical background of what was going on in those days that, by
itself, we think will be meaningful to you; not so much now, because it's
so new, but it's good to see it at first because then witnesses will
start to put all the pieces together.  So it's a combination of, Here's
the historical canvas, and, yes, there are going to be witnesses that
speak to various parts of the important stuff.
JUDGE NYAMBE:  Thank you.
[Trial Chamber confers]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Please continue, Mr. McCloskey.
MR. McCLOSKEY:  Just for the record, this is 1406.  There is a
transcript, 1407, and this is the one section we don't have subtitled.
It's the Muslims in the woods, it's very short, and it's not overly
significant.  But there is a transcript in both languages, but I think
it's best to just see the video at first and concentrate on that, please.
Thank you.
[Video-clip played]
JUDGE FLUEGGE:  Thank you.
At this point in time, we should interrupt.  We have to adjourn
and resume tomorrow morning at 9.00.  Thank you.
.47 p.m.,
to be reconvened on Friday, the 19th day of March,
.00  a.m.
