P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
The Greffier is now instructed to report the attendance of the
parties to the proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the parties to the proceedings today are all
present.  Witness KW-29 is also present, awaiting the call of the
Chamber.  This witness has no relationship with the parties to
the proceeding or the accused and she has already taken an oath.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to call witness Bou Thon.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Bou Thon?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Do you use other names other than Thon?
A. No, I don't.
Q. How old are you?
THE INTERPRETER:
The interpreter cannot hear her because she speaks rather fast
before the mic is on.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What is your occupation?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. Mrs. Bou Thon, could you please be informed that before you
respond to any questions, please wait until you see the red light
on the mic otherwise your message will not be well recorded and
translated.  Do you understand this?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. How old are you?
A. I'm 64 years old.
Q. What do you do for a living today?
A. I don't work actually.  My sibling feeds me.
Q. According to the report of the Greffiers of the Trial Chamber,
you have no relationship with any parties to the proceedings
today and that you have taken an oath already.
Is it correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. The Chamber would like to remind you of your rights and
obligations as the witness.  As a witness, you may elect not to
answer any questions that you are afraid that your testimony
could self-incriminate you, and you are to only tell the Court
the truth, nothing but the truth.
Can you tell the Court the events before 1975?  Where did you
live and what did you do?
A. I would like to tell the Court about the events before 1975.
I got married in Slaeng, Trapeang Veaeng, Kandal Stueng district,
Kandal.  At that time, I left my home to live in Phnom Penh and
until the date when the Khmer Rouge took control of Phnom Penh,
the friend of my father got a car and took us back to our home
town.
When we reached the intersection at the Lok Sang Hospital, we
were directed to go to another road to new Phnom Penh location
and past the gas station.  We lived at that location for about 10
days.
Then Angkar took us back to Phnom Penh and they introduced us to
the revolution.  The person who introduced us was Kuy Thuon, the
chief of the North Zone.  And a few months later my husband was
assigned to work at the Ministry of Energy and, after a while
until 1977 -- I don't remember the month -- my husband was taken.
I'm sorry, I have to go back a little bit.  Actually, we got a
child and I gave birth to the child at the Po Muoy Hospital, and
after the delivery of the child, my husband told me that his
biographies had been rigorously taken, and later on he
disappeared and I was discharged from the hospital and then we
went to Popeal Khae, which was my home town.
Three months later, I was told that my husband was transporting
gasoline and that I had to pack my luggage so that I too can be
reunited with my husband.  Then we were transported to Anlong
Kong.  At Anlong Kong, because I'd just delivered the baby, I was
only offered light work to push the water cart.  And then when I
left the Ministry of Energy in the late afternoon, I had problems
breastfeeding my kid because I did not have the milk to feed him,
and then our colleagues helped me provide the traditional herbs
and then I could have my milk again to breastfeed the child.
And I later on was asked to work at different locations and then
back to Anlong Kong.  It depends on the assignment, so I had to
obey the orders.  And after quite some time, on the day when the
Vietnamese took control of Phnom Penh, then I fled with other
people.
At Stueng Chrov, I had suffered a great deal because I was
beaten, I was mistreated because I could not really fulfil the
task as demanded and I had suffered a great deal.  It was a life
and death situation and, after all, it was I alone who survived.
My daughters and all died, and I am alone after all.
Q. According to the story you have told the Court, it is inferred
that you were the new people and your husband was the new people
also.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, we were the 17th of April people.
Q. Before 1975, what kind of occupation did your husband have?
A. He was a motorcycle motor driver.
Q. You said during the time of the evacuation when the whole
population of Phnom Penh was being evacuated, you were -- turned
your direction by the Khmer Rouge soldiers during the journey
from Phnom Penh to National Road number 4 and that your direction
was changed to Phnom Penh Thmei, to the direction of kilo number
6 at one of the gas stations.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. You indicated that your husband had close relation with Kuy
Thuon.  Is that correct?
A. No, he was not the relative of Kuy Thuon, but Kuy Thuon was
the one who introduced him to the revolution.  He was the person
who just introduced my husband because we were in Phnom Penh and,
at that time, we were advised to join the revolution, and the
person who helped this was the chief of the North Zone, who was
Kuy Thuon, and he was not our relative.
Q. So at that time it was Kuy Thuon.  Did you say Kuy Thuon or
Kuy Khoun?
A. I didn't remember who he was.  Probably he was Kuy Thuon alias
Khoun.  I don't know whether it was Kuy Thuon in particular
because I never knew him in 1975.
Q. The person named Kuy Khuon as you mentioned, what was his
role?
A. I was told that he was the chief of the North Zone.
Q. So according to the best of your recollection, was he the
chief of North Zone?
A. It's correct.
Q. Regarding the introduction of the 17th of April people into
the revolution after 1975, were you -- was your husband assigned
any particular task and where did he work?
A. My husband got a truck, a new truck from Air Cambodge to carry
the war booties, and there were some other drivers also.  And, at
that time, he was not really a driver because he got used to
driving a motorcycle but at that time since he went along with
other people, then he was able to also drive the truck.
Q. Was he despatched into a unit and at that time, so far as we
remember, normally the money was no longer in use and that people
would be put into a unique unit of the Khmer Rouge?
And you say that your husband worked in a unit in the supervision
of the Ministry of Energy.  And we only want to hear more
information in relation to your husband's work, and also how we
can establish the fact in relation to the event in which you said
you went to work in Anlong Kong and that you lost your husband.
So the Chamber is interested to hear the preliminary information
in relation to your husband's introduction to the revolution and
how he disappeared.  So please can you clarify for us in which
particular unit did he work when he was introduced into the
revolution?
A. At that time when we reached the gas station in Popeal Khae, I
worked as a cook and we worked at the Bureau Sosten, and then
after one month my husband was assigned to drive the fuel tanker.
Q. So he was a driver of a truck.  Is that correct?  So your
husband was assigned to drive a fuel tanker.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. From which location did he take the fuel by the truck he
drove, and to which location?
A. The fuel was transported from Kampong Som to Russei Keo and
sometimes from Phnom Penh to Batambang to Kampot and to Kampong
Cham.
Q. You said when you were pregnant and expecting a baby of course
and delivered the baby at the central hospital, and when you were
being discharged from the hospital only to learn that your
husband disappeared.  Do you remember when exactly your husband
disappeared?
A. No, I don't.
Q. At that time, what kind of task were you assigned and in which
unit you belong to?
A. When we were in the -- when our family were together, I worked
at the kitchen cooking meals for people.
Q. People.  Who were they?  Were they the drivers like your
husband, or who else?
A. I cooked meals for the staff at the Energy Ministry.
Q. Where did your family stay during that time -- a house you
resided in?
A. We stayed at the gas station, the Popeal Khae gas station.
Now it is the military gas station on National Road number 5.
Q. You said you had three children and that the last child was
delivered at the central hospital.  What happened to the other
two children of yours, and were they boys or girls, and were they
living with you?
A. I had four children all together.  At that time, three of our
children were segregated.  Only the last child was living with
me.
Q. Can you please tell the Court how many boys and girls did you
have and how old were they at that time?  And that your children
were segregated to different places, so where were they separated
to?
A. The eldest daughter was about nine years old when she was
segregated.  The other one was six years old.  They were not
separated to work but they were just taken away from us to a
mobile child unit and leaving only the last child with me.
Q. What about the other child?  You said you had four children.
Now you already told the Court the two children, one being nine
years old and the other one six years old; what about the other
one?  How old was he or she?
A. The last child was about two months old.  It was a son.
Q. How many children did you have altogether; four or three
including the last child?  You gave birth to him at the central
hospital?
A. I have four children; three daughters, one son.
Q. You already talked about two daughters, the eldest one and the
second eldest one so what about the other daughter; how old was
she?
A. She was about four years old, so after three years I delivered
two children.
Q. When your daughters were segregated and placed in another
child-mobile unit, did you ever meet them after that?
A. I met them on the 10th day of the month or maybe during the
Khmer New Year then I was allowed to meet them.
Q. Can you please now tell the Court about your life story?
After your husband was arrested -- or we can say after your
husband disappeared -- you were asked to pack up your luggage to
go along with them and that you reach Anlong Kong.  Where is
Anlong Kong exactly?  Now, I think you already know Prey Sar
Prison so can you please tell the Court to which direction is the
Anlong Kong as opposed to Kok Prey Sar or Prey Sar Prison?
A. Anlong Kong was to the south of the current Prey Sar prison.
Even now, it is still called Anlong Kong village.  It is a big
place where the prisoners were detained there.  It's a depository
location before the prisoners were dispensed to other locations
and prisoners were also detained at the Russei Sanh pagoda; all
male prisoners.  Also, at the Prakar village or K-13; that was
another location and Anlong Kong was also known as K-14.  They
had various codes for those locations.
Q. Anlong Kong; how far was it to the south of the current Prey
Sar prison?
A. From the current Prey Sar prison, it was pretty far.  Once you
reached the Russei Sanh pagoda, you turned to the south and it
would need another 4 to 5 kilometres before you reached that
location.
Q. In total, was it about 10 kilometres from the current Prey Sar
prison?
A. I think it was less than 10 kilometres.
Q. How many kilometres then?
A. It was about 7 kilometres.
Q. Did you know the chief of the K-14 unit?  What was the name of
the K-14 unit?
A. I cannot recall the name of the chief of the K-14 unit now.
Q. At that time, did you know who was the top person at that
location; that is, the K-14 unit?
A. I cannot recall it.  I totally forget; however, there was a
big main office at that location and a lot of people were there.
It was a depository or transferring location where people were
deposited there first before they were divided and sent to
various other units or locations.
Q. At that location, what were you assigned to do?  As you said,
initially you were asked to post water to supplies to the kitchen
and later on, you had problem with the milk   -- with your
breastfeeding; and subsequently what types of work was assigned
to you?
A. I was asked to cut the firewood or to catch fish or sometimes,
to go and pick the vegetables.  It's up to them.
Q. What about the food ration?  How many meals per day and what
did you get per meal?
A. The food ration was gruel at the time, gruel with a type of
soup -- whatever it was  -- and the gruel was very thin.
Q. How many meals per day?
A. Two times per day.  In the morning, we were given rice and in
the evening, we were given only gruel.
Q. What about the place where you stayed and slept; how was it?
A. We slept in a communal shelter, like 10 to 20 female in each
shelter.
Q. Did they take any measure regarding the location where you
stayed?  For example, was there a regular guard that watch over
you and your group or were you placed in a shelter with enclosed
walls and you were locked from the outside?
A. At the location where I slept, there was one big shelter and
we all slept in that shelter and there was no guard.
Q. You just said your infant, your male infant, died; the one who
was delivered at the central hospital.  When did he die?
A. He died after the Vietnamese entered when I fled to
Battambang.
Q. Regarding your surviving children, when you finished your work
who looked after your young infant?
A. The young infant stayed with the caretaker at that office.
Q. You went to work for the whole day.  How was your infant fed
or the breastfeeding, how was it done?
A. In the morning I went to work.  At eleven I came to lunch and
then I breastfed him.
Q. Besides the situations that you personally experienced as you
told the Chamber, did you observe any other situations, for
instance, that people who were instructed to live there in the
group or in the nearby units, what situations did you observe
regarding those people?
A. What I saw was -- while I was at Stoeung Chreou, at night time
they had a small flashlight to shine on us and count the numbers
of us.  For instance, at night they shined the flashlight on us
and they took one or two people away, and in the morning when the
light up we notice one or two people were missing but we were
silent and they are not to say anything about that.  We just
tried to survive by ourselves.
And sometimes a truckload of people were sent to that location
and next day they all disappeared.  And sometimes young children
in two or three truckloads were delivered and they had dinner and
later on around nine or ten, they were taken back.  That's what
was my observation.
Q. Did you know where those people were taken from and when they
were taken out, do you know the location where they were taken
to?
A. No, I do not know.  I did not dare ask anybody.  I did not say
anything about that to anybody.  I sealed my lips.  I only did
what I was assigned.  For example, if I was ordered to cook rice
for the children, I just did that.
Q. Let me now return to the fact that your husband disappeared.
Did you know the reason for the disappearance of your husband?
A. I do not know the reason for his disappearance, only later on
I learned that because the person who inducted my husband into
the party into the revolution was a traitor, and that's why as
part of the network then he was arrested and my husband's photo
was at Tuol Sleng.
Q. You said that your husband's photo was at Tuol Sleng.  What
was the name of your husband?
A. Phok Horn, that's my husband's name.
Q. Phok Horn, is that what you said?
A. Yes.
Q. Are you literate?
A. No.
Q. When you saw the photo of your husband at Tuol Sleng, did you
know when he was arrested and sent to Tuol Sleng, and when was he
executed?
A. I do not know that.  I do not know anything about my husband's
arrest and death.
Q. Your husband's Phok Horn and, as you said, his photo was found
at Tuol Sleng.  At that time how old was he; that is, during the
time that he was arrested and disappeared?
A. His age at the time he is one year older than me.  So
currently he is supposed to be 65 years old.  In short,
regardless of my husband or not, whoever was sent to Anlong Kong,
that person would be photograph.
Q. There were three main events regarding you that the Chamber is
questioning you.
One, the information related to you personally at Anlong Kong,
and the question is whether Anlong Kong is part of S-21 or not
because in the Prey Sar area, after the study and the research
and examination of the case files, the Chamber has noticed that
there were other units besides S-24 or the S-21 branch or the
re-education centre.  Those areas were divided into various units
or sectors supervised by other people.
So we are trying to determine whether you were a victim of S-24
or Prey Sar, which was a branch of the S-21 Office.
Secondly, the Chamber is trying to question you in relation to
your husband.  As you said, he was implicated in the force of Kuy
Thuon, the North Zone secretary, and he was inducted into the
revolution by Kuy Thuon after 17 April 1975.  And that Kuy Thuon
vouched for his biography and later on after Kuy Thoun was
arrested and research was conducted and your husband disappeared.
So we want to verify the information that you provided against
the information in the case file in order to determine whether or
not the 10,000-plus victims your husband was once amongst them
and, if so, what types of documents to support this and whether
his name was included in the main list.
So we do not want to know about other people.  We only want to
ask you about your information and information regarding to your
husband.
Thirdly, the Chamber also is trying to question you regarding the
three children.  As you said, they were placed at the childcare
centre and you only met them once every 10 days, and we tried to
get information regarding the loss of lives of your husband and
your children.
So let me again ask you about your husband.  This year your
husband was supposed to be 65 years old.  That is, in '75 you
were not sure of the age of your husband.  Is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Where was his birthplace?
A. My husband was at Phum Thmei, or Thmei village, Kraing Tei
village -- that was another name, but also still at Kandal
Stueng.
Q. He was at Thmei village.  What about the subdistrict?
A. The same.  It was Thmei village and Thmei subdistrict.
Q. Did you request a copy of the photo of your husband from Tuol
Sleng?
A. No, I have not asked for his photo.
Q. During the time of your husband's disappearance were there any
disappearances of other people at his unit or were there any
arrests of those people in his unit?  And if so, can you recall
the names of those people?
A. At that time only two people were arrested.  One was my
husband.  Another one was Orn from Kampong Cham.  Orn was also a
driver.
Q. Regarding your children, you said your three children were
separated and they were placed into a children's unit and only
occasionally you met them.  And you also said after the 7 January
1979 liberation you fled to Battambang province and then one of
your children died and currently only you survived and you live
with your younger sibling, but you have not mentioned in details
about your three children.
Can you tell us if you have received any information regarding
the three children; whether they are living now and where are
they living, or have they all died?
A. My three children all died.
Q. Did you know how your three children died, and where did they
die?
A. No, they disappeared forever.  The day that I left I was not
allowed to meet my children.  Only the youngest infant was
allowed to be with me.  I did not see the other children.
Q. During the time of your stay at Anlong Kong did that unit
require you to make your own biography?
A. Yes, they made biographies.  Once in a while they would ask
about my own biography, where I came from and where I went to,
for instance.
Q. Were you ever photographed?
A. Yes.  Once I arrived I was photographed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV official, can you project the document with ERN number
00053796 on the main screen?
Again, the AV official, can you project the document with the ERN
number in the Khmer language 00053796 on the main screen?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Bou Thon, can you look at the photo on the screen?  Can
you recognize this person, and whose photo is it?
A. This is my photo.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you examine the biography of this witness?  What
can you tell us?  Can you confirm that this biography was either
from S-21 or S-24?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the testimony of Madam Bou Thon, as questioned by
you, the President, I completely agree and this photo biography I
also fully agree.  At the same time, I would like to add that
Anlong Kong was a main office where Huy stayed and the biography
of Madame Bou Thon from the Energy Ministry.  The person in
charge there was Rith.  This is according to the statement of
this person.
Rith was only an alias, and Rith was the Secretary of that Energy
from the beginning, so his testimony is appropriate.  And Kuy
Khuon was actually known by the subordinates, but his actual name
was Kuy Thuon not Kuy Khuon.  And I tried to research the name of
this witness Horn and, yes, I found his name.
This is my response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
AV officer, can you remove the photo and project the normal
courtroom view?
Judges of the Bench, do you have any questions to be put to this
survivor from S-24?
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Thank you.  I am Judge Lavergne and I have a few questions to
put to you to try to clarify your statement.
You explained that it is when you were evacuated from Phnom Penh
and that you were returning to your original province, that you
were asked to return to Phnom Penh.  So who asked you
specifically to return to Phnom Penh while you were returning
back to your native province?
A. Nobody.  They had to asked me to go back there except the Pol
Pot's clique.  Actually, the Pol Pot soldiers, they also went
with us on that track.  Two of them stood on each side of the
door and I told them my native village was at Kantuot but then
they said, no, the car had to return back.
Q. You were interviewed both by the investigators of the
Co-Investigating Judges and representatives of the
non-governmental organization, DC-Cam.  Do you recall meeting
with representatives of DC-Cam, the Documentation Centre of
Cambodia?
A. Yes I do.  I gave an interview, but I don't remember the date
exactly.  They gave me some documents and I just keep them.
Q. You also explained that you were a member of what was referred
to as the 17th April people or the new people or the 75.  Does
this mean concretely that this was due only to the fact that you
were an inhabitant of Phnom Penh when Phnom Penh was overrun by
the Khmer Rouge?
A. Yes, I was in Phnom Penh because I moved to Phnom Penh in
1973.  I never left Phnom Penh although my family would want me
to go back home, but my husband said that he did not want to
leave with Pol Pot because there was not enough bread to eat with
Pol Pot.  And I would be living in Phnom Penh until the day when
Pol Pot overrun Phnom Penh.
Q. When you returned to Phnom Penh and you were asked to work for
the Energy office at the filling station, do you recall whether
you were under any particular surveillance?  Do you recall what
you said to DC-Cam in regard to one Chan who interrogated your
children?
A. Oh, I remember it.  At that time I came to live in Phnom Penh
the first time, the singer asked my kid what kind of job their
father was and then they used the word "pa", which means father,
but then my kid told them that they did not have a "pa" or father
but have a "phok', which also father in Khmer, but then they kept
asking them questions.  So I think it was only at the first time
when we came to Phnom Penh when they were asked such questions.
And later on, when we lived at the Energy office, then our
children were segregated and I was told that the children would
be taken to attend study sessions, but they never studied
anything.  I met them later on, and they could not come to live
with me because they got used to living with other kids the same
age as theirs.  And I was helpless.
Anyway, I could not stop them from going back to live with their
peers and, finally, when I left, then I left alone and I did not
have any opportunity to see them back.
Q. You also talked of the death of your own father and the
difficulties you encountered at around that time.  Do you also
remember whether at that time you were monitored at that time?
Do you recall daring to criticize the situation in which you
found yourself?
A. I did not know whether he was killed because I had lived with
my father for long, so he left and returned to the home town in
1976.  Then my husband drove the truck to Kampot, and then later
on told me that his father died and I was told not to tell
anything about this.  And then one day, we paid a visit to Ta
Horn's house only to learn that the information was revealed, but
I still did not know that he was killed.
However, I was consoled that my father died because his karma
came to an end.  I challenged that person who told that my father
was killed because of his karma reached an end.  And then they
started to talk about other people's names like Rith and then I
was familiar with those names.  The person who told me about my
father died did not want to be served the rice I cooked for him
because he was afraid that he would be poisoned.
And later on, the messenger, Vang, came to me and called me, but
I called him Brother, the messenger, because he was the chief
anyway.  I told him that the rice was already prepared to be
served.  "Why did not you eat the rice?"  And I did not know why
by saying that then the person warned me that he would kill me
because I was talking about the people who were being killed.
And he say that actually because I had served him for so long
that's why he spared my life because he was very critical to my
outspoken manner and because of that he did not take me to be
killed.
You know, at that time I talked to the men that why in our house
there was only a warm water pot without other utilities and that
later on I was wrong to say that because it was against the
revolution to even say that.
And later on I learned that a lot of people would have been
killed because of such act.
And I now, when I looked at Ta Rith who came to pay a visit to
that location he was escorted by soldiers and I said, "Look, Ta
Rith is more like a prisoner because every time he came he was
escorted by soldiers."  So by saying so I would have been killed
already because I did not know that my expression was wrong at
that time.
Q. When you arrived in Anlong Kong how old was the baby, a few
days or was he a little older?  Was he a few weeks old by then?
A. He was about one month or so.
Q. You said that at this location you saw hundreds of prisoners.
Can you tell us how large this place was?  Were they coming and
going all the time or was it several hundred people who were
there at the same time or all the time?  Were they always the
same people or did people come and go?
A. At Anlong Kong -- I forget the chief at Anlong Kong.
Now, having heard from the accused about Huy and then it reminds
me of the person that I saw at that time.  The person did not
come to that location regularly.  Of course, people did come and
go and sometimes I myself was shifted to work at Unit 14 or to
other locations.
At Prey Sar it was just established after 1975 and it was used
for re-education and re-fashion.  I lived and worked at Anlong
Kong and sometimes I saw truckloads of people.  After their
biographies were taken they would be taken out.  I could see
incoming people, new people on a daily basis, but I did not ask
them because it would be big trouble, and I was lucky actually to
be able to survive.
Q. You also explained that at night the guards would come with
electric torches to take prisoners.  Did this happen every day,
very regularly, or exceptionally?
A. At that time they were -- prisoners were taken at night and
the next morning we would know that a few people disappeared.
And after our work, then we were given the meals and then we were
called to work again. So they used us at every moment.  They did
not want us to have a good rest.
During the break time we would also be called to work.
Q. Were you beaten?  Did you see any person being beaten or being
the victim of violence?
A. No, I didn't.
But I was beaten, personally actually, because I saw some banana
and I thought that -- I was saying that this banana would be good
for our meal and only saying that they beat me and accusing me of
being the enemy.  And you can see the scars still.  It's well
seen on my face.
Q. When you were interviewed by the investigators, and I'm
referring to document D28/10 of the case file, you also said that
you knew Duch during the exodus.  In 1979 did you have the
opportunity to meet the accused?  Do you recognize him?  Can you
see him in this courtroom and did you see him after you left in
1979?
A. I did not see him in Phnom Penh although I saw him when we
left Anlong Kong.  At that time we were running for two days.
Then we reached Amleang location and I was  -- I was very
faithful.  I did not depart from the group, I still went with
them and then we approached another location near Amleang, and
then we took refuge for about two nights, and then Duch was seen
walking and then people told us that he was the chief of the
prison.  And then everyone was told to steal a good look at him,
and of course I know him, I recognize him, the guy who just said
something just now.
But later on I never met him.  I got my relative, who asked me
whether I knew Duch, and I said that I knew him back in 1979 and
he was a man with small build and that's why -- and I even know
his wife.  His wife was tall, rather well built.
And maybe he also knows that location because when the Vietnamese
was chasing and opened fire behind us while we were running, and
then I was running until I reached Chrang Chaot, and I still
followed the detainees and I was very stupid to follow them.  I
didn't know.  Then after I learned that my children died or
disappeared, then I made a swift decision to go back to my
hometown.  And when I reached Svay Daun Keo I stayed there for a
few months because I did not want to come back home yet because I
was ashamed to be alone because my husband and children died.
When I saw my people from the hometown I would escape because I
was so ashamed, and then I was convinced that I should go home
because losing any relatives or members of the family was not
kind of different because everyone lost such family members.  And
then I was convinced to go back to the hometown.
I had suffered a great deal and I just don't want to recall the
event.  When I watch the movie, and having heard Duch who admit
that he did not kill people -- but I am not convinced because a
lot of people were killed, both at S-21 and Choeung Ek, and my
children and my husband would be ending up in those locations.
I was advised by my uncle, who was the head monk, to try to
forget and forgive but I could not and I am now alone.  When I do
farming alone I am telling myself, "Why should I work with the
farming again, because I have no-one left to work hard for?"  For
example, why do I need to do the farming, because my husband and
children already died?  And then my mother also told me to try to
relax a little bit but I tried to be here at the Court to find
justice for my husband and my children.
Every year I go to Boeng Choeung Ek to pray for the dead souls of
my husband and children -- and children would be blindfolded.  In
1979 I was taken to Boeng Choeung Ek and then I could see the
hair of the corpse and, having seen that, I passed out because I
recognized the colour of the hair of the corpses.  And then I was
taken to the hospital and I was so disappointed.  I did not know
why even young children like that were also killed and leaving
only the person in the family who will have to suffer from those
sufferings.
And if I have not resorted to study dharma I would have been in a
very serious mental condition.  So after all I knew for sure that
my children died at Choeung Ek, and I was also told that the
photo of my husband is seen put on display at Tuol Sleng.  I have
been in good memory of my husband and my kids.  I never forget
them.
The photo of my husband was scanned and copied and sent to me but
I did not want to refresh the memory of the suffering.  I try to
move on with the suffering and try to forget it.  However, it's
difficult.  My sister in the United States helps to support me
now and she has helped me with the money to build a house for me
to live in, and she asked me to actually try to move on, although
she told me that everyone has suffered a great deal but it is
time to heal the wound.
Q. You talked about Choeung Ek.  You explained that you went to
Choeung Ek in 1979.  When you were interviewed you also said that
you had recognized the cloth used to cover the eyes of the
children and I'm going to ask you to confirm what you said
before.  You said that the bands around the eyes looked like
pieces of cloth that they had asked you, yourself, to cut out.
Is this correct?
A. No, I was not asked to do that because I was presumed as
enemy.  They only used their people to cut the pieces of cloth to
blindfold the children.
When I was attending a study session only after 1979 and I was
introduced to Choeung Ek, and then I was told that these dead
bodies were the remains of the relatives and loved ones of ours,
no other people.  Then the mass graves were exhumed and corpses
would be lifted and I recall the blonde hair, because my kids
also had blonde hair, and then I grabbed the hair and I was
shocked.
Q. Was there any cultivation where you were?  Was there rice and
were there vegetables?  Do you know what happened to the harvest?
Do you know where it was stored?  And do you know whether the
people who were where you yourself were could take advantage or
use the harvest?
A. We cultivated the rice and we planted vegetables and we were
asked to carry water to shower the vegetables and during the
break time then we would be allowed to break and have our meals.
But we were well monitored to see whether we were lazy or not.
We grew sweet corn and there were truckloads of corn during the
harvest season and they were plentiful.  Vegetables were also
grown by us but we were not allowed to eat the vegetables we
grew, although we harvested a great quantity of rice but we were
not given sufficient food or rice to eat and we did not dare
protest.
Q. Thank you very much for your testimony.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Mr. President, I have no further questions for this witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since it is a convenient time to take an adjournment, we'll take
the adjournment for 20 minutes and resume accordingly.
The Court official is now instructed to make sure that the
witness can have a good refreshment and rest and return her to
the courtroom at the said time.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1029H to 1052H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We continue to hear the testimony of the witness Bou Thon.
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the
Co-Prosecutors to put questions to this witness if they have any.
The Co-Prosecutors have 15 minutes.  You take the floor.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Good morning, Madam Bou Thon.  The prosecution would like to
ask you some questions.
Did you recognize those people who sent you to Anlong Kong and
were you the only one who was sent or were other people also sent
when you were sent to Along Kong?
A. No, I did not recognize them.  There was only me who was sent
at that time.
Q. Before you were sent to Anlong Kong were you first sent to
S-21 or were you sent directly to Anlong Kong?
A. I was sent directly to Anlong Kong.
Q. Regarding the work that you did at Anlong Kong, how many hours
per day did you work and what time did you start?
A. I started working in the morning.   At 10 or 11 a.m. we
returned, we had meal and then we had labour for half an hour.
Then we rested and we're ready for the afternoon shift.  There
was no rest.
Q. At that location did you notice any children who were forced
to do labour work over there?
A. It seems that there was no child at that location, only
adults.  I only saw children when they were sent by truckloads
occasionally.
Q. Were you ever arrested and sent for interrogation during the
time you worked at Anlong Kong?  You said that you were tortured.
Can you recall the person who tortured you?
Can you respond, please?
A. I cannot recall at all and I do not recognize the person.
Q. Did you know the people who were arrested and sent to Anlong
Kong?  What category of people were those people regarded by
Angkar?
A. At that time, they were arrested and sent and we were regarded
as the enemy.  That's why we were sent to Anlong Kong.  We were
their prisoners.
Q. You said you knew that prisoners were taken out from the
location where you worked.  Later on, did you ever see any of
them return?
A. No, none at all, and I dare not ask anybody.  And some people
even say we would know if we were to be sent out.
Q. At Anlong Kong, did you ever participate in any meeting and,
if so, what was the content of that meeting?
A. No, we were never called to a meeting.  If we made a mistake
we would be beaten, we would be scolded and disciplined.
Q. When you were at Anlong Kong, nobody ever instructed you to
criticize or self-criticize?
A. No.  Like I said, if we made a mistake then we would be called
to rebuild ourselves and we would be beaten.
Q. At Anlong Kong, did you ever see any foreigners detained
there?
A. I did not see any foreigner, no.
Q. You said that during the time that you rested, you breastfed
your baby.  Could you tell the Chamber the location at the child
care centre where you breastfed your children?  Can you describe
it?
A. I cannot use other term other than "suffering".  I had
suffered a great deal because my child was so skinny.  He looked
so thin and small and they did not give good care for the kids,
and then when I came home I noted that my kid was crying.  Then
it was time to breastfeed him, then it was only that time and we
could not really take any other time to breastfeed them.
Q. Do you remember the numbers of children at that child care
centre?
A. There were about 10 of them.  Some were sick and died.  There
were not many.  Some who were sick were not allowed to see their
mothers because they said they had medics to cure them.  The
mothers were not important to be near them anyway.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have no further questions but I
would like to share the floor with the international
Co-Prosecutor.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You take the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Ms. Bou Thon, I would like to put a number of questions to you
regarding the deprivation of liberty that you suffered in S-24.
When you were detained in S-24, were you free not to work?
A. No, I was not detained but they just used me to work.
Q. Were you free to talk with other people who were working in
the same place as you?
A. No, I was not.  I had no freedom of expression, and I had
nothing to talk to them anyway.
Q. Were you free to share your ideas or to criticize the way work
was organized, the quantity and quality of the food or the
quality of the health care that was provided?
A. None of us there talked because we were afraid that our voice
would be heard and we were so frightened that we had to
concentrate only on the work, and then when we came back from our
work then we had to go to bed, and we had no encouragement to
actually talk anything about the quantity or the quality of the
food or the health care, because we noted that people would be
called to be taken away and, by seeing that. we shut up already.
Q. Were you free to move about where you were detained?
A. I would say that I was not allowed to move about easily or
freely because we only had to go to work and then after we heard
the sound of the bell then we had to come back to the place where
we stayed.  It was like being detained in a prison without walls.
Q. If I say that in fact you had no rights, no freedom, and that
you could not take a decision by yourself, would I be correct?
A. Yes, it is correct.  It is very correct.
Q. Were you therefore under the control of the people who managed
and kept you under surveillance in S-24?  Would you say that
there was total control over you?
A. Yes, it was a total control over me because we were kept under
surveillance at all times and wherever we worked we shall work in
that location, and then we were deprived of our rights to contact
one another and we had to abide by their orders, and we had no
right to contest or challenge anything.
Q. Thank you.  So whilst you were in S-24 did you feel that you
were given consideration and respect as a woman or as a human
being?
A. How could I say they respect me as a woman or as a person
because when they talked to us they never looked at us in the
face and I did not know how I was dehumanized because my life was
in the hands of them and they could make any decision to kill me
any time they wished to do so.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I have two last questions, Mr. President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Were the detainees generally in good health, or were they
rather thin?  That is at S-24.
A. Some were very thin, some were normal, but at that time we
were so frightened, although we were thin, but we had to fight to
satisfy them.  Otherwise, we would be killed.
Q. Last question, Ms. Bou Thon.  If someone came from outside and
went to S-24 in one of the places where you worked, would it have
been easy for him to see that the detainees were thin or in poor
health?
A. At Anlong Kong there was a big house.  When newcomers were
sent in they would be sent into the house and we could not see
them.  The newcomers were with good health.  People who were
transferred from the other offices or ministries, they were still
in good shape, but after we left to the work site they
disappeared and we don't know.
Q. Thank you very much, Ms. Bou Thon, for giving testimony.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, we would like to give the floor to the civil party lawyers
to put questions to the witness.  Each group has five minutes.
All together you have 20 minutes.  You take the floor.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Mr. President, Your Honours, today the civil party lawyers have
already agreed that the 20 minutes will be used by I alone to put
questions to this witness.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Q. Good morning, Madam Bou Thon.  I am Ty Srinna, the national
co-lawyer for the civil parties of Group 1 and my colleague, Mr.
Alain Werner, also is in the same group.  Before I put the
questions I would like to request that in your response please be
brief because my time is limited.
I would like to seek clarification in relation to the statement
you already stated that people would be called at night and
disappeared.  During that time, could you tell the Court how was
your mental condition?
A. I was terrified but I did not talk because I just told myself
that today or tonight these people were taken out; maybe the next
day it would be my turn.
Q. Next question.  You told the Court that you worked at Anlong
Kong.  Did you see any mistreatment of the people who worked in
the same place with you?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did you ever see people died of tortures?
A. No, I didn't.
Q. Did you see people die of starvation?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Next question.  In order to refresh your memory -- and it is
the point you stated when you gave the interview to the staff of
the DC-Cam.  This interview was conducted on the 11th of
September 2004 and I would like to quote a portion of that
interview, and it can be found under ERN 0054525 in Khmer; in
English 00283851.
In that statement you were interviewed by the staff at DC-Cam and
that:
"When you closed the door what were you told?"
And you said that:
"He did not say anything then.  He told me the other day that my
husband did not eat a few days and only when he was strangled
that he told about the students who returned from foreign country
and were executed."
And then the question was that:
"In which country were those students from?"
And you said you don't know because you said that he was only
asked to transport them, and when you were asked how many people
were there then you said you don't know.  And at that time you
said you knew that after the people were disembarked from the
airplane then they would be taken away and that they would be
taken to Tuol Sleng Prison.
"The luggages of those people were put in a different truck while
the people would be put in another truck, and that's what he told
me."
In relation to these statements, do you recall having said that
to the staff of DC-Cam?
A. At that time my husband drove the truck and when he came back
he did not eat a meal.  He was so sad.  He did not say anything
and he said that a woman should not be told anything about his
sadness.  And I told him -- I asked him to tell me anything about
his problem because we were only two people.
And then I closed the door and then put my hands on his throat
and forced him to answer me.  And he said that we have to be very
careful and mindful of our business because people who were
transported from the airport were straightforward sent to Tuol
Sleng and the luggage would be put on one truck while the people
would be carried on another truck and sent straight to Tuol
Sleng.
And that's all what he told me.  And he talked to me that he did
not want to share this information with me because women talk a
lot.
Q. Did your husband also tell you about the reasons why those
students from foreign country returned from other countries and
then sent to S-21?  Did he tell you more about this?
A. No, he didn't.  He did not know much further than that.  He
was not different than me when it comes to that matter.
Q. Next question; in 1979 -- you talked and you told about the
events of 1979 to the Judge of the Chamber that you went and met
Duch.  At that time during the time when you were on a run, were
you forced to go there or it was voluntary?
A. As I had already indicated, I was so stupid.  I was not forced
to follow them but I tried to run after them and follow the
gangs.  I was not compelled to go with them but I was forced to
leave the area and then we just followed them.
Q. Who actually told you to leave the location?
A. The chiefs at Anlong Kong because when we noted that there
were bombardments in Phnom Penh then we tried to escape but I
just went along blindfully and I did not instead go to my
hometown.  I didn't know why.
Q. You told the Court that you met the accused, Duch.  At that
time did you realize that Duch was still the chairperson or was
he just ordinary person?
A. When I met him he was seen walking five metres apart from me
and we were sitting in a group and I did not know anything
whether he ordered us to go anywhere else or maybe he was still
with the authority.  And we were told that he was the former
chief and that's all.  And I just stole a glance at him and
that's all.  And we were told that he was the Chief of S-21.
And then we started to run further and the Vietnamese would be
chasing behind.
Q. I would like to go back a little bit.  When you were running
to the location that you met Duch, were you all together with the
detainees or were there civilians also?
A. There were mixed.  There were even horses, horses that carry
the kitchen utilities, and we went together in the group.
Q. How many detainees were on the run with you?
A. I don't remember but there were approximately 100 people
because I could remember having cooked a big pot of rice.  So
there were three big pots of rice to feed the groups or there
were at least 100 people.
Q. When you met the accused did you observe his character or
mental condition?  Was he happy or heartbroken?
A. I did not observe his appearance because I was rather far from
him.  However, I could see that he was just like a normal human
being.  He wore a shirt, short-sleeved shirt and I could see him
walking but I did not pay further attention to his character.
Q. During the time when you were there did you ever hear from the
guards, the Khmer Rouge soldiers assigning new tasks, for example
the Vietnamese soldiers were chasing them.  Did you ever hear any
Khmer Rouge soldier who really set new plans for during such
critical time?
A. No, there was no longer any other meeting.
Q. So you only met Duch once and that's all.  Is it correct?
A. Yes, it's correct.  I never met him again.
Q. I've got a personal question and as you were a victim during
the regime, did you ever make anyone hurt or injured voluntarily
or wilfully and, if so, did you feel remorseful?
A. You ask me about the Pol Pot regime or you ask me about the
current situation and personal question to me?
Q. Could you please be -- could I repeat the question?
If you cause any injury to anyone in a situation that it is not
avoided because you were compelled to do that?  By doing so do
you think that you feel guilty or remorseful?
A. I never committed any wrongdoing.  How could I answer to your
question because I never caused any harm or injuries to anyone?
So in my whole life as a good human being I have been doing good
deeds.  Of course, if someone commits wrongdoing he or she must
be very remorseful as a good human being.  But for me I have
never committed any wrongdoing even towards my parents or my
close relatives and so far I have never had any arguments or
quarrels with anyone of my neighbourhood or member of the family
and I never exploited or caused any troubles to anyone.
Q. Do you believe that you will maintain your good-heartedness
since you have been
a good person?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyer, could you please be reminded that
personal questions or like hypothetical questions should be
avoided because the question is hypothetical and I believe the
response itself is imaginary.  So please be straightforward to
the fact at issue.
MS. TY SYRINNA:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have no further questions but, with
the President's leave, I have a small request and for the accused
actually to clarify for one point.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are allowed to put that request to the accused.
The accused, please be ready to respond to the question.
MS. TY SYRINNA:
I have a question and there is a point that I need to seek
clarification from you.  It is about the students and scholars
who graduated in a foreign country and the Democratic Kampuchea
regime called them home.
The question is why did the DK call them to come back to their
home country?
Number two:  when those scholars or students returned, were they
sent straight for work to S-21 or were they sent to other
locations?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, this topic is far from the pain inflicted upon
this witness, so it is the President's discretion.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, the question is granted because this is also in response to
the witness testimony that this witness tried to threaten her
husband to reply when the plane landed at the airport as she
wanted to know what was going on and whether those overseas
students or professors were arrested and sent to S-21, and she
was not sure on this particular point and her husband himself was
not sure.  So this counsel wants to know whether they were
transported directly from the Pochentong Airport to be detained
at the S-21 Office.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, regarding the overseas students and intellectuals
who returned to Cambodia, the fact for them to be at S-21
involved a lot of stages.
First they would be put into a centre for re-education.  Later
on, they would be sent to S 21.  Later on, upon seeing the
analysis and judgment of the leadership -- especially Brother Pol
Pot -- during the last phase, the intellectuals and overseas
students were seen clearly through that observation and analysis.
It's like Phok Horn who observed and that this witness tried to
strangle him to respond and yes, indeed, they were sent to S 21.
The policies of the CPK at the time, which was led by Pol Pot,
changed and it became more vicious and cruel towards the
intellectuals, and that is the truth.
What I am speaking now is not try to get myself rid of those
crimes and responsibilities.  If we briefly look at this matter
it could be that way but I do not blame any people of the crimes
committed at S-21 and, yes, I am responsible for the crimes
committed at S-21.  I am responsible before the nation, and
toward the end of the final submission I would summarize all my
confessions and I would also mention a point regarding this
witness, Bou Thon.  This is my response to you, Mr. President.
MS. TY SYRINNA:
On behalf of the counsel for the civil party, I would like to
thank Madam Bou Thon for her testimony before this Chamber as
well as in her response to my questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel is now given the floor to put questions to
this witness.  If you have questions, you take the floor.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Good morning, Your Honours.  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Madam, you said Duch did not kill people personally, but he
was responsible for that location.  Can you tell us clearly why
you dare to say Duch did not kill anyone with his own hands?
A. I said that because I did not see it.  That is all.  I did not
see him kill anybody.  If I saw him beating someone or killing
someone, I would say so.  This is my response.  What else you
want me to say?
Q. Thank you.  My next questions to you.
You said during the Pol Pot regime, first, you was not aware that
people were taken and killed.  Is that correct?
A. Yes.  If I knew people would be taken and killed then I would
not blame the revolution.  I did not know anything.  Even after
the liberation, I still followed them.
Q. Thank you.  My next question.
So if upon the time that you knew people were taken and smashed,
and after that you knew the executioners, if they did not follow
the orders those executioners would be executed as well because
the orders came through the chain of command.  So my question to
you is:  in your mind, who would you be angry with if the order
came through the chain of command like that?
A. Now I do not know whom I should be angry with.  This is the
reason why I want the lawyers and all the people here to find the
justice for me.  How can I blame Pol Pot?  Pol Pot is dead.  And
who else should I blame?  So I just would like to appeal to the
lawyers, the competent authorities, to be fair and to find
justice.  That's all.
Q. Thank you.
With the President's leave, I would like the international
counsel to continue questioning to the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel you may proceed.
MS. CANIZARES:
Given the questions that my colleague has put to the witness, I
do not have any extra questions to put.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now gives the opportunity to the accused to make his
observations if he wishes to do so in addition to what he has
already stated in regards to the testimony of this witness, Bou
Thon.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the testimony of Madam Bou Thon is straight from
her bravery act to speak the truth, and it is also the right from
so many years of pain and suffering inflicted upon her.  She lost
three children and she did not even know the cause of their
deaths and one of her youngest infants died in her hands.  Also,
her husband lost his life.
What I have said is not intended to say that because she was one
of the components of the 17 April people, as a policy of the CPK
they did not involve or recruit the 17 people, but when the Party
decided to execute Koy Thoun then all the strings would have to
be arrested and executed.
And that was the mandate of Pol Pot.  And Pol Pot decided to
remove Phok Horn from the Ministry of Energy and it had to be
decided by the standing committee in 1976.  From May '76, the
Ministry of Energy leadership was changed and Ok and Chun
replaced.
But whatever the leadership was, the political line was still a
political line, and Phok Horn was removed because of the CPK
political line and, of course, he was transferred to S-21 and his
name appeared on the list.
Separately, the children of Bou Thon were not on the list, but I
still believed they were taken.
So each year when this witness goes to Choeung Ek, it is
appropriate because I believe that the husband and the children
were killed there so their souls were still there.  Amongst the
millions of Cambodian people who lost their husbands and wives
during the regime, I accept their regret and their sorrow and
their suffering.  And the tear that is now flowing from my eyes
is the tear of innocent and I respect this stance, the suffering
of those people.
I want to be close to the Cambodian people and I don't mind them.
They can condemn me to whatever highest level of punishment, or
if there is an existing Cambodian tradition, as it existed in the
past -- or after the death of the Christ -- Cambodian people can
do that to me.  I would accept it.  My life, just one life,
cannot compare to those lives which were lost during those
periods.
I accept all the mistakes, all the offences, before the Chamber
and before the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the civil party counsel.  You may
proceed.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Maybe now it is too late, but the speech of the accused brings
the witness into a situation that she cannot, and is not able as
far as I can look at her reactions, to sit there and to accept
this speech.  That is my impression.
And I really would like to either grant a break or to stop this
speech which makes the accused to the victim and I would really
intervene at this point.  This is not appropriate.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for your observation, counsel.
Due to the feelings of the witness at the moment -- and the
accused, do you have anything else to add?  You are reminded not
to say more things in order to make this witness remember the
suffering that she has been inflicted upon for so many years.
THE ACCUSED:
I would like to continue a little bit more.
The reasons that I tried to recall the suffering of Madam Bou
Thon and the Cambodian people throughout the country, is to show
the greatest scope of suffering that I have to receive without
doubt.
I have already told the Chamber that the crimes, this tragedy in
Cambodia is like a dead elephant and you cannot hide it with a
basket.  And I have already told the Chamber to the Cambodian
people that now you cannot use two leaves to three leaves to
cover a dead elephant and one leaf would represent the notion  --
MS. STUDZINSKY:
(Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Your objection is not granted.
Now, the Chamber grants the accused to speak.
THE ACCUSED:
What I said is to refer to the crimes that I have to face and to
accept it, regardless how large it is.  I do not avoid my
responsibilities for the loss of the lives of people during the
regime as I have already and repeatedly said in this Chamber.
And I would not use a basket to hide a dead elephant, and like I
said, two leaves cannot hide a dead elephant and one leaf would
represent a notion of loving a country because, at that time, we
believed the Yuon or Vietnamese invaded Cambodia.  And I, myself,
would accept the crimes that were inflicted upon the Cambodian
people and I would not pass the blame to anybody else.  I already
stated clearly the responsibilities of S-21.
And now, finally, before the face of Madam Bou Thon, I would like
to take this opportunity to make this statement before you and
before the Cambodian people that I would like to share the sorrow
and the suffering from you from the bottom of my heart.  That is
number one.
And number two, I will accept without challenge to all the
judgments which will be made by this Chamber; the judgment for my
role as the Chairman of S-21 and all the crimes committed there.
I will accept it by legal means and by psychological means.
And I am humble before the Cambodian people to accept all these
crimes and I would like the Cambodian people to condemn me to the
strictest level of punishment.  I would like the Cambodian people
to be brave and courageous and talk straight and honest like
Madam Bou Thon.
This is my response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time for an adjournment for lunch break.  The Chamber
will adjourn and it will resume in the afternoon, starting from
1.30 p.m.
Before the adjournment, the Chamber is grateful for Madam Bou
Thon's presence and participation in providing her testimony to
the Chamber as summonsed by the Chamber.
The Chamber also notices and acknowledges the challenges and
difficulties faced by you because the facts have existed for so
many years and during the testimony you were faced with several
questions put forward by the Chamber and the parties to the
proceedings.  Regardless, the Chamber is appreciative of your
patience and responses to the questions.
Court officer, can you make necessary arrangements with the WESU
unit to arrange for the safe travel of Madam Bou Thon.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Security guards, take the accused back to the detention facility
and bring him back before 1.30 this afternoon.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1149H to 1332H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
The civil party lawyer, Ms. Silke Studzinsky, you take the floor.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I would like to give some information about our client,
additional information about our client and civil party, Ms. Nam
Mon and I would only ask you if I should do it now or after
reading the documents.  It needs some minutes.  It's not very
long.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.
May I just ask for clarification, Ms. Studzinsky?  You have some
additional documents, or you need to explain some documents that
have been filed?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
No.  I received in the meantime additional information that --
about her and she responded to questions that I put to her which
are not related to the documents that have been submitted and I
would like to share this information with the Chamber and the
parties and maybe also up to your discretion to ask her again in
person if you find it appropriate.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Regarding the request by the civil party group 2, Ms. Studzinsky
asked that the Chamber accept the further information in relation
to witness Nam Mon before the reading of the statements of the
witnesses, and please be informed that this request is not
regarded as relevant at this time.
If the lawyer would wish to raise such a request again then she
would do so during the session in which the statement or the
testimony of the civil parties is being heard.  This schedule has
already been planned to next week, starting from the 17th of
August 2009, and during that period of time there will be a
session in which there will be the position for the challenges
that would be raised by the defence counsel in relation to the
civil party applications, and this issue has already been
notified to the parties, so the Chamber would not accept any
other agenda which is not planned in our schedule during this
afternoon's session.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.  I'm not sure that the translation
was sufficiently clear, but next week it is intended to hear from
defence counsel whether they challenge any of the civil parties'
testimony or status, and not to hear from them in detail but just
to give us the information.
At that point it seems a good time for you to raise your issue,
Ms. Studzinsky.  Have I clarified the translation adequately?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you for this clarification and I only want to add that
I received this information that I wanted to submit at any time
to the Chamber recently, and of course after the testimony of
civil party Ms. Nam Mon, and therefore I couldn't submit it
earlier but I agree upon, of course, to raise it at the
appropriate time and I will do this then next week and give this
further information.  Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We note that civil party lawyer Group 3 is on her feet.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I had indicated to the Chamber that I
will inform you as soon as possible following the documents that
we hope to obtain, and I'd like to say that we would like to
indeed continue with the questioning of file E82/1 and we will
not ask for the questioning of civil party E2/81.  We will not
ask to have this civil party questioned.  Thank you.
And this in such a way so that the Court can organize the
schedule in the best way possible.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much for informing the Chamber.
Next, the Greffier, Mrs. Se Kolvuthy, is now instructed to read
the written record of the interview of Phach Siek, document under
D78/5.
THE GREFFIER:
Document D78/5:
"This is the written record of the interview of Witness Phach
Siek, alias San.  This record was done on the 1st of April 2008
at 2.30 p.m. by the investigators of the Co-Investigating Judges
Office in the Extraordinary Chambers in the Court of Cambodia.
Questions and answers.
Q. Before 1975 what did you do?  Where did you live?
A. I joined the revolution in 1972 at Tik Andaung village, Taing
Krasao subdistrict, Santuk district, Kampong Thom province.
Comrade Linh, the district chairperson, brought me in.  I joined
a production unit which grew farm crops like jack fruit and
bananas at Dei Kraham in Sandan district.
When I joined I volunteered since they told me that joining the
revolution was to liberate the nation and bring Prince Sihanouk
back into the country.  I was in the production unit until 1974,
when they recruited female soldiers in the North Zone where Kuy
Thuon, alias Thuch, who was the zone chairperson, and his wife
Try, was chairman of the women's battalion which I was in, in
Kampong Thom province.
I received military tactics training at Chaeng Daeng in Santuk
district for three months, and they sent me for additional
training at Chong Dar village, Baray district, Kampong Thom
province.  Later they sent me to fight on many battlefields where
Commander Chum, female, was a chairman of the 18th Battalion, and
another commander, Beng, was the regimental commander who
controlled three battalions including my battalion.
In January 1975 they moved from the Kampong Thom sector forces up
to the Central Army, which was called the regular army, which
moved around fighting everywhere; fighting in Kampong Cham,
Kampong Thom and Siem Reap.  Afterwards they had us rest for
three months to prepare to attack Phnom Penh.
During the attack on Phnom Penh I was in the 1st Division where
Ouen was chairman and Kim was deputy chairman.  The 1st Division
attacked and entered Phnom Penh through Chetris, Oudong, but at
that time I was responsible for an economic section issuing rice
to the troops.
Q. Between 17 of April 1975 and 1979, where did you work?
A. When we attacked and reached Phnom Penh, my first division was
based from Phsar Thmei to Prek Phnoeu.  They had me farm wet and
dry season rice at Boeng Bayap near Tuol Kok.
On 18th of March 1977 I was arrested and put in Prey Sar.  Chheng
and Ol, the messengers of Kim came to get me at the Preah
Ketmealea Hospital where I was sick at the time, and they did not
tell me the reason for my arrest.  They only told me that to come
to the division headquarters to wait for a truck to come get me.
At 8 p.m. a military Jeep came to take me and another comrade
named Yoeun, who came from Kampong Cham, and they took us
straight to Prey Sar, passing through the glass factory.
Before they arrested me they arrested Division Commander Oeun and
Deputy Kim and took them away in 1977, saying they were going to
study.  Later they arrested Chhan, the regimental commander,
Comrade female Chum, the chairperson, At, the deputy chairman,
and Than, the member of the women's regiment in 1977.  I did not
know where they were taken but I never saw them come back at all.
My husband, Sam Veat, who was a deputy battalion commander in the
1st Division, was also arrested during 1977.  After that I never
met him.  There has been no news of him since then.
Q. How did you know that the place they took you was Prey Sar?
A. When I first got to Prey Sar, Comrade Pong and Comrade Soeung,
who were the chairman and deputy chairman in charge of married
prisoners, called me and Yoeun to a meeting and said that that
place were Prey Sar.  And they told us, 'You must know that this
place is for holding traitors from the previous era.  And this
place is for tempering and self-building.  If you build
yourselves well, you will stay alive.  If not, you will die.'
The comrades' chairman and deputy chairman said, 'It is not just
you in the zones who are traitors.  Even your mothers and fathers
are traitors as well.'
Q. Please describe the work system and the living conditions at
Prey Sar.
A. Prey Sar was a square, four kilometres on each side, and had
no fence surrounding it.  But inside there were sites for rice
farming, an office and work buildings which included Buildings
14, 17 and Building 25, the place where Ta Thy and Phal worked
and lived.
Aside from that, the entire Prey Sar compound had many villages
where they had the prisoners live in individual houses; for
instance Kdol village and Roka village.  And at night they locked
the houses from the outside so no-one could go anywhere.
They divided the prisoners into units to work.  For instance, I
was in Unit 16, a place for holding married women and old women.
Unit 14 through Unit 17 were for holding unmarried women.  The
men were likewise divided into units for married men and units
for unmarried men.  At Prey Sar there was a unit for children
from ages 13 through 15 whose parents had been arrested and
brought there.
And there were old people too, like the mother of Ta Ouen, aged
70, the commander of my first division who had also been arrested
and brought to Prey Sar.
Work began at
a.m. until 12 noon, when we stopped to rest and            2   ate gruel, with each person receiving two scoops of gruel.  Then
we went back to work at 1.30 p.m. until 5.30 p.m., when we rested
and ate and then continued working until 10 p.m.
The food was insufficient and when we were sick they just brought
us two or three pills.  There were no injections.  If they made
us keep on working but we were not yet well, a truck came to take
us.
At Prey Sar, Thy was in overall charge.  Phal, the deputy
chairman, came to hold a meeting to tell those of us in Unit 16
to strive to build ourselves, saying that the group from the
north had betrayed the Party and had collaborated with the Yuon.
April 17 people were prisoners at Prey Sar too but I never saw
foreigners like Vietnamese.  The work at Prey Sar Prison was
working the rice fields, putting up paddies, dykes, digging
canals and mixing fertilizer.  Comrade Pong held a meeting to say
that Tuol Sleng Prison were for holding those who had betrayed
the nation and who had high ranks from regimental level cadres to
division commanders and zone leaders, and that Prey Sar was for
the prisoners who were subordinates.
Q. If prisoners committed offences, what measures did they take
at Prey Sar?
A. If they committed offences they did not let them eat gruel but
had them work as usual and put them in Building 14, where there
were chains for hanging, and they beat them.  Building 14 was
used to hold prisoners.  In the past there had been a female
arrested and taken to Building 14 and in the morning when she
returned I saw that her face was swollen and they displayed her
as an enemy whose example was not to be followed.
Buildings 14 and 17 and 25 were outside the villages at Prey Sar.
The offences committed were picking up and eating crabs, snails,
ripe sugar palm and ripe wood apple.
Aside from that there was a cell for administering electrical
shocks for interrogating both men and women, which I only learned
about when Pong and Soeung, the chairman and deputy chairperson,
told me.
Q. Do you know where the prisoners who were arrested and sent
away from Prey Sar, and the prisoners placed into Prey Sar came
from and where they were taken?
A. I just know that every night I heard the sounds of trucks
coming to Prey Sar and they called people out of the houses where
they were living into the trucks and took them away.  I did not
know where they were taken.  They only came to take people at
night.
Those people were named in lists they had called out.  Every
single week they had me take clothing and burn it in the rice
field.  I assumed that it was the clothing of people who had been
arrested and taken away, and I never saw them return.
There were a total of 500 to 600 prisoners at Prey Sar, both men
and women.  I never saw them torture or beat prisoners with my
own eyes.
As for me, I was held in Prey Sar prison for about three years
and I was never tortured or beaten, but my name was called out to
board the truck three times by mistake during 1978.
I also heard the sounds of trucks entering Prey Sar because I saw
strangers.  I did not know where they had come from.  When I just
heard trucks arriving, I would become frightened already.  I
never saw any prisoners released.
Q. Did you know Duch?  Did you ever see Duch come to Prey Sar?
A. I knew Duch because before we fled from the Yuon in late
December 1978, he came to a meeting of all of us at Prey Sar
including the old, the children, the men, the women and he
announced, "I am Duch, the Chairman of Tuol Sleng prison and the
Chairman of Prey Sar prison."  I did not know Duch before that.
The content of the meeting was him talking about the East Zone
and North Zone soldiers being traitors and joining the Yuon and
he said he regretted that they had taken good comrades and killed
them, and that later he had learned that the comrades had not
been traitors; that just the leaders had been traitors.  He
allowed the prisoners to express opinions and Chhorn, male, stood
up and gave his opinion that, "I struggle to liberate the nation,
but was accused of treason.  Were my 13- and 14-year-old children
who were arrested also accused of treason?"  After that meeting,
they let us eat three meals a day with dessert in the afternoon.
Later, on the day the Vietnamese came on 7 of January 1979, Duch
and his unit came to take the Prey Sar prisons to Amleang,
Kampong Speu to Thma Kob village and Tumneab village where Duch
ordered 25 people arrested and taken to be killed including me,
but six persons were released including me.  The others
disappeared and were not seen to return to the villages.
Q. Did you know the condition of the people when you reached
Phnom Penh on 17 April 1975?
A. When I entered Phnom Penh, the people had been evacuated out
by the Khmer Rouge soldiers.  My first division also received
orders from Commander Oeun to evacuate the people away saying
that they would be gone at the most a week or two and they would
be allowed to return.
After only four or five days, all the people had been evacuated
from the city.  I did not see any people killed then because they
agreed to leave.  I saw pagodas, but did not see religious
observances.
Q. Why did they arrest you and send you to Prey Sar?
A. When they arrested me, they did not tell me the reason, but
when I reached Prey Sar, they told me that I had been a traitor
and had collaborated with the Yuon.  They said, "The leaders are
traitors, that the subordinates are traitors too".  The neighbour
interrogated me at Prey Sar.  They had me work and tempered
normally and they never put me in chains.
At Prey Sar, I saw the old prison buildings remaining from the
previous era, but they were not used to hold the Khmer Rouge era
prisoners; they were left empty.
While I was at Prey Sar, I never knew; they never took me to Tuol
Sleng Prison.  I only heard them talk about Tuol Sleng Prison.
In the 1975 era, I was a regimental economics chairperson in the
1st Division.  That regiment had three battalions which had a
total of 900 persons.
At Prey Sar, prisoners were not permitted to speak to one
another.  They were forbidden to move around freely and they were
guarded night and day.
Q. Please describe what your woman's regiment in the 1st Division
commanded by Oeun did when it entered Phnom Penh?
A. The woman's regiment had three battalions.  One battalion was
sent to Sre Ambel.   Another battalion was sent to the government
section in Tuol Kok and the other battalion was in the first
division staff near Wat Phnom.
Q. What types of prisoners were at Prey Sar?
A. The prisoners included 1,700 people and soldiers from the East
and North zones, but I just knew about female prisoners.  I did
not know about the male prisoners because they did not allow us
to move around and make contact.  All prisoners had to stay in
the houses in the villages; 15 to 20 persons in each house and
they were not handcuffed or leg shackled, but they locked the
houses from the outside.
At Prey Sar, they divided the prisoners into units or more than
100 persons each with a unit chairman and deputy chairman in
charge, all of whom had been prisoners arrested during 1975.
Each unit was divided into small teams of 15 to 20 persons with a
team chairman, a deputy and a member in charge.  This was the
structure in my unit.
I got free of Prey Sar when fleeing from the Yuon to Amleang.
When the Yuon attacked Thma Kob village in Amleang, I slipped
from Duch supervision.  I did not know where M-13 was.  I just
knew that place where I was in Amleang was called Thma Kob.
I requested to draw from memory the layout sketch of Prey Sar
which is attached to this record.
One copy of this record was provided to this witness.  After it
was read aloud, the witness had no objections and agreed to sign
or impress right thumbprint."
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV official, can you show the document 008186771 on the main
screen?
After hearing the reading of the statement of the witness Phach
Siek by the Greffier, do the Co-Prosecutors have any comments to
make regarding this person's statement?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have only one observation to make
and it is related to the nature of S-24 and to the wording
"re-education centre".
In the statement that was just read out the witness mentions Pong
and Soeung when he arrived at Prey Sar.  And both of these people
told him, and I will quote this:
"You must know this place is used to imprison the traitors to the
nation and is also used to have people be re-educated.  They will
survive if they behave well and they will die in the opposite
case."
So I am now asking myself, following this quote -- asking myself
about the exact nature of S-24, since it was a centre where
people who were sent there were not re-educated, as it is
commonly known, but were rather being exploited and the only
thing that they could hope for if they behaved well was survival
and not recovering their freedom.
So therefore I would like, if you allow me to, to get to question
the accused and to see how he will react to this and if I may ask
him if this was really a re-education centre where people could
be released or was it in fact a place where the only hope for the
people who were detained there was just survival?  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Based on the submission, I think the accused during the previous
observations has made sufficient observations.
The accused, do you wish to add anything to the request made by
the Co-Prosecutor?  I believe during the questioning of the
operations of S-21 you already answered to this question.  If you
wish you can do it now in addition to what you said.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I did respond in details to this question.  So I
do not have anything else to add.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers, do you have any observations to make
regarding the statement of Phach Siek as read by the Greffier?
MR. WERNER:
Your Honours, the civil party lawyers do not have any comments
for this witness.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And what about the defence counsel?  Do you have any observations
to make regarding the content of the statement of Phach Siek as
read by the Greffier?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Regarding the statement of Phach Siek, I noticed that in certain
portions of the statement there are contradictions contrary to
other witness statements.  This morning Bou Thon said at Amleang
Duch did not order anybody to do anything as he was also fleeing
from the attack of the Vietnamese.  But Phach Siek said at Amlang
Duch still issued orders to arrest 25 people and then they were
executed.
This is just my observation, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused is now given an opportunity to make observations of
Phach Siek as read out by the Greffier.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the witness statement of Phach Siek has numerous
points which are appropriate and reflect the truth.
Number one is that she joined the female unit under the
supervision of Kuy Thuon's wife.  Her revolutionary name was Thy
and later on she was integrated into the 1st Division of the
North Zone. This division before 17 April 1975 and a little bit
after that was supervised by Oeun and Kim Men.
I knew this person Kim clearly.  His original name was Prak Kim.
He was in prison with me in 1968 and after 1975 the General Staff
transferred him to the North Zone because it was rumoured that he
scolded badly to his combatants.
So in early '75 Phack Siek made a proper statement but Kim did
not exist in '77 so she could not grasp the situation at the
division where she belonged.  She said she was the chairwoman of
the economics section of that division.  Actually, that division
was changed to 703 Division and then she should know Voeung, the
deputy secretary of the 810 Division.  So I am uncertain
regarding this point.
In addition, she said her husband's name was Sam Veat and that he
was arrested.  I tried to locate the name on the list of the
prisoners to be smashed at Prey Sar and I found the name Sam Veat
on that list but that Sam Veat was a member of the company at the
Ministry of Commerce and actually she said her husband was a
member of a platoon in the 310 Division.  So it's possible that
the names are the same but they are two separate persons.
Separately at Prey Sar there was a section regarding the
interrogation and I believed there was a temporary detention at
Prey Sar before a decision was made by the S-21 Committee, but
there was no interrogation section at Prey Sar.  This is my
observations regarding Prey Sar.
And she said about the Division 313, 14, 15, and 16.  That is
correct.  And she said the overall charge person at Prey Sar was
Thy.  That is contradictory as we all knew Huy was the one who
was in charge at Prey Sar.  And finally, towards the end of her
statement, she said at Thma Kup I still arrested people, and that
is not the truth.  Like Bou Thon this morning, her statement was
true.
So in conclusion, I have some impressions that she might not be
the person who suffered at that location.  She could be a member
of the former 310 Division of Comrade Ouen but worked in a
separate unit, and this is just my observation, Mr. President and
Your Honours.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, Mr. Duch Phary, you are instructed to read the written
record of interview of the witness Kaing Pan.  The document's
reference number is D78/3.  You may proceed.
THE GREFFIER:
Document D78/3:
"This is the written record of interview of witness Kaing Pan,
alias Huy Pan, born on 3rd of April 1954.  This written record
was made on the 31st of March 2008 at 10.10 a.m. by the
investigator of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia.
Q. Did DC-Cam interview you in October 2003?
A. Yes.
Q. We will read the entire text of the 13 October 2003 interview
by Mr. Phan Sochea of DC-Cam and summarize a number of important
points and ask do you acknowledge the entire text?  You are from
Traey Troeng village and you were coerced by the village chairman
to join a unit.  You attended military training for a period of
one year, along with many other students, and later you joined
the 12th Division.
In the beginning you transported food but later you fought on the
battlefields south of Ta Khmau before the day Phnom Penh was
liberated in 1975.  After 17 April 1975 you were based at the
Kandal province office as a guard for a period of time and
entered Steung Bakou, where you lived until the year the
Vietnamese attacked in 1979.
The leader at Steung Bakou was Huy, whose wife was Khoeun, and
you were arrested before the Vietnamese came in 1979.  Steung
Bakou was an agricultural site planting and growing, digging
canals, working from six in the morning until five in the evening
and there was night work as well.  The food was sufficient; three
meals a day.
You were a chairwoman of a unit of
persons being tempered and           12   looked after between 70 to 80 eight to 10 years old children
whose parents had been accused of involvements and tendencies.
All those children had been sent to Steung Bakou after their
parents had been separated from them.  The children were dumped
there and abandoned.  More than 30 disappeared about one week
before the Democratic Kampuchea regime fell.
You declared that the people being tempered were removed from
Bakou during night-time but you did not know why they were taken
away.  You did not know what happened to them but claimed that
they must have been taken to Tuol Sleng.  There were no killings
or torture at Steung Bakou.
You knew that Bakou was subordinate to Duch, whom you knew to be
the Chairman of S-21.  You met Duch when you studied two times,
each time for a period of one week at the Tuol Sleng office.
Duch very seldom came and the instruction was given by others.
During those studies there were various documents but no
"Revolutionary Flag" documents were provided.
You heard screams but never entered the prison or saw any
prisoners walking back and forth because they were put into
covered trucks for transport.
A. That text is entirely correct.
Q. Please further describe your work at Steung Bakou.
A. They pulled me out of Unit
and I don't know who made the 
 
         11   decision to move me, and I was sent to Steung Bakou because I had
a bad personal history and had an elder sibling who had been a
teacher.  I did not know that Steung Bakou was a tempering site.
When I arrived there I saw Mao, the deputy chairman of the 41st
Regiment, who had been arrested and sent to Bakou for one night
before he was sent to Tuol Sleng.
I was a person being tempered and I was responsible for looking
after 12 other persons being tempered; all females.  Those being
tempered had been pulled out of the various divisions and they
were intellectuals et cetera.
I looked after 30 to 40 children who had been separated from
their parents who had involvements and tendencies.  The children
told me that they were the children of high-level officers of the
previous regime, police, military and the educated, for instance.
All those children had been sent to Bakou approximately two or
three months after Phnom Penh was liberated in 1975.
Q. Please describe the Bakou location and structure.
A. Steung Bakou was located south and directly opposite Wat Prey
Sar.  There were three residence sites there for the people being
tempered.  The first was the woman's unit on the other side of
the canal from Huy's house about 20 to 30 metres from Huy's
house.  The second was near Wat Prey Sar which was the economics
unit.  The third was a site for the youth unit to live.  That
site was near Huy's house but far from the woman's unit.  Each
unit had about 50 people being tempered, units of 50.  I will
draw the structure of Bakou for you.  The geography and the
structure are attached to this record.
Huy's house was a large, high house with a pool of water in
front.  Huy lived there with his wife and child, along with five
or six messengers.  The people being tempered there often
attended meetings with Huy at Steung Bakou which focused on
strengthening the planting and cultivation.
Bakou was a part of S-21 and was a tempering site.  Bakou was
considered to be part of Prey Sar.  That was unclear.  Those who
were not able to temper themselves were sent to S-21.  Bakou was
led by Huy and Huy was under the supervision of Duch.
Q. Please describe the conditions of the people being tempered at
Bakou.
A. The people being tempered worked every single day from 7 until
11 a.m. and from 12 until 5 p.m.  Sometimes they were required to
work at night from 7 until 10 p.m.  The work was digging canals
and transplanting.  The children were used to collect fallen
fronds of rice.  Bakou was not surrounded by fence but the guards
who were Huy's messengers came to check the residences every
single day.
Those being tempered did not dare run off from Bakou because they
feared they would be captured.  Not a single person escaped from
Bakou.  If someone was missing because they ran off, the team
leaders were held responsible.  They would be taken for
self-building and guidance.
I saw two women die.  One hanged herself and the other died in a
pool of water for an unknown reason.  The people being tempered
lived in ordinary houses.  They were not shackled.  When they
were ill, there were medics in each unit of 50 to examine and
treat them.
Those tempering in the women's unit could not contact those
tempering in the youth unit.  They met during work time.
As for the food, the first year work began at Bakou, there were
shortages of food but later on there was enough food for all the
people being tempered.  They all ate communally.
Q. You said that the people were pulled out of Steung Bakou and
taken to Tuol Sleng.  Please describe this further.
A. I saw them arrest people at Bakou to take them to Tuol Sleng
at night, 5 to 6 p.m., in covered trucks every week to 10 days.
I know that those trucks had come from Tuol Sleng because I
recognized the trucks and the people who had worked at Tuol
Sleng,when I attended studies near Tuol Sleng.
I think that the orders to remove those tempering at Bakou were
orders issued by S-21, not by Huy.  Huy just followed the orders
of S-21.  Those who came to get the people being tempered first
met with Huy and then Huy's messengers went with them to the
residences, called them out by name, and told them they were
going to a different work place outside Bakou.  All those being
tempered, even the children, thought they were probably being
taken and killed because no one ever returned.
When they came to get small children, they told them that they
were being taken back to meet their parents.  Some of the people
being tempered, especially the children, hid themselves after
hearing others tell them that they were being removed from Bakou,
but the people being tempered went around and collected the
children and brought them back to the residences.
All the children were removed before the Vietnamese came, except
for one girl who travelled along with me to Phnom Oral and who
died there.  The reason the girl had not been removed was because
she had lived with her mother.
I learned that the wife and infant child of Huy were removed and
taken to Tuol Sleng about one week before the Vietnamese came.  I
learned this because a guard at Tuol Sleng told me while we were
fleeing together when the Vietnamese were attacking.  I
personally saw Huy for the last time about two or three days
before the Vietnamese came in 1979.
Q. Did you ever see Duch?
A. In 1978, I saw Duch come to Bakou twice with a messenger.
Each time it was for a period of one day and he only met with
Huy.  I knew he was Duch because I had seen him while I was
studying at Tuol Sleng.
Q. When you were attending studies, what did you see or hear at
Tuol Sleng?
A. I heard the sounds of people screaming -- O!, Help! -- coming
from covered trucks passing by the residence site during the
studies.
Q. Do you know if any of the workers and those who were tempered
at Bakou are dead or alive?
A. I forget the names of Huy's messengers and I did not know if
they are dead or alive.  I know that Comrade Tha, who was in my
team at Bakou, is alive.  Today, she lives in Battambang but I
don't know which village, sub-district or district.  I know that
Comrade Leng from Bakou is alive and now living at Roka Leu or
Kraom village, Khpok sub-district, S'ang district, Kandal
province.
I know that Comrade Prak Khem is now living at Sampan Leu, Prek
Ambel sub-district, Koh Thum district, Kandal province, but I
have not met or contacted him for the past 10 years.
The witness was also given the biography with the photo attached.
One copy of the written statement was provided to this witness at
1605H on 1st of April 2008.  After it was read aloud the witness
had no objections and agreed to sign and place thumbprint."
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit is now instructed to put document under ERN 00186758
up on the screen.  Could you please scroll down so that we can
see until the final page?
The parties to the proceedings are now advised to review this
document, including the accused himself.
The AV Unit is now instructed to remove this document.  Put
another document with ERN 00186759 in Khmer.
The parties to the proceedings and the accused, could you please
review this document up on the screen?
Next, do Co-Prosecutors wish to make any observation in relation
to the statement of Kaing Pan already read by the Greffier of the
Trial Chamber just now?  The floor is yours.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Having heard the statement read out
and in order to make sure that there is a good record in the
transcript, the prosecution would like to suggest that page
number
on the second line from bottom -- the phrase be            2   corrected because in that expression that the person was the
chief of the zone, but it was not the chief of the zone; he was
the chief of the commune instead.
And a point for another correction, on page number 5 line 17.
The Greffier read that "except one girl who travelled with me to
Phnom Oral and stayed there".  In Khmer it was "stayed there" but
in English "the girl died" actually.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers, would you wish to make any observation
in relation to the statement of this witness?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to make one
observation and that is the following.
Text read out of the statement of the witness referred to an
interview with DC-Cam and the witness confirmed her statement
made before DC-Cam, and therefore I would like to refer to this
statement, which is in the Khmer version the document number D59
and then the ERN 00052417 through 00052440.  And in English, as
far as I know, until now no full translation available; only a
summary which can be found under the ERN 00178327.
I refer now to the English summary and there on the second page
of the summary that the witness -- and I quote -- "recalled that
marriages were arranged for medics and cadres at the battalion,
company and platoon levels, with groups of 30 being married at
one time."  And as far as I have learned, in the Khmer document
this should be in the original on  of the document, the
last page, but I'm not quite sure if this is right.
Therefore I want to comment on this only that this shows that
group weddings arranged by so-called Angkar took place in Steung
Bakou and which was under the order of the accused and this fact
shows or sheds light on the living conditions of the staff there.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We have already given the floor to the civil parties' lawyers to
make observation in relation to the statement read out by the
Greffier of the Trial Chamber and the latest observation seems to
be far beyond what the Chamber wished the civil party lawyer to
comment on.
Next we would like to give the floor to the defence counsel to
make their observation in relation to the record of the interview
of Kaing Pan as read out by the Greffier of the Trial Chamber.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The defence counsel has no
observations.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, and finally, the accused is given the opportunity to make
his observation in relation to the statement already read out,
and two documents that are related to this document; the annexes.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all I would like to recognize document
00186758, which belongs to the documents of S-21, truly.  It
means I admit that Kaing Pan was a member of S-21 who was
dispatched to work at S-24, Prey Sar.
Number two, I'd like to accept that the statement of Kaing Pan is
true in principle, so the document itself is true and there has
been very, very few shortcomings.  For example, she said that Huy
lived with his wife.  Actually Comrade Huy did not live with his
wife because his wife was used in Phnom Penh and he only came to
pay her a visit whenever he could.  So this is the point for
clarification she might be confused when she said this.  So
comparing this statement to that of Bou Thon so as the important
documents for the Trial Chamber to establish the crimes at S-21.
And that's all, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The schedule for the hearings for this week comes to an end
already and it comes to an end earlier than expected.
So we will take the adjournment at this moment, and the next
hearing will be resumed on the morning of 17th of August 2009.
And the Chamber would like to also inform the parties and the
public that next week the Chamber is going to hear the testimony
of the expert and hear the statements of the civil parties who
have been decided by the Chamber to call them, according to the
request by the parties so that they can come to give their
statements before the Chamber.  So there will be a four-day
sitting next week in relation to the civil parties.
Security personnel are now instructed to take the accused to the
detention facility and bring him into the courtroom on Monday,
the 17th of August 2009 at 9 a.m.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1449H)
