P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Trial Chamber is back in session for
today.
This morning, based on the schedule, we will continue our
proceeding from yesterday.  The questioning will be put to the
two expert witnesses and the international defence counsel will
put questions to the expert.
But before giving the floor to the defence counsel, the Greffier
please report the attendances of the parties to the proceedings
today.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the parties to this trial today are all present
except the civil parties lawyers, group 2 and group 3 -- group 3
and 4.
So the two experts are present; Ka Sunbaunat and Sironi are
present.  The witnesses D1, D2, D3, D4 and D6 are all present and
are waiting for the invitation from the Trial Chamber.  These
witnesses have no affiliation or relative and blood with the
other parties or the accused person.  They were all sworn in.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please, Alain Werner, the floor is yours.
MR. WERNER:
Hello.  Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.
Just two points quickly.
The first one is that there was a problem -- maybe it was a
problem of interpretation.  It is not the lawyers of civil party
group 2 and 3 who are not present, but it's the lawyers of groups
2 and 4.  That's the first point.
The second point is that I have one very quick, quick request,
Mr. President.  As you know -- and I announced this yesterday at
the beginning of the hearing -- the civil parties who should have
been present wrote an open letter to the attention of your
Chamber and, as you know, the open letter -- and the lawyers were
not party to this process and the open letter was transmitted to
the Greffiers because the civil parties wished that the Chamber
would read out this letter, and we were informed after the
hearing that the letter was not able to reach you because it was
not filed according to the Rules.
So two things.  This letter is extremely short and it would only
take me one minute to read it out, and this is what I suggest
that I do, with your leave.  And if you do not wish that I read
this letter, well then it seems easier that -- well, we'll make
sure that this letter is in the case file but we do not believe
that that is the place of this letter, and the civil parties
simply wish to be heard.
This is why I'm asking just for one minute of your time to read
this letter of five paragraphs.  That way, the civil parties will
at least know that you heard what they wanted to say to you.
Thank you.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Alain Werner, please stand up.
You said that there is a letter from the civil parties and you
also said about that yesterday and you said that you filed with
the Greffier.  My question is that whose letter it was.  Was it
belonged to the civil party?  Did the lawyer who request to
submit the file or the civil party themselves who request to
submit?
Based on the form of the letter, it failed to meet the formality
required by the Trial Chamber.  Please indicate the purpose of
putting that letter before the Trial Chamber.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you for your question, Mr. President.
Regarding the exact way that we went about this, I think the
Greffiers will be able to provide you with better information
than I.
As far as I understand, the civil parties directly brought this
letter to your Chamber and this letter is not the letter of a
lawyer.  It's been signed by 28 civil parties and, as I said to
you yesterday morning, we did not sign this letter and it's not a
judicial act.  This is why we are not partaking in these
proceedings because the letter was not accepted according to the
Rules and the Greffiers informed us about this, and the aim of
this letter is that you may hear what is in this letter.
And we suggest -- because I think this is the most economic way
of doing things.  It won't need to be translated, there won't be
a need for a written request.  I just would like to ask one
minute of your time so we can read out this letter so that you
can hear what the civil parties wish to communicate to you and it
will be in the records.
And if you do not accept it, okay, the lawyers will file the
motion that will have to be translated into three languages and
that will have to be included in the case file.
If that's what you prefer, okay, we will do as so, but I simply
wanted to propose another solution to you which seems to be the
best solution because it will only take five minutes of your
time.  You will hear what the civil parties wish to say to you
and we will not need to file the motion that will have to be
translated into three languages.  Thank you.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Based on your statement, the Trial Chamber unanimously agreed
that you file the letter into the case file, however, your
request to read to the Court now is denied.
Next, the Trial Chamber gives the floor to the international
defence counsels to put questions to the two psychological
experts and, international defence counsel; you have 40 minutes
to put questions to the experts.  The floor is yours.
MR. ROUX:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.  Good
morning, Experts.
Mr. President, I'm going to try to put my questions to the
experts in 40 minutes and, if I'm not able to do so, I will
please ask you for a little extra time.
BY MR. ROUX:
Q.  Experts, first of all, I would like to ask you if we can
provide two small rectifications in terms of form related to the
accused's request and, as you know, he is meticulous.
And therefore the accused would like, with your leave, that we
rectify in the French version of your assessment on  when
you state that he has four children -- a daughter who was born on
the 27th of April 1977, a son born on the 14th of December 1978,
and a daughter born on the 30th of June 1981, and in reality it
is a son.  And I think that you spoke about this together so,
therefore, for the needs of the record I wanted to provide this
rectification, with your leave, of course.
And another correction.  On  of your report -- and this
follows a question from Judge Lavergne yesterday -- on  in
the French version, you state:
"However, Duch no longer remembers the number of victims at S-21
at the beginning of the investigation phase, whereas he had
access to the archives, to the registers and to the photographs
and he provides the figure of 200 victims."
So there must be a confusion here because indeed once, as we've
checked the written records of interview, this figure has not
been stated.  So you are right in saying that he does not provide
any figure, but he does not however provide the figure of 200
victims.
So, once again, for the necessities of the record and also
because, as you know, he is very meticulous, I wanted to share
this observation with you, and you will not find, unless we are
mistaken, any reference to this figure of 200 victims in the
written records.
Now, I've come to my questions.  And I may say, first of all, Mr.
Sunbaunat and Dr. Sironi-Guilbaud, I will wish to extend my
thanks for the explanations that you provided to this Chamber
yesterday and explanations, as you reminded us very clearly, that
are no way justifications but that are an attempt to understand
how Duch became Duch.
And I may say as an introduction to my first question, that I was
absolutely flabbergasted by the way the Co-Prosecutors' Office
seemed to be analyzing this situation.  And apparently Duch is
not today the only one who is in a state of denial.
Co-Prosecutors, please interrupt me if I say one single word that
is not part of the case file in my question which is the
following.
Duch said that he had been a coward.  Duch said that he did not
dare look at the reality; that he did not dare see his friends
being detained.  Duch said that he, of course, was obeying
orders, but that however he was or is responsible for everything
that took place at S-21.  Duch accepted to participate in the
re-enactment at Choeung Ek and at S-21.
Duch co-operated with the Investigating Judges as the following
is stated in paragraph 167 of the indictment.  Duch acknowledged
85 percent -- we calculated this -- 85 percent of the facts that
were put forth by the prosecutors -- and let me please explain
myself about this.
We received in January of this year, 168 paragraphs coming from
the prosecution office requesting that Duch acknowledge these or
accept these paragraphs and he accepted 85 percent of these
paragraphs.
Duch asked for forgiveness, asked the victims for forgiveness by
saying to them, "I am not asking you to forgive me, but I am
asking you -- I am stating my apologies to you."
So in the face of this evidence, which is stemming direct from
the case file, which stems from the proceedings, which stems also
from what you have witnessed yourselves, that is to say that you
yourselves have said that he co-operated with you, my first
question therefore is, well, is this an easy process for whomever
and, in particular, I would say for a Cambodian?  Is it an easy
process to completely open up, to basically stand naked in public
to acknowledge publicly his responsibilities for crimes that are
as serious?
That's my first question.  So therefore it is, is it easy for
anybody, and for Duch in particular, to carry out such a process?
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  Of course not, Mr. Roux.  It's not
easy for anyone and it is not easy of course for Duch to go about
this.  And if you please allow me to, I can add a comment
regarding his psychological development which we witnessed during
our sessions with him.
We saw him and we have been analyzing him for the past year and
we saw him again recently, and this is a process.  Acknowledgment
indeed is a process.  You were asking if it was something easy,
well, because -- but I will also speak about the process because
the accused is going through different phases regarding a certain
number of facts which we discussed with him.
There might be at the start denial, yes; a desire to not
acknowledge.  I'm speaking here again about psychological
mechanisms, however -- and then afterwards there's de-negation;
that is to say an acceptance -- a partial acceptance of the
facts.  That is to say that certain facts are accepted and others
are not and maybe part of the truth is accepted.  And the third
phase, we could say that -- and this is where it becomes
interesting to state it before the Chamber -- there is a change,
a switch, a rather rapid switch towards self-depreciation and
towards self-accusation, and we have not seen Duch as might be
the case with other accused, we have not seen a more, let us say,
neutral acknowledgment process.
I would like to insist right now on the fact that he switches
right away to self-accusation.  He says, "I'm a criminal, I feel
guilty, and how may I go about this?" and here -- we might find
here a psychological mechanism in Duch that is linked to
psychological elements, intra-psychical elements stemming from
his childhood, which betrays the lack of self-confidence and the
feeling of being devalued and his feeling of inferiority that
might reappear at that moment, with an accentuation of his
self-accusation in certain cases.  That is to say from denial to
self-accusation.  That is the process that we can observe.
Q. Thank you very much.  You have indeed anticipated my following
question, which was indeed are we dealing here with a process?
And this is what indeed you just stated to me and I would like to
add, well, in this process there might be inhibitions; there
might be things that are so hard to deal with that we are not
able to express these.  Do you believe that these kinds of
hang-ups are part of the process as well?
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  Yes, Mr. Roux, this may be part of the
process indeed, as you say, either because there are things that
are too difficult to accept and that indeed the acceptance of
such heavy elements always goes through a process for everyone.
This process might take more or less time.  This depends on each
one's personal history.  This also depends on what might lead
someone to become aware and to accept.
We said yesterday that the trial is an element that contributes,
not only for Duch but for other accused people.  It is he but, in
general, it's a more general process.  So the trial contributes
to this acceptance and we are indeed dealing with a process and I
would add that there's another element which we must take into
account.  It is the inherence of the Khmer Rouge shaping process
which we spoke about yesterday and which is still present in him.
So we can say that from an intra-psychical point of view, if we
imagine Duch's mental life as a battlefield where different
battalions or platoons are being deployed on the field, where
things are moving; well, we can say that this element is also
present, this Khmer Rouge shaping is also present, and it is also
mobile.
Q.  Neither of you wish to answer directly the questions that
were put to you regarding Duch's sincerity, as far as his remorse
is concerned, but may I ask you the following question?
According to you, do you believe that he is sincere in the
process in which he is involved -- in this process; in this
process of acknowledgment of his responsibility?  Do you feel
that he is sincere about this?  Can you say anything about this?
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  I'll answer first and then give the
floor to my colleague.
Yes, Mr. Roux, indeed we -- as far as I'm concerned, and I think
we've discussed this anyway together, there is sincerity in this
process, and I would also like to add that -- to complexify
further the question, it is not to call into question the term
"sincerity" that you have used but to complexify it.
Each of us are in strategies of existence and the accused also
has a strategy concerning existence.  It is not to make him
perverse but he is also in this strategy and there is this
mechanism of the awareness of what is happening for him, for the
history of his country at the -- you know, this type of history.
Would you like to add something on the sincerity of the process?
A. (MR. KA SUNBAUNAT):
I agree with what has been said by Ms. Sironi-Gilbaud.  As I
stated yesterday, we have not done our research on the topic of
sincerity because this is not the topic that we focused on.
However, we raised the issue that Duch -- during our interviews
we did not ask him directly on the details of the issues but he
made us aware of the intention to apologize.
In such situation it can be shown that whether he is sincere in
expressing his apology or whether he was pressured to do so, this
is just the situation of our encounter with Duch and of his
intention to apologize, so that we can focus on the issue
together as whether he is sincere in his expression of apology or
whether there is any pressure applied to him or whether there is
any other plan or intention, and we have not conducted our
psychological assessment on the topic of the sincerity.  This is
my response.  Thank you.
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  If you allow me, I'd like to add
something.
Coming back to the issue of sincerity, as my colleague said, our
mission was not to become lie detectors.  That is not the
purpose, the objective of an expertise, but as we were required
as experts it was always our role and our duty to see -- to
always have in mind -- keep in mind that we are not in
psychotherapy or treatment interviews but that we were in a legal
framework and that we needed to look at different elements and to
make sure that we were not in a manipulation of experts.  And I
think we can answer here that no, at no time, did we have the
feeling that we were subject to manipulation.  So I think with
regard to this, we can talk about sincerity and the sincerity in
the process.
Q.  Your answer that both of you have given leads to another
question -- the process.  Does it need to be encouraged or must
we blame him for not having said enough?
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  So I would say neither one or the
other.  As experts, you can't blame a man whomsoever he may be,
otherwise we would be in an idea that there are monsters that, as
of both you have devils, ill-meaning people.  This is not at all
our conception of the psychological functioning of an individual.
From a standpoint of a victim, a country, I can understand a
great many things, but here we are talking from the standpoint of
experts and we can neither blame nor encourage from him to
present apologies.  We said that it is a process, a mental
process, and each individual, each subject is singular, is
unique.
Given the different elements of his life, of his early childhood,
his experience, life experience, it is -- a subject is unique and
each subject has a time.  You can't hasten it.  You can't slow it
down, but what you can do is to accompany the subject, the
accused, in this process, neither accelerating it nor slowing it
down.
A. (MR. KA SUNBAUNAT):  I am one of the victims of the regime,
but I disregard the idea one side when I perform my role.  I
perform my role as an expert under the instructions of the Trial
Chamber.  And what we have said -- and in our report it has been
done within the framework with our neutral position and we do not
have our personal feelings interfere with our work.  And we are
the professionals and we have taken an oath in order to perform
our role as a neutral expert.  Thank you.
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  I'd like to bring to the knowledge of
Mr. Roux and the Chamber that in the beginning of the different
assessment interviews, we met with the Professor Ka Sunbaunat at
several times and we met also with the interpreter who worked
with us last year in the 13 interviews, Mr. Ou Channora, who is a
sworn interpreter, and we discussed amongst us of this
counter-transferential  issue what has led us, our personal
histories, to bring us together here even if we didn't sort of
decide it.
It was very important for each of us to arrive at this exercise
of neutrality, this posture of neutrality that my colleague was
talking about.
So to start with we actually carried out this exercise, this
discussion amongst the three of us and if there had been any
problem at that time, since I was appointed as the main expert of
this assessment, then I would have made sure that it does not
start and not to take place, to avoid any influence of our own
psychology or our own respective history, collective history,
that could have interfered.  And there was no problem with regard
to this issue.
Q.  You spoke when speaking about the accused of the difficulty
that he has, still has, in expressing feelings but, at the same
time, at least twice in this legal process we have seen the
accused filled with intense bouts of crying, at least three
times.  First time at Choeung Ek during the re-enactment, he
collapses literally before the pits where children's bodies were
found.
Second time, still the re-enactment at S-21, he collapses --
well, cries on the shoulder of one of his guards while he tries
to read his declaration to the victims and one of the victims
starts to cry.  And the other day this passage was shown.
And the third time, at this hearing, while he speaks about one of
the victims of S-21, Professor Phung Ton, while the widow and the
daughter of this victim are present and they are upset.  At the
mention of this name, he bursts out into tears.
And I would like to ask you as experts, how do you analyze this
on the part of somebody who normally blocks, inhibits his
feelings but, at the same time, time and again, lets escape, so
to speak, vigorously, his emotions without holding them back?  Is
that part of the process within which he is?  I need your answer
on this.
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD): Yes, this is part of the process.  We
referred yesterday to the mechanism of splitting.  Psychological
mechanism that consists in separating emotions of the rational
side from other parts of the self which, up until then, were
completely compartmentalized.  But you can't be split, as it
were, forever, for a whole lifetime.
I'm also a psychotherapist and that is one of the jobs that we
do, the work we do in psychotherapy to remove this, to life it.
It's not just psychotherapy that actually leads to the lifting or
the removal of splitting, the healing, there's the whole judicial
process that does the same thing, and here we note that indeed
there are emotions on the one hand -- the crying -- which can
also reveal the fact that the splitting is not as watertight, so
to speak.  We're not in the same psychological functioning.
And if you were to analyze further, there are a certain number of
situations which can lead to emotion in the accused and not in
others probably when he is faced with persons who respect him
because we said that the removal of splitting was part of the
process.  What touches him is the source of great emotion and
affection.  We're talking about a professor and, of course, these
are assumptions that we have not been able to check out, to
verify.
But the crying has taken place at specific moments and I think
similarly when Mr. Bou Meng was present here, he knew him, he saw
him when he was in a better shape, he is somebody who is his age,
and you can also think that there is this possibility of
projection between his physical state and the physical state of
Bou Meng.
Now if I illustrate this with these examples it is to say that
splitting response to a process.  We are not an all or nothing in
the expression of these emotions.
A. (MR. KA SUNBAUNAT): I want to add that in the Khmer way of
practice and tradition it is our customary way of expressing
ourselves by focusing on the behaviour not on the psychological
mechanism.  Each one of us can hold back the feeling and not to
burst it out.  However, the light from the eyes cannot hide the
inner feeling.
When Duch shed his tear upon hearing the name Phung Ton he also
describes his remorse and regret of his former teacher and the
one teacher for him -- he's the one person that he respects that
he has affection for.  Therefore the name Phung Ton aroused his
feeling beyond what he could control.
This is why in our Cambodian customary practice people are asked
about the feeling by observing the behaviour, the eyes and the
tears.  And if the question asked is overwhelming and that it
puts pressure on the person who is being the subject of the
process, we can see the evidence coming through from such process
and this is the way that the Cambodian customary practice has
done so far.
Thank you.
Q.  Thank you very much for shedding this cultural light which is
very important for the non-Khmer people.
Now, at the same time we have seen in all these hearings and we
have heard the cry of the victims who have the feeling that Duch
does not go far enough.  Now, in your report, both of you, you
have given us a reminder that you yourselves have used -- I don't
know exactly on what page -- but the term of a regime that had
become paranoid.
Now I don't know how one could actually express here publicly
that the victims will not get all the answers on what happened
during the regime because Duch doesn't have them.  Can you just
tell us in a few words, experts, what you call a "paranoid drift
of the regime," as you call it in your report?
Today, can anybody give a meaning to what happened, what took
place?  Did it have any meaning at all?  Or are we running up
against the word "paranoia" and there is therefore no meaning.
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD): This is a very important question.
Now, first of all, we are not historians.  I need to specify
that.  We didn't speak about regime.
Nonetheless, the clinical geopolitical approach teaches us that
it is taking into account individual history and collective
history; we realized that in countries with this -- suffering
from this paranoid drift, it is the leaders who have become
paranoid.
If we were to establish a diagnosis, according to an orthographic
criteria, we are truly looking at a description of paranoia.  In
other words, a logical delirium where there is an amplification
of the figure of the enemy, the need for protection and paranoia
gallops.  In other words, it does not stop.  Nothing appeases the
paranoid.
Yesterday we spoke about a psycho-political analysis concerning
the accused but also concerning, we could say, the entire
country, namely that slowly but surely the entire country, all
the workings operate in the same way as an individual or rather
the psychological change required by the adaptation of the
psychology of an individual to the change in the regime.
At a given moment in time, both begin to function in the same
way, except for the fact that all the individuals, the people, do
not become paranoid but they need, they have to adapt.  They need
to develop psychological mechanisms in order to adapt and to
survive during such a regime.  In other words, dissimilation --
it could be splitting.  It could also be being over-zealous,
hyper-adaptation to survive, to fight against terror.
To sum up, there is a true psychology of a person living in a
country subjected to the totalitarian regime which is not the
same as the psychology of a man living in a democratic state.
Would you like to add something, Professor?
A. (MR. KA SUNBAUNAT): I would like to add to what you have
raised.  The idea of mistrust or paranoia -- it is true that when
I first stepped into the Liberated Zone, which was under the
control of the Khmer Rouge leaders, I had the feeling that the
Khmer Rouge people or the Communist people and our evacuatees
(sic) were living in different worlds.
We seemed to trust what we were told by considering of what we
were told.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the Co-Prosecutor is on his feet.  You may proceed.
MR. AHMED:
Your Honours, ordinarily I don't like to interrupt proceedings
and certainly testimonies of expert witnesses.  But most
respectfully, I would submit that Your Honours may advise the
Cambodian expert not to make personal observations of his own
experiences under the Khmer Rouge.  He has just told you that he
was a victim, yet he would divorce himself from his personal
experiences and give an objective testimony.  What we just heard
was essentially his personal experiences.
I don't mean to interrupt further but just Your Honours' advice
would be sufficient.  Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Co-Prosecutor, for your observation.
The Chamber would like to remind the experts that during your
testimony you should refrain from mentioning your personal
experience, including the word "victim" or what you personally
encountered during the regime.  This issue shall not be raised
during the time of your testimony.  So the personal experience
should not be shown before this Chamber and I believe as an
expert you two will be able to understand what I said.
MR. KA SUNBAUNAT:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Based on what we have studied and
researched, during the Khmer Rouge there was a saying that of
high vigilance and we had to be vigilant against pessimism and we
have to be guarded against extreme idea of peace and that we
should not trust anyone.  And these are the principles of the
Khmer Rouge regime and it created a situation where people
mistrusted each other on a constant basis.
That is, this is a trait of idea established to conform with the
theory of Communism by the Khmer Rouge.  It created an
environment of mistrust.  Thank you.
Q. Thank you.  I have two remaining questions.  First of all, the
following to react to what you were saying with regard to the
context of the regime.
When Duch says to the Investigating Judges, "I was actor and
hostage of this regime," does that properly represent what you
have just described of this regime at his personal level, saying
"I was an actor and hostage of this regime" and he adds, "of this
criminal regime"?
A. (MR. KA SUNBAUNAT):  In response to your question that he said
that he is one of the actors and a hostage of the regime, this is
his personal, personal views but we need to try to understand --
unless we conduct a further investigation to find who he was in
that regime.
But the purpose of our psychological assessment, we did not focus
on those facts of he was being the actor and the hostage of the
regime.  So I cannot respond to your question at the moment.
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD): I would like to add that -- well, an
author and an actor, we could say.  It seems to me that in the
different sessions that we had during the assessment with the
accused, well, it seems that these two positions as actor and
author have been mentioned.  I cannot guarantee that the word
"hostage" was used, however, but we analyzed together the
workings and indeed these two positions, but I do not remember
exactly if the word "hostage" was used but, in any case, he
acknowledged that he was an actor and, as well, that he was in a
position where he could not dissociate himself or step out of the
process.
And I think my colleague used the word "workings" yesterday, yes,
and so what I would like to say is that the accused acknowledged
and explained to us that he was in both of these positions, even
if this question was not put to us explicitly.
Q. Thank you very much, and thus my last question.  You said
no-one is born an executioner; one becomes an executioner.  So my
question, therefore, is can we re-become human?  You said indeed
that the executioner dehumanizes himself before dehumanizing the
victim.
So in the process in which Duch is involved, is it possible for
him to rehumanize himself?  This is what you are telling us when
you tell us that he can be reintegrated and rehabilitated?
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD): Yes indeed.  Yes, we can answer your
question by "yes".  If we really cover all of the elements that
we have analyzed regarding his personality, regarding the shaping
of common history or the influence of the common history on the
accused, by also analyzing the accused's psychology from the
start of the trial onwards, we can answer indeed yes, yes, to
your question.
No-one is born an executioner, one becomes an executioner, and we
can also be rehumanized and we can do so in different ways.
There might be other elements -- religious factors, whatever --
but there are different ways to do so.
I would just like to specify very briefly -- you asked this
question in relation to the accused.  Well, I would like to also
say that we are a certain number of people across the world
dealing with the psychological support for authors of collective
violence; no matter the level, whether they were ordering this or
whether they actually committed this violence, but in general, in
our psychological support, we can see that there is the
possibility -- or we notice that there is the possibility to
change; not with everyone but yes, in the case of the accused.
Yes.
Q. And may I dare then put a question to you in the form of a
thought?  You said that the executioner dehumanizes himself
before dehumanizing the victim.
Well, would you agree to say that if the executioner re-humanizes
himself, this will also contribute to re-humanizing the victims
as well?
A. (MS. SIRONI-GUILBAUD):  Well, I would say that re-humanization
-- the re-humanizing of an executioner is one of the necessary
mechanisms and important mechanisms.  This is a very important
element indeed in the re-humanizing process of the victim who was
dehumanized by the executioners.  But it is a process again for
the victim, and because there's a lot of suffering involved
insofar that dehumanizing is not wished, sometimes the
executioner also does not wish it to happen but when he is
undergoing shaping.
But to return to the victim, again, it's a process.  And here my
ability of projecting stops because I cannot answer in their
place, but I can simply tell you that since I have been
practicing for the past 20 years with victims of torture and
genocide, well, when the victims whom I saw, essentially in
Paris, migrants who had come to Paris, well, when there is
impunity in their home country, when there is no trial in their
home country, when the authors do not acknowledge or deny the
necessity to care for the victims, the necessity to improve --
well, it's much more difficult for them to overcome their
suffering than when there is a collective process of
acknowledgement of what happened, of the country's past.
MR. ROUX:
Mr. President, I have no further questions and I would like to
extend my thanks to both doctors.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Trial Chamber gives the opportunity to the accused to
make observations on the testimony by the two experts, yesterday
and today, please.
The floor is yours.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to express my thanks for you to give
me the floor to make observations, and I would like to express my
thanks to the experts that they can understand well my
psychological conditions.
Today, I would like to say that I have the intention to the world
to know that I want to be as an ordinary person and I hope that
the two professors and the experts will help to understand about
my psychological condition through the Trial Chamber.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The two experts, the Trial Chamber is grateful to both of you who
spend your time to make testimony and prepare a report to explain
to us about the psychological condition of the accused, and you
did make an effort to respond to various questions based on the
psychological condition of the accused.
And we note that the questions and responses were complicated and
difficult to answer, but we acknowledge that both experts made
every effort to explain and to answer those difficult questions
until its completion.
So now we come to the end of your testimony as the experts to the
Trial Chamber and both of you can go wherever you intend to go
from now.
(Witnesses exit courtroom)
The next program will be one hour-and-a-half, so we would like to
adjourn for 20 minutes until ten thirty.  We will come back in
session to hear the character witnesses of the accused.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1010H to 1032H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
Court officer, can you invite the witness, Sou Sath, into the
Chamber?
(Witness enters courtroom)
I notice the international Co-Prosecutor is on his feet.  You may
proceed.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Yesterday morning, the defence shared
with you a certain number of suggestions with regard to the
witnesses who will be heard and who were presented by the
defence.
If it were possible, may I ask for your authorization to be able
to make our observations with regard to the suggestions of the
defence?  Thank you, sir.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
There is a request from the international Co-Prosecutor regarding
the process of the testimony of the witnesses on the character of
the accused.
The Chamber noticed that yesterday the international defence
counsel raised some suggestions regarding the process of hearing
the testimonies of the witnesses on the accused's character, and
in order to make it certain, the international defence counsel,
would you be able to reiterate again your position or suggestion
on the hearing of the testimonies of the witnesses regarding the
accused's character that you actually suggested yesterday before
this Chamber?
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, President.  For a better clarity of the debate I
suggested indeed that we let the witness make a short statement
before we ask questions.  I think that is a method that would
allow us to move ahead more quickly and in a more coherent
manner.  The witnesses know very well why they are here.  They
are here to talk about the character of the accused and I was
proposing that the President ask them the question, "What can you
tell us about the personality of the accused?" and let them make
their testimony.  That is all I had asked for.
MR. PRESIDENT:
(No interpretation)
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.  Maître Roux, there is one
question that I have in relation to your request.  When it comes
to Dr. Goldstone, I have been informed by the Witness Expert
Support Unit that he wishes to understand the parameters of the
testimony he will give, and I have not attempted to respond in
any way.
Is it your intention that he too make a statement along the lines
that you summarized for the Trial Chamber earlier, referring to
the purpose of his testimony?  In short, do I need to go back to
the Witness Expert Support Unit and tell them what I believe the
defence wishes him to discuss before the Trial Chamber?
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Your Honour.  I do believe indeed that for Judge
Goldstone we are looking at a slightly different case from the
other witnesses and we could maybe accompany his testimony with
questions.  We said clearly, when we had given the list of our
witnesses, that we were calling upon Judge Goldstone for him to
testify on the guilty pleas before the international criminal
jurisdiction and, more particularly, what the guilty pleas have
been able to bring by way of contribution as benefit for
reconciliation to the international criminal jurisdiction.
That was the sense of the testimony that we wished of Judge
Goldstone but, as far as he is concerned, if we ask him this
first question then he will be able to make his own statement.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you.  That's assisted me.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you may now proceed.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
In reality, if I understand correctly, the defence had presented
four suggestions a little wider than merely the suggestion
concerning the statement read by the witness.  Now, if I were to
take these four points, at least the three others, it was asked
that the statement of the witness deceased, Mr. King, be read.
It was also asked that authorization be given to the defence to
read a decision of Justice -- the Obrenovic decision -- and it
was finally asked that the time allocated to witness Jennar be
extended.
Now, I would like to very briefly respond to these four points,
starting with the easiest one.  Concerning the reading of the
statement of the late Mr. King, we are not opposed to it once the
statement is placed in the file and where we have the possibility
of making our observations in the hearing concerning this
statement.
Concerning the method that is proposed today, namely that each of
the witnesses that are presented by the defence be able to start
with the reading of a statement, we believe that we must not
waiver to what we have by way of practice; that you ask the
questions and then the parties ask the questions they wish to, in
order to respect some spontaneity in the testimony.  We are not
talking here about civil parties who are making statements but of
witnesses under oath, and I think we need to keep the consistency
of the practice which is that of the Chamber -- or it has been
that of the Chamber.
Concerning the reading of a decision of justice -- quite an
extensive ruling.  I believe we wish to oppose this.
This ruling is not an element of proof in itself -- is not an
evidence in itself.  It's a decision of case law which has
already been filed.  The defence will be able to mention it in
its final plea.  But we are not talking about evidence as such,
and one can even question its relevance concerning the fact that
it's a guilty plea which, as far as I know, not admitted in the
Internal Rules of the ECCC.
Confession, according to the Rules, is subject to the
appreciation of the Chamber just like any other mode of evidence
and we have to note the presence of the civil parties in this
Chamber and therefore it is not -- a plea bargaining is not
envisaged, as it may be the case before other international
jurisdictions inspired by common law.
Then, concerning the increase in speaking time or time for debate
with regard to Mr. Jennar's testimony, the prosecutors believe
that the time actually allotted is sufficient, not only to avoid
the repetitive nature or characteristic of the testimony of this
witness, but also with regard to the concision of the report that
has been filed, the report of the defence witness, the part
concerning directly S-21.
Maitre Roux yesterday spoke directly of the time devoted for the
examination of the expert report, Craig Etcheson, but that report
was clearly longer.  It was 56 pages and had several footnotes
sustaining the statements of the expert.
So here we have our four suggestions to the proposal made by the
defence, and thank you very much for hearing me out.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel, you may now respond.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I regret that my colleague from the
Co-Prosecutor's Office, who wasn't able to be here yesterday
morning when I provided my observations, was so poorly informed
by the other members of his office regarding my requests.
First point, I never requested that our witnesses read out a
statement.  I, on the contrary, requested that they may provide a
spontaneous testimony, as in the system that my colleague knows
very well, which is the civil law system.  So this point seems to
me to be settled and you were poorly informed.
In the same way, you received the wrong information regarding the
Obrenovic case.  Never, never, asked the reading of the Obrenovic
ruling.  I said very clearly that the defence was able to acquire
the video of the Obrenovic hearing and it selected excerpts from
this video and, in particular, the submission by the prosecutor
in the Obrenovic case, and the defence wishes that this video be
viewed.
This has nothing to do with the reading, which would be
unbearable for everyone, of the decision of jurisprudence.  But,
regarding this point, I would like to reassure the Co-Prosecutors
Office that if this is an issue for you, if this viewing is an
issue for you, well then it will be part of my final statement.
I am free in my arguments so therefore -- but it seemed to me to
be preferable that the video be viewed in the context of our
current discussions, but now if you prefer that I only use it in
my final statements, well, then you will not have the opportunity
of addressing it.  Well, too bad for you.  Too bad for you.
Now, as far as saying that we're not here involved in a plea
bargain, here again I regret to say that the Co-Prosecutors
Office did not provide you with all of the information that we
have been -- and we have been talking about this for months.
And, finally, regarding Mr. Jennar's statement, what bothers you?
What worries you about this statement, Mr. Co-Prosecutor?  What
could justify that a defence witness benefits from less time than
a prosecution witness?  What could justify that an expert for the
defence side benefit from less time than an expert from the
prosecutor's office whereas they're dealing with the same topic?
Why are you so worried?  Are you so worried about what Mr. Jennar
is going to say, and I believe in fact that you are right in
being worried.  I believe that you are right in being worried.
But I would like to stand by my request not that Mr. Jennar
benefit from the same amount of speech time as Mr. Etcheson.  He
will require much less time, in fact, than Mr. Etcheson in order
to say things that will be in the end much more relevant.  Thank
you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you may respond.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Well, regarding the reading of a statement -- well, let's say
regarding the spontaneous testimony -- well, we are not opposed
to it and you will decide what is suited, and you will decide
which questions you wish to ask as of the start.
Now, regarding the video, I will bring up the question again of
the relevance in relation to the case in which we are involved,
and I will let the Bench decide on this.
Now, regarding Mr. Jennar, nothing disturbs us about his
statements, but simply I notice that the report that is presented
to support his statement is very, very short and therefore does
not require extra time being granted for this.  That's all that I
wanted to say.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good morning, Madam witness.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What is your name?
A. My name is Sou Sath.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 66 years old.
Q. Where is your current address and what is your current
occupation?
A. Currently I live at Pou Saen Snay, Srayov, Stueng Saen.  I am
a retired teacher.
Q. According to the Greffier report, you have no relationship or
affiliation to any party to this proceeding, and that you have
already taken an oath before your appearance before this Chamber.
Is this information correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. The Chamber would like to inform you of your rights and
obligations.
Madam Sou Sath, as a witness you can decide not to respond to any
questions which you think could self-incriminate you; that is, if
you think your statement or response would place guilt upon you.
However, it is your obligation to only tell the truth that you --
of the facts that you have heard or have witnessed or seen
personally related to the facts currently being placed before
this Chamber.
A. Yes.
Q. Madam Sou Sath, can you describe to the Chamber the character
of the accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, whom you have known
during the time of your contact with him?
A. Mr. President, I would like to inform the Chamber that I was
in a study group with Mr. Kaing Guek Eav for two years.  I
studied with him for two years from '59 to '60 and 1960 to 1961.
Mr. Kaing Guek Eav was a person of a good character, loyal, and
kind and generous especially.  He was a good student in his
class.  I had attention on him because he's not the person who
concealed his knowledge.  He always parted his knowledge to his
study group without hiding anything.  He provided us the
mathematic solutions and also other solutions to the study
topics.
He was a well-known student in the class, but he had a few
friends only.  He was a person who was not worry about love
affairs and he was a friend who strengthened and supported other
friends in the study.
This is my statement, Mr. President.
Q. You have described the accused's character during the time
that he studied with you for two years; that is, from 1959 to
1960 and from 1960 to 1961.  During that period, what year were
you in and where did you study?
A. We studied at year 4 and year 3 which are equivalent to year 8
and 9 at the present system.  We studied at the Kampong Thom High
School or College.
Q. You talk about his good character, understanding, kind and
generous and with a
helping attitude to his friends and his peers within his study
group and he parted his knowledge to the group members,
especially his excellence in mathematics, however, he was a
student with a few friends.  I think there is like a
contradicting situation here.
Would you be able to shed lights to the Chamber because due to
his generosity, his kindness to others, he should have had more
friends, but why he had only a few friends?
A. I did not know the reason for that.
Q. During the time of your study together with him, you knew of
his character through your observation and you have stated so
just then.  During such time, did he ever have any conflict --
verbally or physically -- with his friends, classmates or within
his peers or with those children within the same village?  Did
you ever observe such situation?
A. I did not know regarding that situation at the village level,
but in the class, he never had any conflict or argument with
anyone.
Q. What about his character toward teachers at that college that
you studied at year 3 and 4 with him?  What was his character or
attitude toward his teachers or to the school management team?
A. He always respected the teachers and the management team.  He
had never had any conflict with those people.
Q. What about the discipline.  Was he a punctual student to
attend the class regularly during the time of his studying with
you?
A. He was very well punctual and he was never absent.
Q. What about the way he spoke to his peers and friends during
the time he studied with you; what did you observe regarding his
way of speaking?  Was the way he spoke humble or docile?
A. As I said, he was a humble and docile person.  He was not an
animated type.
Q. From 1962 to the present day, had you had any contact or met
him personally?
A. From that time, we have not had any contact.  I cannot recall
when he went back to look for me; it was either in 1965 or '66.
I only remember that at that time I did not have any children
yet.  He went to my house in the village.
Q. From 1975 to 1979, and then from the 7 January '79 until the
present day, had you had any direct contact with him?
Please answer again because you are reminded to notice the red
lights on the head of the microphone.  You have to wait for the
red light to be on so that your voice can go through
the system for the proper record of the transcript and also it
would go through to the interpreter.
A. Mr. President, could you please repeat your question?
Q. The Chamber would like to know, during the Democratic
Kampuchea regime -- that is from the 17th April '75 to the 6th of
January '79 and a period after that -- that is after the 7th
January 1979 to the present day -- have you had any direct
contact with him?
A. No, I have not met him.
Q. Another point we would like to come back because one of the
information we would like to know did you know anything during
the time when he was in the same class as yours at grade four and
grade three in the high school in Kampong Thom.  Have you heard
anything about that he was influenced by the Communisms when he
was in the class?
A. No, I received no information at all at that time.
Q. Thank you, witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Your Honours, Judges, do you have any other questions to put to
the witness?  If you have, please.
Next, the floor is given to Judge Lavergne.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Good morning.
You told us that the accused came to see you in 1965 in your
home.  And if I understood correctly this was the last time that
you met him and then you no longer had any direct contact with
him.
Can you simply tell us, if you wish to do so, what he came to ask
from you when he came to visit you?
A. Yes, he went to see me in 1965.  He told me that he was
teaching in Skun.
Q. Did he ask you to become a teacher along with him?
A. No, there was no encouragement because I was already a
teacher.
Q. Thank you very much.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have no further questions to put to this character witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber is now giving the floor to the Co-Prosecutor to
put questions to the character witness if you would like to do
so, and you have only 10 minutes to put questions.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Mr. President, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. TAN SENARONG:
Q. Good morning, Madam Sou Sath.  The Co-Prosecutor does not have
many questions for you but we have only one.
You described to the Chamber a while ago that you were in the
same class with Mr. Kaing Guek Eav only two years -- that is from
1959 to 1960 and from 1960 to 1961 -- and you said that he is a
person of a kind, generous and docile at that time and helpful to
other friends.
My question is that other than those two years -- and you said
that he is a person of kindness and open to other friends -- did
you ever go to his house and you get to know some of his family
members and friends at the village?
A. No, I have never been to his house.  But in the study club
there were some friends who understand well and know well about
the subject but they keep for themselves.  But for him, he is the
one who is transparent about the key to solve the mathematics
problem or any science subject.  He shared with other students in
the club.  But I do not know his house.  But I just know that his
parents was the fishermen in the fishing lot.
Q. Based on your experience, only two years in the high school,
it seemed to be not very long, during the education in grade
three and grade four it is in the high school.
In addition to what you observed from his knowledge and his skill
in the study, did you ever notice that his future view or
perception toward the future, have you ever noticed that kind of
things at that time?
A. When we were in the same class I did not observe any of his
view or future perception.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please, Mr. international Co-Prosecutors, the floor is yours.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q Ms. Sou Sath, you just told us that the accused was a member or
maybe even the leader of a study group of which you were part.
What was the importance of this group in the eyes of the accused,
given that you told us that he was an excellent student?
And being part of this group was it for him a way of feeling that
he was recognized or did he do this completely in a disinterested
manner?
A. Mr. Prosecutors, it's not only him, myself was also an excel
student.  We did not consider him as the chief of the group.  We
tried to work to study together.  No one even our team leader in
the group.
Q. You said a while ago that in a way difficult to explain, the
accused did not have many friends and in fact Nic Dunlop mentions
the same thing in his book on , last paragraph in English.
You said that he was known for his academic success in school,
but that he wasn't particularly popular.  Do you believe that he
could have suffered from this state of things?
A. I do not know about that because I spent most of the time to
focus on our study.
Q. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Sou Sath, do you know Professor Kae Kim Huot, one of his
masters since 1958?  Was he your teacher as well at that time?
A. I was not a student of Professor Kae Kim Huot, but I know him.
I did not talk to him or met with him, but I just know that he
was one of the teachers there.
Q. Did the accused talk about this professor and the influence
that this professor could have on him?  Did he have normal
relations with this professor or special relations, according to
your knowledge?
A. Yes, he never talked about his relationship with his
professor, and I do not know whether he was a student of
Professor Kae Kim Huot.
Q. If I understand your statement correctly, in what you remember
of him at that time, nothing led you to believe at that time that
one day some of his professors would end up in S-21 under the
direction of the accused?
A. I had no idea until I read the book titled "The Lost
Executioner" and I know that those teachers and professors end up
at S-21.
Q. How did you react when you heard this news, the death of this
professor, under his responsibility when he was heading S-21?
A. I was very stunned and terrorized by reading that book.
Q. You said a moment ago that you never witnessed an episode
where the accused would have lost control in his relations with
his school mates, but how did he react if anybody -- another
student or one of his friends contradicted him from an
intellectual standpoint?  Did he not react or did he try and
persuade the other that he was right?  What was his reaction?
A. Please, Mr. Co-Prosecutor, ask your question again because I
did not catch your question.
Q. I wanted to know whether in the exchanges between friends or
other students in the school -- if the accused said something and
when somebody contradicted him, another student contradicted him
because they did not share his point-of-view, how would he react
to this?  Did he not react?  Did this make him angry or did he
try to convince the other person that he was absolutely right, or
did he try and understand the point-of-view of the other
colleague at school?
A. I did not see him having any quarrel or conflict with anybody.
Q. Two last brief questions.  Mrs. Sou Sath, were you aware of a
failed love -- disappointment in his life when you were students
at the College of Kampong Thom?
A. I did not know about his love failure.  I know nothing about
that.
Q. And, finally, I would like to ask you whether the accused at
that time was secretive about his Chinese origins, about his
past, about his political activities, and about his ambitions?
Did you note that he was interested in political questions at
that time or was he solely concentrated on his studies?
A. When we were at school, he didn't say anything about that.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President, I have no further questions.  Thank you
very much indeed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please, counsel for civil party group number 3.
MS. MARTINEAU:
Thank you.  Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honours.
Your Chamber knows that the civil parties that are boycotting the
hearing have asked their lawyers to be present, in order that the
witnesses who are called and to whom the lawyers cannot put any
questions, be informed about the reason of the absence of the
civil parties.
So I'd like to ask you, Mr. President, to be able to say a few
words in order to explain to this witness why there are no civil
parties present here today in this hearing.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber indicated yesterday in responding to the
counsel for civil parties, that the Trial Chamber do not give the
reasoning to the absence of the civil party in the hearing of the
character witnesses or the character experts.
So it seems very clear yesterday and there's no reason to inform
to the character witness about the ruling of the Chamber that
caused the civil party not to attend in the hearing.
The Trial Chamber indicated clear that it is given in the written
ruling and it is listed in the written decision of the Trail
Chamber when it is completed and issued.
MS. MARTINEAU:
Understood what was said by the Chamber yesterday, however, in
such an important trial I believe that it is important that all
witnesses be informed about the absence or the suppression of a
right, decision taken against the civil parties in order not to
extend this hearing.
I'd just like to say that the civil parties -- and Madam witness
probably doesn't know this -- have deposited this letter and will
file it in due form, but anybody wishing to be informed about
this letter, it is enough to read the press of this morning.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Trial Chamber is giving the floor to the defence
counsel to put questions to the character witness, please.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours, and the witness.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Madame Sou Sath, I would like to ask you a question.  When you
were in the same study group with Kaing Guek Eav; and Kaing Guek
Eav, when he referred to you or call you, did he call you by your
name?  And also other friends in the group?  Could you please
elaborate?
A. Mr. Counsel, he called me aunty and he called another friends
by the name.  There were three male students and two female
students but he called me aunty, not by my name.
Q. Please indicate a bit further why did he not call you by your
name but he called you aunty instead.
A. (Microphone not activated)   I do not pay much attention but
maybe he tried to call me following my niece and my nephew but I
don't know the reason that he called me aunty.  And he also
called my husband uncle.
Q. Thank you.  During the time you knew Kaing Guek Eav have you
had any idea about his living condition in his family?  Was he in
a well-off family or a poor family at the time?
A. I did not know well about his family background but he is very
person who like to save money.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
I have no further questions but I would like to give the floor to
my colleagues to put questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please, Mr. François Roux, the floor is yours.
MR. ROUX.
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good morning Madam Witness and than
you for having come.
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. In fact, I just wanted to ask you whether it is correct that
you yourself worked -- have worked for an organization of human
rights for several years here in Phnom Penh?
A. Mr. Counsel, I used to work for LICADHO organization for 10
years from 1995 to 2005.
Q. And can you give us some indications as to what you were doing
in this organization, the LICADHO?  What was your function?
A. I was a human rights trainer in that organization.
MR. ROUX:
Mr. President, I have no more questions.  If only seem to know
that Mrs. Sou Sath would have liked to ask the Chamber for the
right to visit the accused now that she has testified.  I
specified that this is a common practice before international
criminal courts.  Once the witnesses have completed their
testimony, they often ask for the authorization to be able to
visit the accused.
This of course could not take place before this testimony, this
hearing, and now you are the ones to be able to grant this
authorization.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I have not heard the intention of this witness asking for the
visit and I only heard it from the defence counsel, Mr. Roux,
yourself.
Madam Witness, is it your intention to visit the accused as
requested and suggested by the defence counsel, Mr. Roux?
MS. SOU SATH:
I would like to meet him for a brief moment if possible.
Probably it's going to take 10 minutes if I am permitted.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber will consider your request and you will be informed
in due course.  And if we grant your request, then we would make
necessary arrangements for you to meet him after the adjournment
of the hearing.
And your testimony on the accused's character has come to an end
now.  The Chamber is grateful for your participation as summonsed
by the Chamber.
You are now excused and you can return to a location you wish.
You can also participate in these proceedings in the public
audience if you wish.
And today the Chamber will discuss and make our decisions
regarding your request for a visit to the accused because at the
moment we are still in the process of our trial proceedings.  You
are now excused.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Mr. Tep Sam is now called into the Chamber.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Witness.  Is your name Tep Sem?
A. Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honour.  Good morning,
counsels, and good morning, ladies and gentlemen and good
morning, teacher.  He's my teacher.
My name is Tep Sem, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Tep Sem, how old are you?
A. I am 61 years old.
Q. Mr. Tep Sem, you are instructed not to respond quickly to my
question.  You have to wait for the red light on the head of the
microphone to be on before you can speak, so that your voice will
go through the system for the proper record of the transcript,
and that it will go through to the interpreters so that they are
able to translate or interpret it into English and French for the
participants for the proceedings.  Do you understand that?
Where is your current address and what is is your occupation?
A. Currently, I live at Ta Saen village, Soutip commune, Cheung
Prey district, Kampong Cham province.  I am a rice farmer.
Q. According to the Greffier's report, you have no relationship
or affiliation with any party to the proceedings, and that you
have already taken an oath before appearing before this Chamber.
Is this information correct?
A. Yes, the information you have given is correct.  I am not a
relative to any party to this proceeding or to Mr. Duch.
Q. As a witness, the Chamber would like to remind you of your
rights and obligations.
As a witness, you can decide not to respond to any questions
which could self-incriminate you and, as a witness, you are
obligated to speak only of the truth that you have heard, have
seen personally.
Mr. Tep Sem, would you be able to describe to the Chamber of your
contact with the accused?  During which time did you have contact
and for how many years?  And where did you have contact with him
and the reasons of your contact with him?
A. My contact with him started in 1965, 1966.  He was a teacher
at the Cheung Prey
School in Kampong Cham province.  He was my teacher at the time.
Q. So your teacher-student relationship existed for how long?
A. It started from 1965 to 1966 and it continued from '66 to '67
and then to '68; so the total period is three years.
Q. When you studied with him, which class were you in; which
grade were you in?
Please, you can only speak when you see the red light on the
microphone.
I ask you again.  During your three-year contact with him, what
grade were you in and which subject did he teach at that school?
A. In 1965 to 1966; he taught me while I was in year 3 and he
taught mathematics and geometry.
Q. And from '66 to '67?
A. From '66 to '67, I was in the second modern grade and he
taught me Khmer literature.
Q. And what about from '66 to '67 -- '67 to '68?
A. From '67 to '68, he taught me in the first modern grade and he
taught mathematics, so he was my teacher for the whole three-year
period.
Q. Mr. Tep Sem, can you tell the Chamber the character of the
accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, through your contact that you
have observed during the period as you mentioned, that is from
'65 to '68, in the student-teacher relationship; what was your
observation on his character?
A. In my student-teacher relationship within the years that I
described, that is from '65 to '68, he was a humble person,
gentle.  He did not care about the social classes of the
students.  He was mindful and attentive to the students.  He did
not apply his right as a teacher to the students.  He almost saw
the equality in teacher-student relationship.
Q. Did you observe any other things about his character; for
example, was he a mean person?
And that you were in the third, second and first grade, so you
were actually at the top level of the education system already
because not many Cambodian people at that time could reach that
level of education.
So, based on your knowledge, what was your observation on his
teaching character?  For example, regarding poor students or the
student who could not study well or those students who were not
punctual or absent a lot, what would be his reaction to these
circumstances?
A. Through my three-year observation, everything he taught us was
according to the curriculum.  He was strict and punctual on
timing and he was meticulous with what he did, and that earned
respect from every student of his.
Q. Did he ever express his reaction or any attitude towards lazy
students or students who violated school disciplines, for
instance?
A. For students who were lazy or who violated school disciplines,
he did not mistreat them.  He only reminded them to study hard,
to form study groups, for instance, and to be attentive to the
subjects being taught, and nothing else.
Q. Besides these observations, did you observe anything else?
For example, his attitude toward a poor student or to his
teachers, to the peer, or those who had difficulty in their
livelihood?  What was his actual attitude towards those people
who were inferior economically than him?
A. For poor students, it is my observation that he taught them
freely.  He would invite those students to provide private cost,
free of charge, and he parted his knowledge to the students so
that they would be well educated.
Q. What about his social interaction?  For example, amongst his
peers, other teachers or the school staff; what was your
observation regarding this circumstance?
A. Within his peers, it is my observation that he never had any
argument or conflict with any of his peers.  Whatever their
attitudes toward him, he never take those things seriously or
disputed with them.  No, not like that.  He only asked them to
assist the students.
There were two other teachers who was his friends, and actually
one was the principal, Mr. Khan, and he was his friend.
Q. What about his interaction at the social setting; for example,
within the village environment?  What was your observations
regarding his social interaction with other people outside the
school environment?  Did he ever have any argument with
villagers, or what was his attitude towards them?
A. In his social way of living, it's a bit hard for me to say
because we lived a distance apart, so I could not say anything
regarding this matter.
Q. Besides his teaching activity and his good intention and
kindness towards the student and besides his gentle attitude
towards the students, did he achieve anything else during his
tenure as teacher at that school?
A. During the three-year period, I observed his focus on teaching
the students on his speciality and his support for the students;
for instance, by providing free classes, his extra classes free
of charge, and his encouragement for the students to study hard.
Q. What about the politics; during the time that you studied with
him -- that is the three-year period -- what was his political
view or his teaching?  Did he ever express his political vision
or view as to whether he had any tendency towards the red part or
towards communism during the time -- that is during the '66, '67
or '68?
Because during that time there was a tendency among the teachers
at various schools, also among the rice farmers; there were
plenty of contentious discussions on the doctrine of communism.
So during your study with him, did you ever discuss or hear him
speaking about communism?
A. During the three academic years, I heard something about the
communism. Towards the end of the time, usually he would talk
about the peasant class, about the middle class, for instance,
and about the bourgeoisie class.  That's from my recollection.
Q. Were you aware of the event where the police at that time, at
the time of the Sangkum Reastr Niyum -- that is between the '60s,
that he was arrested?
A. During the 1960s, I heard of his arrest but I did not know the
reasons for his arrest because I departed from him in 1968.
Q. You were studying in the first grade with him.  Did you
complete year 1 with him -- that is the final year?
A. I could not clearly recall. I believe my final year was
complete, but I am not 100 percent certain on this, but surely I
did study in the final year.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, do you have questions to be put to this
character witness?
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the
Co-Prosecutors to put questions to this character witness if they
wish.  You take the floor.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. President, and good morning, Mr. Tep Sem.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. TAN SENARONG:
Q. I have a few questions for you.  First, during the times that
you were his student, you told the Chamber about his tendency
towards Communism as he talked about the various classes -- the
classes of the peasants and the classes of the bourgeoisie.  So
as a mathematics teacher did he ever instruct you or guide you
towards participation in the revolutionary movement?
A. At that time, toward the end of the class session he briefly
talked about this ideology but he never encouraged students to
join the movement.
Q. Thank you.  Also during the academic year that you studied
with him did you observe the Communist movement or the Khmer
Rouge movement?  Was it active among the intellectuals,
especially at the Prey Chhor school?
A. At that time it is my understanding there were some movements.
I would not be able to say how active the movements were.  I know
movements existed but how progressive they were I would not be
able to say so.
Q. Thank you.  When you were his pupil was you a good leading
student?
A. At that time my academic performance was average.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Tep Sem.  I do not have any more questions for
you but my colleagues would ask you some questions, with the
President's leave.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you may now proceed with your
questioning.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Good morning.  So I have some very short questions to put to
you.
First of all, did the accused exude any kind of natural authority
vis-à-vis his students?  Was he naturally respected and was his
authority ever challenged by one of his students?
A. During the three-year academic period the student-teacher
relationship was in such a situation that students did not
question the authority of the teacher.  However, the relationship
was smooth and because also he regarded us almost in the same
status or equal status to him as being a teacher.
Q. Did he grant you the same status because he was a very young
teacher and therefore he was very close to his pupils?
A. Yes, he gave me the status and to other general students as
well.  He did not mind us as being his students.  We could
chit-chat with him, play around with him and he did not mind.
Q. This closeness that you had with your teacher, did this allow
him in a certain way to have an influence on your opinions and on
your way of being and also on your way of studying?
A. In this context the closeness and the understanding on his
part is not for me to describe.  I would not know what was his
intention.
Q. Because you knew him well and because you knew him for three
years, was he a model for you and as well for the other students?
Did you admire him?
A. Yes.  During the three-year academic performance and education
I can say that he is a good model for us during the three
academic years of teachings.
Q. Did he do everything that was possible in order to be admired
by his students, according to you?
A. He did everything.  What he did was meticulous in terms of
teaching and explaining -- so during the teaching every year,
every month -- and that good job make him a good teacher and the
students loved his way of teaching.
Q. If he was generous and attentive to his students do you
believe that this allowed him to gain prestige from this, to gain
a good reputation, as well as some kind of leadership within the
classes that he was teaching?
A. I do not understand your questions.  I do not understand your
questions.  What do you want to ask me?  Please ask again.
Q. Since he was generous and attentive in particular towards
students coming from a peasant background, and also attentive
towards students who had trouble in class, therefore did the
accused benefit from some kind of prestige because of this; was
he even able to gain some kind of leadership within his class
because of this?
MR. PRESIDENT:
(No interpretation)
MR. ROUX:
Mr. President, I believe that this is a question that the witness
will have a hard time answering.  He is not an expert, he just is
telling you what he saw, but you're asking him if he could think
that he was able to gain some kind of benefit from this.  How do
you expect him to know the answer to this?  This is a question
that you should have put to the expert psychologists and not to
the witness here present.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I will therefore reformulate my question.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. The fact of being attentive and generous to his students; did
this put him in a position in which he would be appreciated and
listened to and also put him in a position in which he could have
some kind of influence on you?
A. Yes, what he did just had the impact on the students that make
them like him and like his teaching when he is teaching private
course.  And he did not made any encouragement but when we just
get information we voluntarily go to his class.
Q. I have a last question.  Regarding his relations with his
superiors, the accused's relations with his superiors -- do you
believe that at any given moment he would have obliged his
students to do things so that he could please his hierarchical
superiors in the aim of, for example, pleasing the principal of
the school or other colleagues?
A. Yes, normally at that time it's not only him or other
teachers.  They would like the students to pay respects during
the three-year education.  Every one of us respect the teacher
more than what we have now.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you.  I have no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice that Alain Werner is on his feet.  Please, the floor is
yours.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you.  This is a new request and we do, the civil party
lawyers, we do request that you, Mr. President, tell this witness
that the reason why the civil parties are not there is because
they do not understand the decision which do not authorize the
lawyers to ask to this witness any questions.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Alain Werner, you seem to have made the repetitive statement.
Are you the person, the kind of person like that?  We are not
repetitious on this matter and we will not allow you to raise
this matter again.
The accused, Kaing Guek Eav, you have just listened to the visit
raised by witness Sou Sath.  She mentioned that following the
suggestion of Mr. François Roux.  Do you wish to allow the visits
of Sou Sath to you?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, both of us, we are friends.  We are separated for
quite a long time and we would like to meet each other, and
please, with your leave, I would like to request that we would
like to meet.
MR. PRESIDENT
The Trial Chamber permits Sou Sath to pay a visit to the accused
and we are recommending the Court officer to make the arrangement
necessary for that visiting.  And the Trial Chamber hereby
announce that we will give you the floor to make the observation
to the six character witnesses at the conclusion of the four
witnesses.
And now it is time for lunch break.  The Trial Chamber is
adjourned for lunch break and the hearing will start 1.30 in the
afternoon and the Trail Chamber is grateful and appreciate to Mr.
Witness, and your testimony is not completed yet and there will
be more questions from the defence counsels.
Therefore, the Trial Chamber invites you to come into the
courtroom again from 1.30 this afternoon so that defence counsel
can pose questions to you.
The security is to take the accused to the detention facility and
bring him back before 1.30 this afternoon.
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1211H to 1333H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the defence
counsel to put questions to this character witness if they so
wish.  You take the floor.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good afternoon, Your Honours.  Good
afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Mr. Tep Sam, you were a student of your teacher Kaing Guek Eav
for three years.  During the three academic years did you ever
see or hear any student or staff or teacher criticize your
teacher Kaing Guek Eav?
A. During the three-academic year period, all students and
teachers whom I knew never said anything that I could hear
regarding this matter.  If any one of them were to criticize him,
I would not have known about it.
Q. Thank you.  So you never heard of any criticism.  Can we then
say all students, teachers and staff of that school have
affection on your teacher, Kaing Guek Eav; can we say that?
A. Yes.  During the period, nobody was upset with him, neither
students or teacher.  We just went along well; we just attended
the class and left at the end of it.  That is all.
Q. Can we say that everyone was fond of him?
A. I cannot say everyone was fond of him because in the school
there was a management committee and I had no idea of their
feeling toward him.
Q. Thank you.  This morning, you told the Chamber that Mr. Kaing
Guek Eav was one of the teachers who was humble, honest and
befriended with students -- with every student, especially those
poor students.  And, in addition to that, you said he assisted
those poor students during the school holidays or during free
time, free of charge.  Is this correct?
A. Yes, I said so this morning.
Q. Thank you.  Did you know that Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, as a
teacher, not only helped the poor students but he also raised a
few of his poorest students who could not afford to be on their
own during their study?
A. I was not aware of any children-raising by him.  When I rode
my bicycle I rode past the house where he stayed and I saw
students coming in and out of that residence.
Q. Thank you.  For poor students who could not afford writing or
material or books or pens -- and as his student at that time --
did you ever see your teacher, Kaing Guek Eav, provide this sort
of material to his poor students?
A. For poor students, I did not know much.  I myself received
encouragement verbally from him, but I would not be able to say
whether any materials were given by him to those poor students.
Q. Thank you.  You, personally, did you ever purchase any books
or school kits from any student collective?  Did you ever buy
those books or any school materials from that student
co-operative at a cheaper price?
A. At that time, I bought school materials from the student
co-operative.  It was located at the east of the school, but I
did not know the source of the establishment of the co-operative.
Q. Thank you.  Actually, your teacher founded that co-operative
to assist poor students.
Did you know that villagers who knew Duch and who befriended with
Duch, did any of them ever get upset with Duch?
A. Regarding the relationship between him and the villagers, I
hardly see this contact.  His main focus was teaching students at
school and outside the school activities I did not have much
observation.
Q. Thank you.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, we, the two defence counsels, do not have any
further questions for this character witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Witness, for your testimony to the Chamber per our
summons.
The Chamber acknowledges difficulties and challenges you faced in
responding to questions put to you by the Chamber and by the
parties to the proceedings, and that you tried your best to
respond appropriately to the questions asked.
The hearing of your testimony is now coming to an end.  You can
return to your residence or to whatever location you wish, or you
may prefer to sit in the public gallery to participate in the
proceedings.  You are now excused.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Court officer, can you invite another witness, Tep Sok, into the
Chamber?
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Witness.  What is your name?
A. My name is Tep Sok.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 61 years old.
Q. Where is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. I live in the Sangkae Pong village, Srama commune, Cheung Prey
district, Kampong Cham province.  I am a rice farmer.
Q. According to the greffier's report, you have no relationship
or affiliation to any party of the proceedings and that you have
taken an oath already this morning.  Is this information correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. The Chamber would like to remind you --
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the defence counsel.  You may proceed.
MR. ROUX:
Mr. President, if I may.  In the translation it is indicated that
the gentleman was a cultivator -- in the French translation --
but, if I understand correctly, he is a school principal.  So
maybe that needs to be changed in the transcript that he is a
farmer.  That should be changed in the record.
BY MR PRESIDENT:
Q. Mr. Tep Sok, what is your current occupation?
A. I formerly was a director of Samaki Meanchey High School.  I
now retired and I am a rice farmer.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. François Roux, is that clear to you now?
MR. ROUX:
Yes, indeed.  Thank you Mr President.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. As a witness before this Chamber you can decide not to respond
to any question which you think could self-incriminate.  And as a
witness you have an obligation to tell the truth of what you have
seen, have heard personally.
Mr. Tep Sok, have you ever known the accused Kaing Guek Eav,
alias Duch?
A. Mr. Kaing Guek Eav was my maths teacher during the academic
year '67 and '68.  I knew him very well.
Q. During your contact with him as your teacher, where did you
study and which grade were you in and which subject he taught
you?
A. Mr. Kaing Guek Eav was my teacher teaching mathematics at the
Skun College at Cheung Prey district, Kampong Cham province.
Q. During the academic year that you studied with him, what grade
were you in?
A. I was in grade 4, moving to grade 3.
Q. And in the next academic year what happened?
A. I passed the secondary exam and I moved on.
Q. You studied with him at the Skun College and he was your math
teacher.  But then you said you studied in grade 4, grade 3 and
grade 2 together with him as your teacher.  Can you tell us
exactly how many years did you study with him -- two or three?
A. I studied with him for two years; that is in grade 4 and 3.
Q. Did you know the accused well during that academic year where
you studied at the Skun College?  He was just one of the many
teachers teaching at that school.
A. I knew him very well.
Q. Mr. Tep Sok, can you tell the Chamber the character of the
accused Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, through your observation
during the period of your contact with him in the status of
student-teacher relationship, as you have just said while you
were studying at the Skun College?
A. Mr. President, when I was studying with him I knew him very
well.
He was a teacher who was appreciated and affectionated by
students.  He was very gentle and kind and especially he had a
great understanding and kindness toward poor students who lived
at the countryside.  He used to provide writing, and writing
materials such as pens or pencils, books, to those students.  He
also established study groups for the students to assist each
other and any student could ask him any time on anything that
they did not understand.
And that is my observation of the situation at the time.
Q. You talked about the character of the accused.  My question
is, during the time that he was a teacher at that school and in
his capacity as a teacher, was he a strict teacher regarding the
discipline; that is, both for himself and for students?  Can you
tell the Chamber about the disciplines he observed and practiced
at that school?
A. At that time, it was my observation that he was firm and
meticulous in his work and his attitude.  The way of his speaking
was such that we was advised, encouraged to be good students and
that we should focus on our study to become leading students and
that we should assist each other.  He always had clear plans for
students to follow and he could be consulted at any time if any
student had any question for him.
Q. For those students who were lazy or who breached school
discipline, either in the classroom or while they were at that
school, did you ever observe such a situation?  If so, what was
his reaction or treatment towards students who were lazy or who
breached the school disciplines?
A. I observed that for students who were lazy or who avoided
class; to me, I did not see such a case.  Instead, I saw him
encouraging students to study hard to become leading students
and, as a result, I did not see any measure taken by him
regarding the school disciplines.
Q. What about his communication within his peers; that is,
amongst his teachers or his communication or relationship with
the school management or a school staff?  Did you observe these
circumstances?
A. Regarding his behaviour towards school staff or to his peers,
it was smooth; it was done in a co-operative way.  There was no
conflict observed by me.  I only witnessed the solidarity amongst
his peers.
Q. During that time, did you ever see any situation where he was
angry or upset against anyone and, if so, what did you observe?
A. I did not see such a situation.
Q. During the time of his teaching at the Skun College, did you
ever go to the residence where he stayed?
A. The house where he stayed was along National Road number 6,
and there were always students coming in and out to study or to
put questions to him at that residence.
Q. What about his social interaction amongst his neighbours or
his relationship with other people in the community; did he have
good relationship with his neighbours or was he proud to be a
teacher with higher salary like 7,000 riels per month?  And if we
compare his salary to other professions at that time, his salary
was very high.  So what was your observation regarding this
aspect?
A. It was not a problem at all for his neighbours.  I only saw
solidarity amongst those neighbours and him.
Q. During your study, and as you have shown to the Chamber in
your teacher-student relationship, and not only you but other
students also enjoys the study groups founded by him and that you
assisted each other in your study quest.
The question is, during such time, did he ever address the issue
or present his view or tendency toward communism, or that did he
ever tell you or your peer of his view on communism?
A. He never said anything regarding the doctrine or the tendency
towards
Communism.  Instead, he always educated us to love human beings
and to focus hard on our study, and that we should be kind to one
another and to assist one another when needed.  And that is his
teaching, his instruction, and encouragement for all of us as his
students at the time.
Q. Besides his teaching at the school official hour and at the
extra hours through the formation of the study groups or through
his spare time where he provided his teaching free of charge, did
he do anything else for the students at Skun during his tenure as
teacher at that school?
A. During the time that I had a student-teacher relationship with
him, I was always assisted by him when needed.  He provided me
with books -- writing books -- pens and he taught all the
students free of charge if we wanted to study.  Every student
liked him very much; respected him very much.  That is all, Mr.
President.
Q. Another point.  When you had a relationship as student and
teacher at that time, did you notice that he was the one who
liked to order others or he liked to establish equal relationship
between others and if any task he would like to do himself, he
would do himself, or he is a kind of person like to order others
to do things?  What is your observation on this point?
A. As I told the Chamber earlier, he was a simple person, a
respectful person.  He did not show any bad habits and he liked
to show appearance that other people like him.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Your Honours, do you have any other questions to pose to this
character witness?  If you don't have any questions I would like
to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutor to pose questions to the
witness and I would like to remind you that you have 10 minutes
to pose questions to the witness.  Please, the floor is yours.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. President, and good afternoon, Mr. Tep Sok.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. TAN SENARONG:
Q. You were one of the students of Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias
Duch.  My question for you is that in each of his teachings and
during the break time at the end of the day did you observe your
teacher Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, talk anything in that break
time?
A. During the break time I never saw him talking anything.  He
never talked to me during the break time at the end of the day.
I saw him when going to his place after the teaching.
Q. As you are aware that during that time the Communist movement
became even more active, did you notice any other professor or
teachers told you or other students about the struggle, about the
society evolution based on their perceptions and their views?
A. In general, when I was a young student I heard sometimes they
are talking about class struggle but it was not directly from
them, but I heard from somebody that they are talking about class
struggle but I do not understand what it is.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Tep Sok.  I don't have any questions and I give
the remaining time to my colleagues to pose questions to you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The floor is yours, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to start by asking a
question that might give rise to a contradiction that we noted.
The contradiction is the following:  in the table that was given
to us by the defence, that is to say Table E5/9 regarding the
witnesses they wish to call, the description regarding Mr. Tep
Sok states that he was a student in the Skun High School in
Kampong Cham province during the '68-'69 academic years, as well
as '69 to 1970.  And today the witness is telling us that he was
in the Skun High School and that the accused was his professor in
1967 and in 1968.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. So therefore I would like him to tell us if indeed he's
referring to '67-'68 and '68-'69 and thus there is an error in
the table that was given to us by the defence, or was he a
student during other years?  And in that case, if he could please
tell us which.  Thank you.
A. Yes, when I was his student, the Professor Kaing Guek Eav from
1977-1978 (sic) and I continue until 1968 and until 1970.  Yes,
I'm sorry that I made a mistake earlier.
Q. Thank you.  During the time when you were at school in the
Skun High School did your professor, therefore the accused -- was
he arrested?  Was he ever arrested?
A. I did not know whether he is not arrested.
Q. Thank you.  Based on what the accused said -- and I would like
you to react to this -- well, the accused was apparently arrested
on the 5th of January 1968 and was released in April 1970; that
is to say exactly when you tell us that you were his student.
Therefore, how can you explain this to us?
A. Talking about that incident, I was his student when he
disappeared.  I have no idea where he went.  I received no
information about his imprisonment and about his arrest.  I have
no idea.  He disappeared later and that but I don't know anything
about that.
Q. So therefore you stand by the fact that you were his student
during two consecutive years or during part of these academic
years which you mentioned to us earlier.  Was he a math teacher
during those two years and, therefore, as of when did he
disappear?
A. When I was his student he disappeared in late 1968 -- yes,
1968.  I'm not quite sure because I did not pay more attention to
that.  As a student I focus only on my study but not the
disappearance of the professor or teacher because of that.  I
could not tell you the specific date of his disappearance.
Q. However, earlier on you were quite precise when you gave us a
rather flattering description of your teacher.  So this didn't
trouble you that he was arrested while you were his student, when
he was supposed to have been your teacher?
A. When he disappeared my feeling at that time -- I thought at
the time that I do not have a math teacher from that time because
it is the official and the civil servants arrangement for that
teacher to teach at the high school.
Q. Did the principal in that junior high school provide any kind
of explanation regarding this arrest?  Was there any kind of
political connotation to it?
A. The school principal at the time -- do you want to know the
disappearance of the school principal?  I did not know about that
and I did not follow their fate.  In summary, I don't know about
that.
Q. No, no.  I think that there was a problem of interpretation.
It's not that it is the principal who disappeared, but did the
principal provide any kind of explanation regarding the
disappearance of the accused?  And you say that this occurred at
the end of 1968.
A. At that time the school principal did not inform us anything
about his disappearance.
Q. Thank you.  And you finished your statement by answering the
President by the following sentence, which is you said that the
accused did not have any shortcomings and he liked to present
himself as such.
So therefore, do you indeed believe that he was only showing an
outside appearance?  Was his aim only to be well considered by
others and to be liked by others?  Do you believe that this was
hiding another kind of personality, that there was another kind
of personality behind these appearances?
A. At this moment I can say only what I observe in the
relationship as student and teacher; only in that moment.
Q. Mr. Tep, during your presentation you did not mention to us
what you had done between 1975 and 1979, so it seems useful to
us, in order to analyze your statement, to know where you were
and what you did during that period.  Were you evacuated?  Did
you join the Khmer Rouge?
Could you provide us with a few details, a few rapid details
regarding what you did during the period of Democratic Kampuchea?
Thank you.
A. I cannot respond to your question because I don't understand
your question.
Q. So therefore I will clarify this.  Between April 1975 and
January 1979, did you work in a co-operative, for example, or
were you obliged to travel somewhere else in Cambodia?  Were you
forced to work or did you wilfully work for the Khmer Rouge?
This is what I would like to know.
A. Yes, during the Khmer Rouge regime I participate in doing the
labour work at the co-operative.  It is the Khmer Rouge
co-operative.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I have no further questions for the moment.  Thank you, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The counsel for civil parties, I notice that you are on your
feet, so what is your wish now?
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  On behalf of the counsel for the civil
parties, we request the President to inform the following
character witness about the right of the civil party to pose the
question to the character witness that, based on the recent
ruling of the Chamber after --
MR. PRESIDENT:
This is not a new proceeding.  It is just a new character witness
to come.  And the Trial Chamber will not respond to what has
already been responded to you.  And we will not give you the
opportunity to stand up and make any request or statement when
the character witness comes to the next testimony.
And now we give the floor to the defence counsel to pose the
question to this character witness if you wish to do so, please.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours, and ladies and gentlemen.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Mr. Tep Sok, I would like to ask you that when you were a
student and Mr. Kaing Guek Eav was your student (sic) what were
his support and assistance to you at that time?
A. When I was a student, Teacher Kaing Guek Eav taught me.  He
spent his effort to teach me when I was a poor student and later
I became a good student.  He helped us with some education study
including books, pencils and pens and he encouraged us to study
hard and to build good friends, love and like the classmates.
These are his encouragement to us.
Q. Thank you.  So I would like to confirm your statement that you
told to the Chamber that you used to be a poor student, but after
the encouragement by Professor Kaing Guek Eav you became a good
student and excel student.  Is that true?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. So those are the students who were weak or poor, and what is
the average that became from poor students to excel students, so
can you say about that?
A. During that academic year the students I observed that they
were improved, including knowledge, skills and decency, and they
liked him very much because he spent most of his effort to teach.
Q. Thank you.  Your teacher was a mathematics professor.  Did you
know that your teacher taught at Skun High School -- what other
subjects that he taught at high school?
A. I know only mathematics.  It might be chemistry or physics.
I'm not quite sure.
Q. Thank you.  So when you were a student of your teacher were
you a poor student or a well-off student at that time?
A. When I was a student at that time all the poor students and
well-off students were regarded equally by the teacher.  There
was no discrimination in this regard.
Q. I would like to ask a bit further about you yourself.  Were
you a poor student or a rich student at that time?
A. Yes, I was a poor student.  I lost one of my parents.
Q. Yes, you were a poor student and you lost one of your parents.
Did you ever stay at the house of your teacher?
A. Yes, my house located close to the school, but I was not
living in the same house as him.
Q. Then did you know that your teacher takes some of the poor
students of the poor family to live and feed them?
A. Yes, he took some of the poor students to live and stay with
him.
Q. Thank you.  Could you remind or recall, since you know your
teacher, what were the achievement and the works that your
teacher created for the school?
A. When I was his student I observed that he established a
co-operative and he sold the books and other education material
at a cheap price.
Q. Thank you that you recall the achievements made by your
professor.
During the time that you were with your teacher did you ever
observe any student, staff or teacher ever criticize your
teacher?
A. No, there was no criticism made towards him.
Q. Thank you.  So do you mean that no one ever criticized your
teacher because of his good and outstanding character?  So can we
say in another way that he was loved by everybody else?  Can you
specify on this point?
A. Personally, as his student it is my observation that all the
students were fond of him, with no exception.  Also I observed
that he was actively involved with the staff and teachers at that
school.
Q. Thank you.  I no longer have questions for you.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, my international counsel and myself do not have
questions for this character witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the defence counsel is on his feet.  Mr. Roux, you may
proceed.
MR. ROUX:
Yes, Mr. President, just a few more questions.
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness.  I think that we need to clarify two
points with you, Mr. Witness.
The first point is the question of dates.  The Co-Prosecutor who
questioned you was right in reminding you that indeed since the
beginning of 1968 Duch disappeared.  And I therefore appeal to
your memory.  In your mind is there not any confusion in the
school years that you are talking about?
Now, if Duch disappeared as of the beginning of 1968 -- the
beginning of 1968 -- and if you were his student for two years,
it would be years before this date.  Can we check that with you
please?  Can you confirm that?
A. Regarding the dates, I think maybe I get confused.  I cannot
recall correctly on the academic year where I studied with him.
It could be 1967, '68.  What I said was from my recollection, so
the actual date could be different from what I can remember at
this stage.  I apologize if this caused inconvenience.
Q. For us this is not a problem.  If you are sure or certain to
have been a student of Duch for a period of two years, according
to what you said, that is important; then of course we can
double-check on the dates.  But the question is that is it true
that for a period of two years you were a student of Duch? That
is the question.  For a period of two years were you a student of
Duch?
A. Yes, I studied with him consecutively for two years but the
date could be different.  It could be '67 and '68 or '66 to '67.
Regardless of the date, I studied with him in the grade 3 and in
the grade 2 but I think I did not complete the grade 4.
Q. Thank you for these clarifications.
You said that at that time you were a mediocre student coming
from a poor family and that Duch helped you.  Is that correct?
A. He assisted me during the time of my studying with him.  Mr.
Kaing Guek Eav did not only help me but he helped every other
student who needed help.
Q. And you yourself continued your studies and you yourself
became a professor.  Is that correct?
A. Later on I became a teacher, but before I became a teacher I
had to work during the Lon Nol regime and only after that I
became a soldier.
Q. You worked under the regime of Lon Nol and you were a soldier
in the Lon Nol regime?
A. That is correct, Counsel.
Q. Mr. Prosecutor will have the answer to his question, I guess.
So after having been a teacher, you became a principal of a
junior high school.  Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Looking at your professional career -- a modest student and
then teacher and then principal of a junior high school -- do you
have the feeling that Duch is in part responsible for the career
that you were able to achieve?  Is it, in part, thanks to the
assistance that you received by Duch that you were able to become
a teacher and then a director or principal of a junior high
school?  Would you say that?
A. That is correct.
Q. When did you learn that Duch -- during the years '75-'79 --
was heading S-21?  When did you learn this information?
A. I heard that Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, was the Chairman
of S-21 when he was arrested and brought before this Chamber.
Q. And what did you think upon learning this, Mr. Witness?
A. When I heard the news I was regretful for him as a man of
virtue and that he became a criminal.  I am very regretful for
this.
Q. And despite this -- because it was a man who assisted you, who
helped you -- you decided to come and testify at this trial as a
character witness.  Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Thank you, Mr. Witness, for having
coming here.  Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Tep Sok, for providing your testimony as summoned
by the Chamber.  The Chamber has noticed that you have tried your
best to answer the questions posed to you by the Chamber and by
the parties to the proceedings.
The hearing of your testimony has come to an end now.  Therefore,
you can now go to the public audience to continue observing the
proceedings if you wish, or you may like to return to your
residence or any location you wish.  You are now excused.
(Witness exits courtroom)
It is now appropriate for an adjournment.  The Chamber will take
a 20-minute break and we will resume at 3 p.m. to continue our
proceeding.  We will hear another character witness when the
Chamber resumes.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1442H to 1502H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Trial Chamber is back in session.
The Court officers, please invite character witness Chou Vin to
come to the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Witness.  What is your name?
A. My name is Chou Vin.
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, how old are you?
A. (Microphone not activated).
Q. Please respond again.  You are reminded to wait until the
question is completed and the microphone is activated, and then
your voice could be heard in the system and also in the courtroom
for proper transcripts and for the benefit of interpretation into
English and French so that the parties to the proceeding can hear
what you said in your testimony.  Do you understand that?
A. Yes, I understand, Your Honour.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 50 years old.
Q. What is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. I am living in Souphi village, Kampong Svay district, Serei
Saophoan city, Banteay Meanchey province.  My occupation is
teacher.
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, based on the report of the Greffier, you have no
affiliation in blood or consanguinity with any party of the
proceedings and that you take an oath before entering into the
courtroom.
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, as you are a witness, you have the right not to
respond to any question or any statement that may bring you to
self-incriminate.  In the same time you have the obligation to
tell the truth, what you saw, you heard and you witnessed
personally.
Mr. Chou Vin, did you know the accused Kaing Guek Eav, alias
Duch, during which period?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  I know Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch.  I
know his name later.  I used to know him in the name of Hang Pin
since 1995 until 1997.
Q. When you know him at that time, to what extent as relationship
-- as you were the colleagues or just accidental meeting during
that year?
A. I knew him as we are colleagues, teachers in the school.
Q. Did you remember when you met with him and have a relationship
in work with him, with the accused that you said he was Hang Pin
but you know him as Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, only later after
you have the relationship in work with him before?
My question for you is that during those meetings and you worked
together with him, where was it, where is the place, and what
school was it?
A. At the time he was a teacher in Phkoam village.  It has a
school under the education department of Svay Chek district and
later on, due to his personal security, he came to stay in the
office to ensure his security, so I arranged him to stay in the
district education department -- (microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please turn on the microphone so that the witness can continue
his response.
MR CHOU VIN:
He was one of the colleagues, a teacher in Phkoam village.
Phkoam Primary School is under the education department of Svay
Chek district in 1995.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Was Phkoam school a primary school or a secondary school or a
high school?  What was the subject that he taught and what grade
was it?
A. He taught at Phkoam High School and he taught physics and
chemistry.
Q. So what grade he was teaching?
A. I do not remember that, Your Honour.
Q. Phkoam High School was under the government or under the Khmer
Rouge force, because in 1995 there was no integration of the
power of the Party?
A. In 1995 the area was an integrated area.  It started
integrated in 1994 and he start his teaching and he is enrolled
in the education program.
Q. You said later he came to stay at the education department at
the district for his personal security.  At that office what was
his function and position?
A. Yes, Your Honour, when he came and stayed in the district
education department at Svay Chek district his reason was because
of his personal security because his family was robbed and his
wife was killed, and I tried to arrange that he can come to work
and help to do some job at the office.  But there was no specific
assignment; he was just my assistant at that time.
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, can you tell the Trial Chamber about the
character of Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, that you used to know
him by the name of Hang Pin, based on your observation when you
were working with him and have some relationship as the
colleagues in doing the work there, please?
A. In 1995 when he came to work at the education department of
the district his character was humble and meticulously in doing
the work.  He worked very hard and very well, correctly as per
the assignment.  I assign him to do anything; he can do that.
Q. Other than the character that you notice, what are other
behaviour or attitudes of the accused in summary about his
personality?  What are the facts that you can notice and tell us
now?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  During the time he stayed with me he was
very friendly.  He is popular in the education field.  He worked
very hard and very well.
From the beginning, I don't know him as Hang Pin.  He was called
Krou Ta; it's a grandpa teacher.  So this is his pseudonym called
grandpa teacher, but I saw him on the list as Hang Pin.
Q. During the time he worked with you as your assistant and
colleague, what is your position and role that you can -- that
you could assign him to do some job?  So what was your position
in 1995 to 1997 that you have contact with the accused?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  During 1995 to 1997, he came over and
requested me to do some work.  I was the deputy administrator in
charge of staff and accountant at the same time.  And then I
assigned some tasks him to do; for example, school book
distribution, and he organized the list of distribution following
the plan set by the Ministry of Education.  And he did a good job
and he always met the deadline.
Q. What was the reason that you decided him to be a teacher?  And
you said that he can become in the official civil servant
framework, and during that year, as I remember, anyone can become
a teacher.  One must experience the training, psychological
training, so that a person can become a teacher or professor for
any place across the country.  So what was your ground that you
selected him as the teacher at Phkoam High School and also the
staff at the education department of the district?
A. In 1995 -- 1994 or 1995 -- it was the fighting area between
the tripartite factions and the government, and in Thma Puok it's
the integrated area, and it was confusion about teacher
recruitment and there was some returnees from the camps and they
are living in different areas in those areas.
So we selected the person, the person who knows a little bit who
can teach the other trade and the one who knows much should teach
the other better literacy.  So we have a lack of teacher and
professor, that's why the school principal decided to select him
and he get into the civil servant framework and then he request
to the department and then he gets the approval to be the
teacher.
Q. You observed his character in communication or relation among
the teachers and students when he was the teacher at Phkoam High
School, and later when he was in charge of your assistant at the
district education department of Svay Chek?
A. Based on my observation, and my conclusion is that he is a
person of friendly to many people.  Many teachers respect him and
like him very much and call his grandpa teacher.  And I ask
myself why people call him like that?  Because he is a
well-educated person and he is humble and people, young and old
people, recognize that he has a good teaching skill, work very
hard, and all teachers and students all are like him have as
ordinary friends.
Q. When he worked with you, as you were the deputy administrator
in charge of certain tasks and works, my question for you is, did
you ever notice his character, his activity that appeared to you
or showed to you when he spoke or during the discussion in any
meeting?  For example, when there's a controversial in political
perception between other parties of the Cambodia because there
was a controversial discussion between the faction at that time,
have you ever noticed or discussed about the Khmer Rouge regime,
and what was his character in that discussion?
A. During the period he worked with me, I observed that his
character was normal.  He did not talk about any political
perception or tendency.  Then I, of course, only worked with him.
Q. Did he attend a public meeting of teachers or the staff of the
education department of the district or in any other meetings
that assigned by the department for him to attend?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  He attended only the meetings in the
department about the organization or setting up the office.  If
you are talking about assignment for him to attend on behalf of
department, we don't have that kind of assignment for him.  So he
was in charge of the warehouse, of school education material, and
so on.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please turn on the microphone so that the witness can continue
his statement.
MR CHOU VIN:
And he often good staff, being punctual to come to the office,
among other office colleagues, because they were living far from
the office, but he's the one who is very punctual.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. When we are talking about teaching and teacher and professor
often get the improvement, my question is that when he was a
teacher in Phkoam High School, did he receive any assignment and
sent him for any improvement in terms of pedagogical training
improvement?  This is the general policy of the education, to
improve and to strengthen the capacity of teachers and professors
for the benefit of education, and improve the quality of
education as part of the Government of Cambodia policies.  And
there is always this kind of improvement program for the teacher.
The question is that was he assigned to the improvement for the
benefit of future career?
A. He was one of the good teachers in the school.  He always give
advice under his teaching and I noticed that there was no
assignment for him to get the improvement course.  There was just
kind of internal improvement class and training because at that
time we do not have a good organization.
So we allow the department or each office to take action so that
we can follow the program designed by the Ministry of Education.
Q. Can you recall and tell us, in order to recruit him to be the
teacher at Phkoam High School, in his request so that he can be a
teacher for Phkoam High School, what were the requirements under
the form or the request?  Was there a photo attached to the form?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  In order for him to become a teacher he
needed to meet the requirement.  There has to be a photo attached
to the application.
Q. You said that he used his name as Hang Pin.  My question is
that did he use any alias name in the application form to be a
teacher at that school?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  In his application form he used only Hang
Pin but his nickname was Grandpa Teacher Krou Ta but it was not
indicated in the application form.  So we keep calling him Hang
Pin.
Q. Can you recall the teacher's application form that he filled
in?  What was the requirement of the application form?
A. Mr. President, I cannot recall the actual application form but
in practice, indeed, it is compulsory to have a teacher's
application form in order to teach at the primary or secondary
schools.
There needs to be a biography and a photograph and also an
agreement before one can be employed by the Ministry of Education
and before the ministry approves the application.  Actually the
department and the district had direct contact with the Ministry
of Education for the employment of teachers at the location I
mentioned.
Q. Can you recall whether you actually examined and reviewed his
application, including his biography?
A. I only looked at his information sheet with his photo
attached.  He mentioned that he was a widow, his wife passed
away, and he also stated his children and what he did during the
Khmer Rouge regime et cetera and what qualifications he has had.
Q. Can you recall, in his biography, what were the surnames for
his children?  We would only like to know the surname or surnames
he used in his application form for his children.
A. I cannot recall it, Your Honour.
Q. As you told us you observed his relationship with his other
teachers, with his staff at the Skun High School during the time
of his employment at the district's education department, did you
also observe his contact or his interaction in the society; that
is with the people in the village or with his neighbours?
A. I cannot recall that, Your Honour, I'm sorry.  However, I
observed that he was well-befriended with many people and he was
famous and that information reached the district education
department.  And during the curriculum year of '95-'96 he was
requested to teach the French language at the Svay Chek Primary
School.  That was his outstanding point as his knowledge was
acknowledged and he was requested to teach French.
I personally, the deputy person -- the deputy chairman of the
district education department -- I assigned him to teach the
French language on the 28th of October 1996.
Q. After the reintegration of all the main factions all the
forces in most units or departments were combined together; that
is, the government force and the three-party faction.  However,
the reintegration was formed with particular detail of each
faction to be integrated and the personnel they sent to be
reintegrated within a certain unit or department, and the
government department or ministries would have an overall control
of the management of the force or the particular personnel.
And from your recollection can you tell us whether he was from
any party or faction or from the tripartite factions?
A. Your Honour, I apologize.  I do not actually recall the exact
party or faction he came from.  At that time the situation was
confusing and chaotic because the main purpose is to recruit
those people who were knowledgeable in order to form a group of
teachers in order to teach and educate young children.
Actually, at that time the situation was not yet peaceful and
stable and the war was still sporadic.  In certain areas the
district education department did not dare to go there.  Only the
school principals came to make contact with the department.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, do you have any questions to be put to this
witness of character?
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Good afternoon, witness.  You indicated to us that you met
Duch and he had been victim of a burglary in the course of which
his wife had died.  Did you have the opportunity of talking about
these events with him, and what did he tell you about these
events?
A. I find it hard to answer your question because I did not
understand well of the situation surrounding the robbery.  I
myself never went to that location and he only came to the
department to contact me and inform me of the robbery.
And that was the reason for him to be allowed to stay at the
department because in the course of the robbery his wife was
killed.  But I never actually asked him in details regarding the
situation surrounding the robbery.
Q. Hang Pin is a name which is Chinese sounding, if I understand
correctly.  Did Duch talk about his Chinese ancestry?
A. I apologize, Your Honour.  I do not know well about his
ancestral background.
Q. At that time had the accused converted to Christianity?  Did
he talk to you about religion?
A. During the time that he was allowed to stay at the district
education department he already converted to Christianity but I
did not know the exact time of his conversion from Buddhism to
Christianity.  We never talked in detail regarding his religion
conversion.
Actually I was wondering whether he ever talked about his
religion conversion but I personally did not pay much attention
to his personal observance of religion.
Q. If I understand correctly what you have said to us, there are
a lot of aspects regarding the accused that you discovered later
on, aspects that were never dealt with in your discussions with
him, or they were hidden.  Did you get the impression that it was
somebody who was trying to hide something, keep secrets?
A. When he was allowed to stay at the district education
department it was for his personal security and for his own
protection and actually staff at that time was sufficient, so he
was not required to be an agent or a staff, a full-time staff of
the district education department.
The main purpose was for his own protection.  That's why he was
allowed to stay at the department.  He did not hold any official
position while he stayed at the department.  Actually, it was the
principal of the school who supervised him and he was only
assigned work to do, this or that, by me personally.  He was like
my personal assistant, so he was only assigned to do what I
required of him.
Q. I understand.  So Duch was somebody who was close to you, with
whom you worked every day.  You saw him every day or almost every
day.  But can we say today that he was somebody who had a
secretive side?  Did you notice this secretive side in him at
that time, or was it a complete surprise for you to learn who
Hang Pin really was?
A. Your Honour, I was actually surprised when he was detained and
arrested, and that his actual name was Kaing Guek Eav or Duch.
During the time that he stayed with me he was an ordinary
personnel.  It was an area where people were not well off.  If
you were a little bit well off then you would be robbed.  And not
only Hang Pin -- anybody else, with no exception.
So I did not pay much attention to his personal information.
Q. Thank you very much, witness.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have no further questions for the witness.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor now to the
Co-Prosecutors to put questions to this witness.  You take the
floor.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. TAN SENARONG:
Q.  Good afternoon, Mr. Chou Vin.  You have told Your Honour that
when you received the teachers who were sent to teach at your
department, and the accused was one of them who filled in his
personal information regarding his background during the Khmer
Rouge regime, for instance what he did -- the question is, did
you personally review his information sheet and what he did
during the Khmer Rouge regime and what he did before that?
Can you elaborate on this point?
A. Mr. Co-Prosecutor, after he filled in the information sheet,
from my recollection he talked about that he was a teacher before
the Khmer Rouge regime and during the Khmer Rouge regime he was
an author of books for school curriculum and later on he was a
teacher.  I think that was all.
Q. Thank you.  Also, did you get an opportunity to discuss with
him during the time he was a teacher at your department and did
you ask from which faction he came?
A. For his own safety and protection in 1995, he was allowed to
stay at the district education department for a short while; it
was not for long, and he was required to teach at a primary
school.  So during the period of '95-'96, I sent him to teach at
the Svay Chek High School.  So I did not discuss in details of
his personal background or which faction he came from.
At that time, the situation was rather chaotic with the
integration of the tripartite faction.  Some teachers came in the
place of other teacher's names, so it was rather confusing, but
everything was clear and his name was on the payroll, once we
received the information from the Ministry of Education on the
level of his teaching at various schools and the service scale.
I did not pay particular attention to any other factions as my
party at the time was with the governing party.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Chou Vin.  From the time you knew him, and
later on he became your colleague at the district and until the
time you knew Hang Pin was actually Kaing Guek Eav, can you tell
us any outstanding points of Mr. Kaing Guek Eav or as you known
him as Hang Pin?  What type of person he was then as he mentioned
in his biography and later on as he became your colleague at the
district education department and then later on he was arrested?
Would you be able to elaborate on these various stages of his
circumstances?
A. From the time he joined us as a teacher within the framework
of my supervision in
1995 and '96, he came to stay at the district education
department and he did not show any behaviour that attracted our
attention.  His outstanding point was that among all the
teachers, he was the most well-educated teacher with experience
until he was nicknamed the "grandpa teacher."
And I knew him well only in '95 when he came to stay at the
district education department.  Before that, I did not know him,
but once I learned of his nickname as the grandpa teacher, I got
to know him and later on he was sent to teach at the Phkoam High
School, and I did not follow him further later on.
The only point that attracted my attention was his outstanding
skill in teaching experience and his infamous nickname as grandpa
teacher.  And, later on as I mentioned earlier, he was required
to teach the French language due to his experience and
background, and he was sent to teach French on the 28th of
October 1996.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. Chou Vin.  I no longer have question for you,
however, I would like to give the floor to my international
colleague, with the President's leave.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you may proceed.
MR. DE WILDE D'E'STMAEL:
Thank you, President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, I'd like to ask you two or three questions or
maybe some more than
that concerning this period.
A while ago, you spoke about the fact that as a result of his
personal security, the accused was authorized to lodge in your
premises -- in your building in the offices where you worked.  Is
this something that you would do commonly for any other person
who would have been a victim of burglary?
A. As a leader, I was responsible for the well-being of my
teachers regardless of his
situation or circumstance, therefore, for the 30 of my teachers
then I would consider the circumstance.
At that time, the situation was unsafe and insecure; shooting,
robbery existed almost every day.  Law was not respected at the
time; therefore, it was obligatory to take care of my teachers
and to protect them wherever I could for their own safety and
protection.
Q. The best way of guaranteeing the security of a person, would
it be not to know what were the reasons for this insecurity?  Did
you try to find out with him who he was scared of?  Was it just
like a robber, somebody who would have come back?  Was it the
Khmer Rouge, the government?  It's difficult to understand that
you didn't ask the accused this question.  Do you remember having
asked him this question?
A. The area was insecure and not only him was robbed.  Tun Bun
Chhin and a few others were also guarded to stay at Svay Chek
district.  The chief of the village and the chief of the
sub-districts, after the re-integration, also guarded themselves
and lodged at the district education department.  It was
customary at that time -- actually, teachers were also armed in
order to protect themselves for their own protection.  So if we
worked for the State of Cambodia, we were armed and we were
allowed to stay at the district education department.
Q. Was the accused armed at that time?
A. At that time, he was not armed.  He was gentle.  He did not
speak much.  He did what was asked of him.  If he was asked to
clean the place, he cleans the place.  So everybody observed the
goodness out of him.  And later on -- actually, when he came, the
war was almost over, but the insecurity still existed.
Q. Are you sure that there was no rumour concerning the past as a
Khmer Rouge cadre or as director of S-21 concerning Mr. Hang Pin?
At that time, was there such a rumour; did you not hear any such
rumour?  Did you not want to give this -- such a rumour any
importance?
A. During that time, I did not pay my attention to former Khmer
Rouge cadres or any prison chairman or the name Kaing Guek Eav;
none so whatever.  I only heard of that name after his arrest and
I was surprised.
I could not believe that he held such a senior position during
the regime because in my mind he was an elder, respectful person
who was weak and who was kept at the department for his own
safety.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutor, you have five more minutes in your questioning
of this character witness.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, I will finish very soon.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. There is an episode that is reported in Nic Dunlop's book,
-245 in the English version, where he says that in 1994
several teachers, colleagues of Hang Pin, had gone to Phnom Penh
and that one of them visited Tuol Sleng.
And it is said -- reported in this book at any rate -- that this
colleague is supposed to have recognized Hang Pin as being Duch
as a result of the photographs that he saw in S-21; that he is
supposed to have spoken about this to his colleagues, but all
would have decided not to say anything out of fear.
Did you hear this story told to you by your colleagues or do you
believe that this does not actually correspond to reality?
A. I was not informed of this news.  Actually, the colleagues who
came to Phnom Penh was actually my superior, and he did not tell
me this information because at that time Ieng Sary and Khieu
Samphan were integrated into the government already and that they
were pardoned by the government, and everywhere else there was
amnesty for those former Khmer Rouge soldiers.  So we did not
actually pay much attention to this.  We only focused on our work
and task.
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, when you finally learnt that Hang Pin was Duch,
was the Director of S-21, did you feel afterwards -- did you feel
betrayed by Hang Pin because he'd dissimilated his name, his
criminal past, and because he could have put into danger --
jeopardized the life and the teaching -- the life of these
students or of the teachers in your establishment?  Did you tell
yourself that this is incredible, that Duch is an excellent actor
and has misled everybody?
A. Mr. Co-Prosecutor, up to the day of his arrest, I did not
learn of his Kaing Guek Eav or Duch.  I was actually surprised.
How could he held onto his secrecy for so long because I learnt
of nothing at all?
Maybe now when he's seeing me he would smile of what he held back
from me, but during the time that he stayed with me our
relationship was smooth, nothing else, and I was not aware at all
of the existence of his criminal past.  And only after his arrest
that I learned, oh -- if at the time, if he had the feeling of
betrayal, then I would have been killed or would be in danger,
but at the exact time I did not feel that.  His teaching was
excellent, actually.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have no further questions.  Thank
you, Mr. Witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Trial Chamber would like to give the floor to the
defence counsel to put questions to this character witness if you
wish to do so, please, Mr. Counsel.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Mr. Chou Vin, I would like to ask you the following questions.
My question is that Kaing Guek Eav, formerly Hang Pin, when he
reintegrated into the government -- before the reintegration or
after the reintegrations?
A. Since I know him, he came after the reintegration because when
there is the reintegration there was him and other teachers come
to apply for the job, and so Svay Chek and Thma Puok.  They were
under the supervision of the department, but after the
reintegration my department has the supervision power over those
two areas.
Q. Thank you.  So after the reintegration, meaning that after he
came, when he defected from the Khmer Rouge, did he continue to
maintain any relationship with other Khmer Rouge soldier or
cadre?
A. When he came to work with me after the reintegration, I
observed that he had no connection or relation with other people
in the Khmer Rouge.  He was always staying in Svay Chek.  This is
a short period of time when he stayed with me in 1995 and in 1996
he went to teach at the high school and later after that, I do
not know.
Q. Thank you.  During the time you (sic) stayed with you, you
said that he had no connection or relationship with the Khmer
Rouge.  So my question for you is, currently the accused, who
used to stay and live with you, did he cause any problem or
trouble to the community?
A. Mr. Duch did not cause any trouble or problem to the community
or to other teachers.  He is a quiet person.  He requested my
person to go to the church in Battambang to practise his belief
and religion in Battambang.
Q. Thank you.  So can you say whether or not the accused can be
reintegrated in the community or society?
A. Based on my assumption, when he was in Phkoam -- you mean
Phkoam or Svay Chey?
Q. I would like to say with you.
A. With me, yes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The counsel, please reframe your question.  You should refrain
from any question that leads the witness to give you the
assumption or conclusion because he is not qualified to make any
conclusion, as it is for the experts.  So he is testifying in a
different manner.
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Please listen to my question again.  During the time the
accused stay and live with you.  You can say that the accused can
be reintegrated and live in the society or community.  Is this
correct?
A. Yes, Mr. Counsel.  He can do so.
Q. Thank you.  When the people or the mass gave him the pseudonym
as "grandpa teacher" because they understood that he was the best
teacher of other teachers, what were his good character in
addition to what you said earlier?
A. I keep asking the staff and personnel why they called him
grandpa teacher, so they said based on his skill in teaching and
his adjustment to the society.  So they used that pseudonym to
the person who is popular and well-known.  So he was called
grandpa teacher.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Chou Vin for responding  to my questions.  I no
longer have questions.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
So with you leave, Mr. President, I had the floor to the
International defence counsels.
MR. PRESIDENT:
But I would like to remind the witness that be mindful using of
the reintegration because there's the repatriation of the refugee
camp under the Paris Peace Accord.  It is a different matter.
And when you are talking about reintegration, we are talking
about the Khmer Rouge force who refused to participate in the
election organized by the UNTAC; and another final step that the
remaining Khmer Rouge force defected to the government.  These
are the chronological order so that you can indicate the facts
more clear.  If you are not clear, and then it will cause the
Trial Chamber a little difficulty in understanding the context.
But you should make a difference between the repatriation of the
refugee camp people of the tripartite factions under the Paris
Peace Agreement so that they can come into the country,
participate in the election in 1993, and there was another
reintegration of the Khmer Rouge factions in June 1996.  At the
time, there was a large reintegration and another reintegration
happened in 1998.
So in using those terms, you should be more specific because in
relation to the accused we are hearing the testimony regarding
his corrector and it has the connection to the Khmer Rouge regime
and especially to the accused.
Next, the floor is given to Mr. Roux to put questions to the
character witness.  Please, the floor is yours.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good afternoon, Mr. Witness.
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. You therefore told the Chamber that you had very much
appreciated Duch back then even if he did not bear that name.
And you also said that you were very much surprised when you
learned that Mr. Hang Pin was the former Chairman of S-21.
And therefore my question is the following.  Didn't you have any
problems to come testify today in his favour?  Didn't you have
any difficulties to do so?  Now that you know that he was the
Chairman of S-21, what do you think about this today?  What do
you think about his character?
A. Yes, Mr. Counsel.  After knowing that he was the former Chief
of Tuol Sleng Prison, and I am now the character witness, I will
respond to the question, only the truth.  But I don't know what
to do that I know that he was the former Chief, so I will use my
best effort to respond to the question as asked and instructed by
the Trial Chamber, but based on my observation upon his
character, it's only those that I describe.
Q. And you also described him to us as someone who you very much
appreciated during the entire period you knew him.  Is that the
case?  You liked him, and you described his qualities during this
period when you knew him.  Isn't that so?
A. Yes, Mr. Counsel.  I did say that I appreciate him, based on
his performance and his acumen.  This is his good deed, but I
have no idea what he did in the past.  This is -- I can tell you
the truth.
Q. This is indeed what the Chamber was expecting from you, that
you say the truth.  And you provided -- you gave the detail of
what you knew of the accused and I thank you for this.  On behalf
of the defence, I thank you for having come all the way to this
Chamber to speak to us about the character of the accused, and we
have no further questions to put to you.
MR. ROUX:
Mr. President, I thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Chou Vin, that you appeared to provide testimony
to the Trial Chamber as per our summons, and we noticed that you
faced some difficulty to respond to some questions from the Bench
and from other parties to this proceeding.
However, the Trial Chamber noted that you spent your best effort
to perform obligation as the character witness, and your
testimony is coming to an end and you can go back to your
residence or you can go where you wish from this time on.
(Witness exits courtroom)
And the Court officer, please co-ordinate with the Witness and
Experts Unit to help the witness so that he can return to his
home village, and the other two witnesses who are yet to be
heard, and please inform them that we don't have time for them
today and we would defer them to be heard for tomorrow morning.
And the Trial Chamber is now adjourned for today and we will
resume tomorrow from 9 o'clock.
The security, bring the accused to the detention facility and
bring him back before
o'clock tomorrow. 
           9   (Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1615H)
