P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber is going to hear the statement of civil party
group 2, three civil parties as scheduled, according to the last
revised schedule.
The Greffier is now instructed to report the attendance of the
parties to the proceedings and the persons concerned.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the parties to the proceedings today are all
present.  The civil parties, Madam Im Sunthy, Madam Sunthary
Phung Guth and another civil party are all present awaiting call
from the Trial Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Alain Werner, you take the floor.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you.  Good morning, Mr. President  (microphone not
activated).
I am hearing in Khmer in channel 2.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Alain Werner, could you please repeat your statement because
we only heard just very little translation from your previous
statement.
MR. WERNER:
Yes, Your Honour.  I will have a very, very short request for
you, Mr. President.
Yesterday, when my last client, Mr. Phally, talked to this Court,
he told you about his arm -- what happened to his arm -- and I
should have and I did not, and that is my mistake, I should have
asked you for the record to be flagged that indeed his left arm
has been amputated.
Because he was not sworn in and because he's here today, can I
ask your leave simply -- and he could maybe stand up -- simply
for the record to reflect that indeed, as he told you, indeed his
left arm has been amputated at the elbow.
Can I just ask your leave for the record to reflect that fact?
That's everything I'm asking.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber allows you to do that.
So Mr. Neth Phally, could you please rise and please show your
amputated left arm.
So we can now see that your left arm was amputated, and yesterday
we already heard your account in relation to the problem,
actually what happened to you that caused your left arm to be
amputated.  Thank you.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you very much, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Silke Studzinsky, you take the floor.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes.  Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.
Good morning to everybody.
I would like to make first a request to the Chamber regarding the
order of the appearance of the civil parties today, and I would
like to ask and agree -- and the civil parties agree upon this,
of course, that we hear first Mrs. Im Sunthy, and then second Ms.
Phung Sunthary and then Mr. Seang Vandy.  That is my first
request.
And then, regarding the time allocated to Mrs. Im Sunthy, who has
30 minutes, and her daughter, Ms. Phung Sunthary, I would like to
make a request to the Chamber to allow us to take this time for
both as one portion because already the introduction and the
documents to which I refer concern both civil parties and are
rather time-consuming to note all the ERN numbers and so on.
So I would appreciate if you allow us to take this time for those
civil parties as one portion together, and not to separate it in
30 minutes and three hours and 30 minutes, so that we can deal on
our own with this time allocated.
These are my two requests.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Your request is granted and the Chamber hereby allows you to
follow the requested order.  There is no procedural defect in
relation to the hearing of the statement of the civil parties in
any orders.
The Court officer is now instructed to call Madame Sunthy Im.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Madam Sunthy Im.  Is your name Sunthy Im, as I
already said?
MS. STUDZINSKY
I'm sorry.  I did not get the answer.  Could you please repeat
your question -- or I don't know if your answer was not
translated or what happened, but to start again.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I, myself, have not heard from her because she appears not to
have responded to my question yet.  So I will ask her again.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Im Sunthy, is your name Im Sunthy?
A. (Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer, could you please make sure that we can hear
from her because -- could you please move the mike a little bit
away from her face because -- actually to make sure that she can
actually see the red light and I, myself, or the Judges of the
Bench can also see the red light.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madame Sunthy, please respond to my question.
A. Good morning, Mr. President and Your Honours.  My name is Im
Sunthy.
Q. How old are you?
A. I'm 70 years old.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. I am Cambodian.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I was born in Phnom Penh, Sangkat number 6.
Q. Where do you live now?
A. I now live with my children at Tuol Kok.
Q. What is your occupation?
A. In 1979, I worked at the Ministry of Public Transport, but now
I am a pensioner.
Q. From the 17th of April 1975 to the 6th of January 1979, where
had you lived?  What did you do?
A. From the 17th of April 1975 I, like other people in the
country, were evacuated from the city and were made to work hard.
We were separated from our family members.  We were not given
enough food and we were made to work very hard and, as the
President already knows, the work during this black-clothed
regime was brutal and intensive.
Q. What is your parents' name?
A. My father's name was Im Tuy (phonetic).  He was the principal
of the Ecole Annexe Normale.  He died.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. She is Mom Trasos and she was a teacher in Phnom Penh.
Q. Can you tell the Court about your marital status?
A. I got married to Professor Phung Ton on the 15th of June 1955.
He was a professor who was executed by the Pol Pot people.  In
1975, the 17th of April, I was evacuated along with my children
and relatives.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please hold on?  You may proceed with the account of
your story later on.  We only need to ask further information in
relation to your identification and some basic information needed
at this stage, and you will be allowed the floor to tell the
Court in detail about the accounts.
We would like now to give the floor to the civil party group 2,
to briefly tell the Court about the identity of Madam Im Sunthy
and the reason she has joined as a civil party, and also the
grounds for claims for civil reparation in relation to the
alleged facts in which the accused, Kaing Geuk Eav, alias Duch,
is the accused before the Chamber.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I will make this introduction for Ms. Im Sunthy and for Mrs.
Phung Sunthary, the daughter, together because it's related.
Madam Im Sunthy has submitted already a copy of her identity card
to the Chamber and same for Mrs. Phung Sunthary, who has as well
the French consular card.
The background of this civil party, Mrs. Im Sunthy, and her
daughter will appear after Ms. Pung Sunthary, is the following:
Ms. Im Sunthy lost her husband during the DK period and learned
later that her husband was killed in S-21.  She was not aware
during the DK period because of the separation of families that
her husband was already killed.
For her daughter, who represents then the whole family as well as
Ms. Im Sunthy, she lost her father, the professor Mr. Phung Ton
who was the former dean of the University of Phnom Penh and a law
professor.  She as well, the daughter, Ms. Phung Sunthary, was
not aware during the DK period what happened to her father.
The interest to become a civil party for both is to preserve the
memory of the husband and the father and to find the truth
concerning the fate of Mr. Phung Ton which is until now still
hidden.  And although several witnesses were asked, and including
the accused, to disclose information, those civil parties and the
whole family is still left without any knowledge what happened
exactly to their husband and father.
Concerning the reparations, both civil parties, Ms. Im Sunthy and
Ms. Phung Sunthary, will leave these questions to their lawyers.
I will now give the Chamber documents that were submitted to
support the civil party application and these documents are all
on the case file and can be grouped as follows.
There are, first, different prisoner lists where Mr. Phung Ton
appears at different times and shows that he was -- when he was
still alive; if it can be called alive -- and then a biography --
now to be autobiography -- and different letters that he wrote
and who are preserved.
I will give as far as possible the ERN numbers and I start with
document D25/5/7.  The Khmer ERN is 0018847 through 00188850.
Sorry, I forgot one 8 in the first number.  I repeat the Khmer
ERN number.  It is 00188847 through 00188850.  The English ERN
number is 00274957 through 00234960.  This is one prisoner list.
Another prisoner list is the document number -- it has document
number D25/5/8.  The Khmer ERN is 00188853 through 00188856.  The
English ERN is 00234961 through 00234962.
The next prisoner list is the document with number D25/5/11 with
the Khmer ERN 00188870 through 00188875 and the English ERN is
00239745 through 00239750.
Then the next prisoner list is D25/5/9 with the Khmer ERN
00188858 through 59 and with the Khmer -- sorry-- with the
English ERN 00239014 through 00239016.
And then the next prisoner list is D25/5/12 with only the Khmer
ERN number which is 00188877 through 00188879.
And then the last prisoner list where Mr. Phung Ton appeared and
it is in the document with the number D25/5/13, and this has the
Khmer ERN 00188881 through 00188882, and the English ERN is
00335539 through 00335542.
Then another document to support the application and the civil
party application of these two civil parties is a biography from
S-21 which is the case file on the document number D25/5/9, with
the Khmer ERN 00188857 through 00188859 and the English ERN is
00239013.
Then on the case file is another document, which is an
autobiography; that this document is from S-21, but was written
during already the detention outside of S-21 and can be found
under the French ERN 00188817 through 00188822 and Khmer ERN
00188832 through 00188838.
Then there are supporting documents which are letters written by
Mr. Phung Thon when he was abroad and which will -- where the
civil parties will refer to later on.  These letters can be found
under the document numbers D25/5/1 and through with the French
ERN number which is original -- it was original, written in
French -- 00188811 through 00188812 and the Khmer translation,
00224277 through 78.
The next letter from May 1975, also written abroad, can be found
under the document number D25/5/2 and is also written in French
-- the original -- and to find under the ERN number 00188813
through 00188814.
And then the last document and letter is the document number
D25/5/3 from 23rd of December 1975 and also written abroad under
the -- in the original language, French, and to find under the
ERN number 00188815 and in Khmer 00284318.
So far these documents and these documents, of course, refer --
or are the basis and supporting documents for both civil party
for Mrs. Im Sunthy and Mrs. Phung Sunthary.
I would like to inform the Chamber that first Mrs. Im Sunthy will
give her statement and refer to her personal suffering as wife of
Professor Mr. Phung Thon and she will give this statement also to
preserve the memory of her husband, and this will be rather short
statement and more detailed will be then the daughter, Mrs. Phung
Sunthary.
And I only want to inform the Chamber that Mrs. Im Sunthy is in a
rather weak health state and as the Chamber may be aware, she
already collapsed once in the courtroom.  And I think so far Mrs.
Im Sunthy would like to give only the statement and -- so far --
read it out and she feels not able to respond then to questions
and so I would suggest to leave this more to the daughter who
then represents the family comprehensively and can be questioned
then.
And so, also to inform the Chamber about the proceeding with Mrs.
Phung Sunthary.  She has prepared as well a statement and will
present this statement then to the Chamber and, of course, will
be open then for further questions.
And Mrs. Phung Sunthary has also questions to the accused at the
end and will put them then through the President to the accused
or directly, as you find it appropriate.
So far my introduction and I hope -- although you didn't mention
it again -- but that you agree upon my request to consider the
time for both civil parties as a whole because only the
introduction now needed sometime to mention all the documents we
are referring to, and then I would like to give the floor to Mrs.
Im Sunthy.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Sunthy Im, you can now make your statement to the Chamber
related to the events and facts which leads you to becoming the
civil party to this case, and the facts and crimes alleged on the
accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch.
MS. IM SUNTHY:
Mr. President, I would seek your permission for my medical
assistant to sit next to me.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The medical assistant, you're instructed to sit next to this
civil party.
MS. IM SUNTHY:
In 1975, my family and I were evacuated from our home.  We were
walking together with my parents as the rest of the people in the
country.  My husband was abroad; he was on a mission in
Switzerland.  He was a law professor specializing in
international law and he was also an expert in the law of the
sea.
On the 16th of March 1975, there were several bombardments in the
vicinity of Chum Chao and Pochentong and I would not be able to
follow him at the Pochentong Airport.  My two younger siblings
farewell him off at the Air Cambodge's office south of Phsar
Thmei at 3.30 p.m. because of the tremendous bombardments at the
time.
I was anxious at the time too, and during that period we had no
mobile phones.  I sat at his office waiting for his telephone
call whether he reached the Pochentong Airport.  I was so
concerned due to the serious bombardment at the time.
I was waiting for his call until 7 p.m. and finally he called me.
It was the 16th of March, as I said, he arrived in Bangkok.  He
spoke at length, asked me to take care of myself and the family
as I had not been well.  My health was poor at the time.
He told me again and again to take care of myself and that I
should not force the children to go to school because he knew
that I wanted the children to be well educated, and he begged me
not to force them to school because of the unpredictable
bombardments in the city, and that I myself should only focus on
my health and that I should observe the situation and make a
decision accordingly whether the children should be sent to
school or not.  He talked at length and I did not want him to
waste money on the telephone bill because we were strict on the
expense.
During our evacuation at 9.30 a.m. when we were ordered to leave
our house, my second-eldest son was not with us, but because we
were forced so we had to move.
Before the fall of Phnom Penh, I received a letter from him from
Geneva.  In the letter he reiterated his wish for me to take care
of my health and that I should not force the children or be too
firm with the children.  These are the two main points of his
letter.
I actually had a son.  He got polio, and during the evacuation,
Mr. President, it was miserable as he had to drag his leg.  There
was no support for him and the relatives, they had to take care
of their children as well, and my youngest child, who was six
years old at the time, was so hungry.
When I left, I took along his letter, his last letter, and the
voice I heard on the telephone from Thailand was the last voice
of him that I had ever heard.  His letter was exactly the same as
what he spoke on the phone from Thailand.  He understood my firm
stance toward the children and that's one of the reasons he
reiterated in his letter and on the telephone.
When I left, I also brought along some family photos and also I
had a photo in my wallet, but everywhere we passed through we
were searched and all the photos -- even a wallet photo -- were
seized.  I got a photo of my child studying in Germany as an
engineer and the connection was with his friend who was on a
mission with him in Paris in France.
When Mr. Ung Pech made a presentation about my husband, my son
stood up and said that, "The person you spoke about was my
father", and during that gathering there was an older woman who
claimed to be my husband's friend and she gave some photos to my
son and there was a photo of my husband.  So, in summary, my
photos were all gone.  They were all confiscated.
My husband's hobby was reading books and researching documents.
He did not ever waste any time.  His time and scheduling of the
day was always strict and precise.  Sometimes he had me read a
French book or a lecture text, however, I did not really
understand well due to my limited French knowledge.
And he taught me.  For instance, when he asked me to read a law
book in French, after my reading he would explain to me what the
law was about in Khmer so that my understanding in the legal area
would expand and, with that knowledge, then I would be able to
educate the children well.
I also provided my assistance to my husband to the best of my
capacity.  For instance, when he had to correct homework for the
children, then I would classify the homework and I would help him
with the ordering of those marks he gave to the homework.
So we two were so close during the 20-years period.  We had never
had any single argument and I would seek his advice on my
shortcomings in my character, and he had a knowledge of
understanding my character, my psychological habit, and that he
would seek a way to explain to me of my shortcomings, and he
would tell me the difference between black and white.  There
would be no grey area.  And that was him; that was my husband.
In addition, during his tenure, his contacts with the French
embassy or other embassies, then some journalists that -- and the
newspapers that he read, then he would collect all those clips
and I would arrange them, organize them for him.
So, in short, he educated me very well to understand the right
from the wrong and to make myself progress.  During the time that
I was with him, I felt the warmth I received from him and that I
was one of the lucky women who had a very kind and understanding
husband and who impart his knowledge to me.
I also lent him a hand whenever I could so that I would be
accustomed to the way the work was done and be familiar with his
work.  Also, during the time that I had to carry a water, I
imagined of his time in Geneva or in France that he was lucky to
be there but here in Cambodia I had to carry water from the
river.
I slipped and fell, and I fell on the bank of the river as it was
steep.  I had to carry the water from the river to fill in the
pot, the main pot at the kitchen.  I also had to look after my
mother because my elder children were separated and they lived in
different cooperatives.  I only lived with my younger children.
And the kitchen was huge for the cooperative and I had to supply
it with enough water for the kitchen.
The river bank there was so steep so I had to use a stick to
support myself while I carried the water.  My elder daughter was
also sent to the location where they built the dams and she has
to carry the soil.  So was my son.
I suffered a lot during that time and the food ration given by
Angkar was so little.  At that time the rice was wrapped, mixed
with grass and some mud.  It was nothing much in there, very
little rice and I had to give that food to my children.  We were
so mistreated during that regime.
Even my mother who had lived through various wars, she learned a
few tricks from those wars and she told me to cook rice from the
rice that they distributed in the morning so that she could
divide those rice into little pieces and then she could give
those rice to the children.
Sometimes they really mistreated us.  The rice-cooking pot that
we ate -- there was -- they defecated in that pot.  They treated
us like animals and we dared not to do anything.
My father one day went to cut the bamboo and he was not well as
well.  And on that day it was raining and he had to carry the
bamboo back.  He had a fever so I went to ask for some medicines
from the village medical office.  From the medicines I got I gave
to my father and he got seizures because that pills were made
from a poisonous tree.  And then I went again to see that person.
I said, "Mr. Chief, could you please send my father to the sector
hospital?"  He was so ill.
And that chief was actually young but I had to call the chief
like Mister.  My father did not say anything because of the fact
of that poisonous pill.
I repeatedly asked permission from the village chief and he said
there was no gain to keep and there was no gains to lose or to
get rid of and he scolded my father.  He was the type of person
who did not know any morality.  It is not Cambodian culture.  And
I was so upset because I was so pitiful on my father.  I was so
angry so I spill out, "If you have parents like this, did you
ever think of your parents?  If there was no gain to keep them,
so it means you do not have to feed your father or mother?"
And my younger brother was very afraid that I would be taken and
killed so he dragged me away and backed the chief.  And he
apologized to the person that because I loved my father so much,
that's why I was so upset.  And if I was taken and killed then
nobody would take care of my children and I had seven children.
And later on I was given some medicine.  I was put on a bed while
charcoal, hot charcoal was placed underneath and I developed some
blisters.  Later on my children died, including my mother and my
auntie.  My aunty was like my biological mother because she had
taken good care of me all the way and they all perished because
they were given the medicines, a kind of very poisonous medicines
that put them to death.
And I could imagine how difficult the life of my father would be
because having lived in such a regime I experienced these
barbaric acts and I talked about this to my relatives.
And even during the time when food was deprived, we talked about
eating chicken with some kind of ginger sauce.  Having said that
among our children, then we were taken to be re-educated and we
were warned not to even mention about eating such bourgeoisie
food like that.
So even the young people like my children who talked about being
hungry, about eating delicious or more delicious food were warned
not to talk about this again because it represented the idea of
the imperialist or the bourgeoisie's regime.
Our children actually were educated by I and my husband to be
brave, to be able to challenge any tough situation.
We were living together in the co-operative, and one day when my
children were very sick and I asked the chief of the unit so that
he could be treated.  However, I found it difficult to actually
get such information.
And another child of mine was good at producing some kind of
tortures and he could also go fishing.  He was six years old, but
he could catch some fish, and because of that he was punished by
being exposed to the sunlight because he was accused of damaging
the young rice plants in the paddy fields because he caught a
fish in those fields.
After my child committed that alleged wrongdoing and was warned
and punished, I myself was also called to build myself.  I didn't
understand the words "building myself" because I was told to sit
down on the paddy's dyke and that I was told that I was a liberal
person.  I was ill disciplined.  I got used to living in the
city.  So like father, like son, like mother, like daughter,
because you people got used to the city lifestyle so you should
now be warned not to behave like that again.
I would like now to make it brief because I feel rather exhausted
telling the details although it was telling it, but I would like
to skip to the time when we came to Phnom Penh.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. STUDZINSKY
Q. I would like to ask you to make it easier, a question that you
could describe for the Chamber.  When you learned -- the time
when you learned first what happened to your husband, and if you
could start to describe this first and then a little bit about
how your suffering until today was.
A. Thank you.  In 1979, when I returned to Phnom Penh, I felt
that my husband could be reunited with us but, later on, I
learned that he was detained at S-21.
When my father died, I was already deeply depressed, however, it
really shocked me and it was a really complete distress when I
lost my husband.  It's a kind of tremendous grief, and I don't
know how I can really put this into words to explain or to
describe to the Chamber to understand how huge this suffering I
have had having lost my loving husband.
It has been more than 30 years, but time only intensifies my
grief.  I have never been happy and I have been terrified and
living with trauma.
So every minute of every day I could never forget to think of
him, and sometimes I had to sit down and to even find a very
quiet moment on my own to think of how I could really manage the
lives and the livelihood of my seven children because I was left
alone without the support and assistance of my husband.
And I know for sure that my children as they were well educated
by my husband, they really want to learn more and they want to be
well educated.  Having had this in my mind, I started to be
feeling even more worried of how I could really cope with this
because at the beginning we started from scratch again with seven
children without a husband.
And sometimes I even attempted to commit suicide because I just
want to finish off everything and to finish this hardship.
It is actually impossible for me not to feel sympathetic for my
husband who could have been inflicted some kind of tortures and
sufferings in the regime during the time when he was in his
captivity.  If he lived, he would be of all kinds of assistance
when needed because he was a very caring husband and father.  And
in our family, we had experienced some kinds of difficulties and
hardship, but the situation was degenerating when they had to be
dealt with without my husband.
Now, I can see that my children are brave and everyday they are
outspoken people because they were well trained by their father,
although many believe that they seem to be aggressive by behaving
like that, but the way that my husband would like them to be is
to be brave and aggressive like that.
However, I can't stop weeping and crying, but I never make it
known to my children.  I had to close my bathroom door and then
make use of this very lonely moment to cry out loud in that
bathroom, but not to make my children heard.
I earn very little at the Ministry of Public Transport and I had
to be on my own to support my family, and I never wanted to ask
any assistance from my relatives, sisters or brothers, because I
just would like to shoulder this alone.  And I knew for sure that
my families have been in a very desperate position also.
However, I would like to be proud to be alone here anyway to
raise the children, although it is very difficult.  As a widow in
Cambodian society, normally it is well criticized.  However, I
have been behaving in the way like I perform two roles, as a man
and as a woman; a husband and wife at the same time.  So I have
to teach my children, to cook for them, and also the most
important thing is to tell them to be able to struggle, to hold
onto life.
When I come to these hearings to be part -- to observe the
hearings at this Tribunal, I have visualized the brutality of the
regime, and when Robert Hamill put the photo of the person who
was seen struggling in a pool of blood it really shocked me
because I could imagine how difficult life could have been for my
husband at that time and I could not really control my feeling at
that time, and some time I passed out.
So I can only survive these days because I have to consume
medications.  One day when I was at home to watch the movie in
which I saw the shackles and people were being shackled, and I
could not really dare see those footages.
Q. Ms. Im Sunthy, I would like to put another question to you and
maybe to make a conclusion that you have reported to us how
difficult it is to raise the children without a husband and to
cope with all the sufferings during the time.  Maybe you could at
the end now summarize for what you are looking here in this
trial.  Why did you become a civil party?  What do you want for
your husband and what do you want from this trial?  Maybe you
could summarize this and then I would suggest to give Sunthary
the floor.  Thank you.
A. Thank you, Ms. Studzinsky.  Whenever I have to recall this
account I feel even more broken.  I am here to actually pay
homage to the dead souls of my husband and my father and the lost
family members.
Some people say that I am here to take revenge but it is not
true.  I am here to find justice for my husband.  I am here to
reveal the truth why people were killed, why these barbaric acts
were inflicted onto the victims.  Was this because of the power
enrichment or for the personal gain, or for what else?
I would like to tell Your Honours that as a professor or
schoolteacher, anyone must be ethical and professional and
everyone must think of how to really build a country, not to
struggle for power, for personal power.
I would like to conclude my deposition now and I apologize for
being too emotional sometimes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Silke Studzinsky, would you wish to put some further
questions to the civil party?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
No, I have no further questions at the moment but I would thank
Mrs. Im Sunthy a lot that she arrived today here at the Court to
preserve memory of her husband but of course to all her family
members and Cambodians.
And I would thank you that you could have the force to sit here
before the Chamber and tell about your sufferings and to give
your husband a face.
There are no other questions, not from my side.  I would then
give Sunthary the floor.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, would you wish to put any questions to the
civil party?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  As requested, we do not have any
questions to put now.  If we do have questions we will put them
to her daughter but we do thank her for her statement this
morning.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, would you wish to put questions to this
civil party?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, thank you but the defence counsel does not have
any questions to put to this civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Im Sunthy, the hearing of your statement has now come to an
end and, as scheduled and agreed that more times will be
allocated to her daughter to give her statement, now you are
allowed to sit back at your seat.
(Witness exits courtroom)
And since it is an appropriate time to take the adjournment,
we'll take the adjournment now and resume at 20 to 11.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1022H to 1044H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
And we are going to hear the statement of the civil party, and
now we are going to hear the statement of Phung Guth Sunthary.
Please come to the front seat before the Chamber.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Madam Civil Party.  Is your name Phung Guth
Sunthary?
A. Yes, Mr. President.  My name is Phung Guth Sunthary.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I am 53 years old.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. I have a French nationality but I was born Khmer.
Q. What is your place of birth?
A. I was born in Sangkat number
in Phnom Penh. 
 
          6   Q. Where is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. At present I live in Chaktomuk in Phnom Penh.  I am a former
pedagogical trainer in French and the training is for the French
teachers throughout the public schools in Cambodia.
Q. What was the name of your father?
A. His name was Phung Ton.
Q. And what is your mother's name?
A. My mother's name is Im Sunthy.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now gives you the opportunity to describe to the
Chamber the events and the facts related to the crimes alleged on
the accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, and the impact upon you
during the commission of those crimes when the S-21 was
established and operated from the 17th April 1975 through the 6th
of January 1979, and the reasons for you to be a civil party and
the concrete reparations that you wish to seek.
Also, you can express your feelings regarding the sufferings,
emotionally and physically, from those crimes.  You can proceed.
MS PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Thank you Mr. President.  Thank you, Your Honours for giving me
the opportunity to make a statement before this Chamber today.
First of all, I would like to describe about my memory and
sentiment between my father and I from my childhood through
adulthood, through adolescence.
What I can remember is an innocent and lovely father, and the
last time that I saw him I will describe that and, later on, I
will briefly talk about the period of the Democratic Kampuchea
and the fact that I did not see his returning.  I will talk about
our suffering and our great loss after we heard the news that he
was executed at S-21.
Later on, I will talk about our effort to do the research and the
results and the responses we received from the accused.
Mr. President, through this statement, I would like to praise to
my father's soul as a prisoner wearing serial number
at S-21.            17   With Mr. President's leave, I would like to show some photos,
some surviving photos of my father and the serial number on my
father is number 17.
The Court officer, please take the photos from the civil party
and have them projected on the slide.
Could you try to adjust the reflections of the light on the
projector, Court officer, because part of the photo is whitened?
Madam civil party, you can now continue with your statement.
MS PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
First of all, I just showed you the photograph of my father
wearing placard number 17.  I would like to pray to his soul.
He was handcuffed and pushed onto a truck on the 16th of March
'76 and was sent to Tuol Sleng where he was tortured, dehumanized
and, in the end, he was smashed.
Mr. President, Your Honours, I wish to describe the personality
and the quality of my father as a person and as a father who
lived in the Cambodian society, who earned respect from people
who knew him; I want to make this as lively as possible.
My father was a man who had a strong stance, firm but humble.  He
listened to his children regardless of what the matter was.  He
paid attention to the children and he always had time for the
children despite his busy work.
He never beat any of his children.  I have never have heard him
even using some kind of strong words towards the children.  He
taught us to love humankind and dignity.
My father taught us how to deal with conflicts and how to avoid
taking any revenge against anyone and teaching us how to know the
dignity of humankind.  And he meant business.  He really was a
role model.  Whatever he did he left the trace of great model, a
person with great wisdom and the wisdom that is still well
embedded with every -- the mindset of all the children.
When we grew up we learned that he was the person who really
admired and respected.  And we received very warm care --
attention from him at all times through his attitudes, his way of
speaking to us and his kindest affection.  It was a huge
sentiment towards us and it is priceless.
Always he protected us.  So he was like a great shadow to protect
us from the outside world of hatred and problems.
On one occasion there was a big rain and I was about five to six
years old and I went out to play under the rain and then I fell
and hurt my chin without the knowledge of my mother.  When I came
back home I was assisted by my father and he took me to the
doctor so that my injury could be treated and I could feel how
caring he was towards me and he could really heal my pain, the
emotional pain.  Although 50 years almost passed by, the moment
we had been together still haunts me.
On one Sunday evening, we walked at the riverfront and I could
recall the moment when he lent me his hand to help me get off the
car and then he put his hand into the open mouth of the concrete
statue in front of the Royal Palace and then he would joke with
me by saying that, "Look, the lion is now biting my hand."  I was
back then called Ly, which is my alias name, and I cried when I
heard that the lion was biting him because I was afraid that he
got hurt, but he then laughed at me.
My childhood memory reveals that I had been very close to my
father and how much care I had also from my father.  It is
actually my duty now to attest to this Chamber the memory, the
dignity, the caring father; the things that had been deprived of
him during the time when he was in captivity.
He was actually the cornerstone for the whole family.  He did his
best to support the family and he was the father who educated
children to be gentle and humble.  He worked a lot.  He was a
busy rector, the director of the high educational institution.
My parents normally had dinner at about 7 to 7.30 p.m. and he
would be seen coming to our room to assist us with our homework
and he always listened to our problems at school and then he
would be able to assist us with all the problems.
Sunday would always be reserved for our time together in the
family.  One day, when my mother was preparing some food for the
meal that we enjoyed together during the weekend, then my father
would take the opportunity to teach us how to be a good citizen,
how to be a good person in society.  He would like us, and me in
particular as a single daughter in the family, to be highly
educated and he really cared for me a great deal.
He was the person with open mind; his mind was open to the
outside world.  However, he really had the idea of the
preservation; he preserved the Khmer culture and heritage.
I still remember during the 1960s there was a novel, the novel
entitled, "The Nature of Women" and then it had been produced
into the film and show at the Soriya movie and I sat next to him
to watch that movie together.  The movie reminds us of the event
because in the story itself, the author tried to educate the
audience of how parents' love could have been towards their
children although the mother was departed from the children then
she could really showed her loving nature toward the children.
After the Khmer Rouge, I tried to locate the movie but to no
avail.
My father never forgot to educate us on several other foreign
cultures to understand the world.  Very often my father had to
fill missions in France, Swiss, China, South America and every
time when he was there, he would be sending some gifts, souvenir
from abroad to the children and the family.
As a lawyer, a professor, a rector and the principal of the high
education institution, he earned a lot of dignity and he tried to
protect the interests of the nation and he tried to protect Koh
Puolo Wai of Puolo Wai Island during the time of conflict with
the South Vietnam and Cambodia.
In 1974, he went with the navy -- the national navy crews to that
island and we were anxious because during that time the country
was in conflict, and that Lon Nol's regime had a conflict with
the South Vietnam government and I could not stop being so
anxious although when I was at school because I knew that my
father would be on the way to that island.  And I had been so
anxious until the moment I could see him back home.
And I would like to also tell the Court that my childhood and my
adolescent-hood actually, I have spent the entire period to be in
the very good care of my father.  When I turned 18, I wanted to
study law because I would like to take the footstep of my father
and as advised by him and he was a great role model; a very
righteous role model.  And as a daughter, I would really love to
follow his footstep and he never refused to allow me to pursue my
education in law.
And I was waiting to be granted a scholarship to continue the
education; however, a few months later, my mother told me that
actually my plan really worried my father because he told my
father that he was afraid that I would not be well treated
because if I studied law then I would be close to him and close
to the politics.
I would like to now proceed with further statement.
On the 16th of August 1968, at about 10 o'clock in the evening, a
group of police came to arrest me -- I could hear their footsteps
-- and they started to search my room, and then I was half awake
and I could see my grandparents and I was shocked.  I ran to take
refuge under the arms of my father while the police kept on
searching the room.  I remained close to my father but my mother
told me to go and be close to my brothers.  I tried to be close
to my father, of course, because it was so warm.  However, I
could not really contest my mother's advice that I had to go to
see my brothers.
And in the morning I woke up.  I did not see my mother and I
could expect that she would be in my grandparents' house.  My
grandparents' house is close to my house and I went there and saw
my mother, and my parents were very saddened and I knew that my
father was arrested.  I was very terrified because I was afraid
that he would be also arrested and killed in Trapeang Kraloung
like the other people who had been executed there previously.
However, I was consoled by my grandparents.  At that time I was
12 years old.
A few weeks passed by.  Children were allowed to pay a visit to
my father, and I still remember the moment when the door opened,
we all ran to hug him.  My mother and my younger son was cradled
my mother when she gave him to my father to continue to cradle
him, and at that moment it was so moved that even the guard could
not hold back his tears.  Next to the bed there was a table for
writing and there was a piece of paper in which the writing of my
father could have written in it, and no-one could talk anything
and then we were separated.  Before we left we looked at the door
which was closed behind us.
A month later, during lunch, my mother was not present, because
normally she would be taking the meal to my father at the
detention facility located at Tuol Kok.  I ate lunch together
with my brothers and I heard the footsteps of my father coming
and I saw him coming back home wearing dark green pants, and I
could see a few policemen following him, and the children left
the lunch table to greet him because they were -- we all were
happy to see him back home.
He was still under surveillance of the police and he was put in
the house arrest for the following three months.  This event
really is still in my mind.  I don't understand why such a good
family, a good father like him, was accused of being the Khmer
Rouge.  He was a normal man, a noble person who would like to
protect the liberty and would like to provide the opportunity for
the poor to be able to continue their education, and that's all.
And I would like to proceed to the 16th of March 1975, when my
father was departing to Geneva.  In the evening of March 1975 I
was still reviewing my lessons because students at that time had
two shifts at school because a lot of people would be seen
running from the liberated zones to Phnom Penh, and school days
was reduced.
At about 3 p.m. my mother shouted or called me and then I could
see my father, who was already at the ready to depart.  She
looked at me without saying a word.  It was a very strange moment
of departure.  Having noted this moment, I could now see that at
that time, my father could have already envisaged the disasters
that could have happened to the family during his departure.
I and my brother saw him off at the airport.  At that time I
could not concentrate on my study or homework because I was so
anxious.  And a few years later we learned that he died, and I
asked her to recall the accounts of what happened to my father
after he finally departed from us.
My mother told us that after he was well dressed, his clothes
secretary before he was to be leaving, he removed his shirt and
lied on his back, and my mother was seen to give the massage to
him and she noted that my father did not want to leave the
family.  It was some kind of omen that he could see that
something could happen.  So his worries could be well expressed
in his facial expression, and it was at the moment that he was
speechless.
At about 7 p.m. we were expecting his phone call because he
promised that when he reached Bangkok he would then call us.  We
started to feel very worried already when he left home to the
airport because at that time we could hear that there would be a
lot of bombardments everywhere in the country.  Later on we
received the phone call that he was in Bangkok.  That was the
last words or voice we heard from him -- the last moment that we
heard from him.
The evening of 16th of March 1975 we were announced -- we heard
on the radio broadcast that schools would be closed because there
would be severe bombardments and that students were not advised
to go back to schools.
A few days before the 17th of April 1975 my mother received a
letter from the Foreign Ministry.  In the letter we learned that
he would be back home.
I would now like to proceed with the 17th of April 1975 event
when the population of Phnom Penh was forcibly evacuated.  At
that time I was so shocked to see such exodus carried out by the
Khmer Rouge and it was worse because there was no presence of my
father.  Fortunately, my grandfather could assist us with the
evacuation.  However, he could not be the right person suitable
enough to replace my father.
We went together on the direction to Kampong Chhnang.  My parents
were born in Kampong Chhnang and they would like us to move to
Kampong Chhnang to do the rice farming as ordered by Angkar.
Since we did not have any kind of means of transportation to
travel to Kampong Chhnang then we let Angkar decide which
direction they would wish us to go to.  Then we moved to Sector
21 and finally Sector 505.
Like the other women I was moved to mobile units and would be
made to do farming in various places according to the orders of
Angkar.
Starvation, forced marriage, these kinds of things I could
escape.  Luckily, I could avoid being raped or avoid the forced
marriage.
During the regime I could not stop thinking of my father.  I
wished he were with us to share the moment.  I knew that he was
in France.  He was fine.  By having said that I mean first I
would like him to be with us but however, after all, I knew it
would be better off for him to be there.  At least I knew he
survived in France.
Later of the year there was a big flood at Sector 505 and I did
not know why at that time I was so anxious, and I had a vivid
nightmare that I saw my father in the dream.  His body was
swollen.  I could not see his face and he was speechless, and I
did not know why he did not talk anything in the dream.  I could
still feel uneasy about this.  And I asked permission from the
chief of the unit to go home.  And when I came home I did not see
my mother.  I met my grandfather instead.  I shared with her
(sic) the account of my dream and I told her that I was afraid my
father would be in big trouble because I saw him in the dream and
he was not in good shape actually in the dream.
And a few years later of course that dream came true because the
dream gave me the indication that my father would be in trouble
obviously.
In Khmer Rouge regime when I saw the old people the same age as
my father who had to work under the sun, the baking sun and I
could imagine how difficult life could have been.  And I thought
that it would be very fortunate for my father who would not be
there anyway.
On one occasion I went to the place where I was asked to write my
biography and I wrote the details, the truth of my family,
myself, my parents, in order to make sure that this information I
put in the biography could be communicated to the upper echelon
of the Khmer Rouge so that my father could locate us.  However,
unfortunately I did not know that the biography could end up
being in the hands of some bad people maybe and that could lead
to the arrest of my father.  But I don't know.  Maybe it was true
that because of that biography that my father was arrested later.
I did not know until now whether the biography was torn apart or
thrown in the garbage bin, but who knows?
During the regime, the Khmer Rouge regime, whenever emergency
came, whenever I had to be exposed to the starvation I could not
talk because the 17 April people were regarded as prisoners of
war, so we were deprived of our freedom, liberty.  We were put to
plant rice at the rice field and I was left on one occasion in
the jungle because the people did not like me; they left me alone
in the jungle.  Luckily some senior women loved me and then gave
me a ride home.
Last time when I was carrying soil on the Seda dam I saw people
who were defeating from the battlefields and I dropped the
earth-carrying basket and then I ran away together with those
flocks of people.  I kept running due to fear and excitement
until I could not move any further due to the number of people
who were also running.
I did not know where to go.  I did not have anything with me.  I
only had the clothes on my body and I did not know anyone.  I
lost all my family members.  I could not find my mother.  I only
saw people scattering and running everywhere.
At Bos Leav sub-district it was nightfall and I went searching
amongst those groups of people and I heard the voice of my
mother.  I looked into that direction.  I saw her carrying a
torch shouting for the names of my two younger siblings.  I met
her and she took me to her group where I saw my handicapped
sibling and my grandmother there.
I left with them by taking the boat crossing the Mekong River and
continued our escape as ordered by the Khmer Rouge who gathered
us together with them to go to Boeng Ket Mountain and later as
there was a village chief who was nearby and the son of that
village chief had a radio and he tuned to the channel of the
Democratic Kampuchea but instead they heard the voice from
American channel and we learned that Phnom Penh fell.
So we went down the Boeng Ket Mountain and I met my aunt who was
forced to get married by Angkar.  So we together made our journey
to Kratie as we had no food to eat and we would starve to death
if we keep running.
So we returned to the last village where I stayed but upon our
arrival at that village we did not have any rice -- to search for
any rice and I would like to tell the President and the Chamber
that when Angkar evacuated us on the 17th April '75 to our native
villages due to the announcement of the fear of bombardment, and
my native village was in Phnom Penh and over there I had nowhere
to stay, so I had to move by the order of Angkar.
And when the Khmer Rouge were defeated, we ran to the village
where we used to work and stay there, but they refused to give us
anything because everything which was communal at the time,
became private property of those villagers.  And there was
nothing left for us to eat.
We had to think deeply on what we had to do next and, finally, we
decided to go back to Phnom Penh which was a long journey from
Kratie.  And we could not walk on our feet for this long journey
and we had nothing left, no diamonds or no gold to exchange for
the trip, or no transportation.
We then decided to make a bamboo raft and then we made our
journey on the Mekong River from Kratie to Phnom Penh and we
reached Phnom Penh in February '76.
Next, we stopped at Prek Takong and we exchanged the raft for 20
kilos of rice, and we stayed at a monk residence in Prek Takong
Pagoda.  In order to solve our food, then my younger son -- my
younger brother worked as a boat carrier, transporting people
across the river in order to get rice to feed us.  And my mother
wanted to look for her younger brother who disappeared.
And we heard that my father actually came to Cambodia and he was
killed, but none of us believed.  All of us still had hope that
he was still living in France and that one day we will meet him.
We did not know the extent and the scope of the killing committed
by the Khmer Rouge regime.
And I always thought, regardless of what happened, my father
would be untouched because he never mistreated anyone.  Nobody
ever displeased with him.  And then I heard that one of his
friends was still alive and he came to meet us at Prek Takong.
That uncle only spoke of two words, that Brother Ton was lied to
and that he gave up his children and family.
I was shocked.  I was wondering what my uncle was talking about.
I was moved.  I look at the bucket, the water bucket, and I
pretended to carry the water.  In fact, I tried not to let them
see when I cried.  At the river bank, I saw my youngest brother
who was 10 years old plus, was also weeping quietly.  I tried to
hold onto my tears, not to let him see me crying or weeping.
Then I came up and my uncle could not -- he just look at us, his
tears dropped because a lot of members of the families were no
longer with us.
From the departure on the 17th April '75 and on the day that we
met him, most -- half of his family disappeared.  We live in a
situation full of suffering and despair and nobody dared to ask
or add anything to such suffering.  I only heard of people
talking about the disappearance, about the deaths, about the
starvations; death and death and more death.
Bad news kept coming up about the loss of the family members,
friends and relatives.  We were living and we were trying to find
jobs.  We were trying to find something to eat and we were also
wiping our tears but, at the same time, we were glad that we
survived from that dark cloud regime.  I was still thinking of my
father.
On one side, I was still believing that he was still alive.  On
another side, I thought he might have been killed as they said.
But then my hope disappeared gradually from my mind and heart.  I
was shocked, moved, because I saw my mother and my siblings
survived but unfortunately for him who was living abroad came to
die in his country.
We received subsequent news.  Some people said they saw him at
the Technological Institution and some said they lived with him
at Boeng Trabaek, Talei, and some even said on the day of the 6th
of January '79, he was seen carrying a backpack making a journey
to Siem Reap.  So we were unsure and we were undecided or divided
on the fate of my father, but nobody talked or said anything
about S-21 at the time.
One day in about October or November '79 after the rainy season,
I returned to the house of my mother's cousin at Charles de
Gaulle.  She left her Kampong Chhnang village to live in Phnom
Penh.  I would like to tell the Chamber that I found a job at the
Phnom Penh port and from May -- and when I left with my mother's
cousin, it was in either late October or early November and I
still can clearly remember that the rainy season was finished.
At that time, there was no currency yet and everything was sold
on the exchange for rice.
After I returned from the house, my mother's cousin and another
women who was selling sugar palms so I stopped her and exchanged
rice with that sugar palm.  That woman wrapped that sugar palm
with a piece of paper, so I put it in my bag and made my trip.
However, somehow I wanted to see what is on that piece of paper
since I did not see anything in writing since 1975.  That piece
of paper was either in the form of a newspaper or magazine.
Along that Charles de Gaulle Street, I unwrapped the sugar palm
and on that piece of paper I saw a snapshot of my father along
with other victims' photos, and under his photo his name was
written, but I could not believe that was his photo.  I thought
they must make a mistake.  And I refused to accept it and I told
my mother that it was not my father's photo, but my mother looked
at the photo and she acknowledged it was his photo.
So my mother and I became pale, speechless, shocked, and we kept
making our journey home without saying a single word.  We did not
know that people were killed everywhere.  When I saw that piece
of paper, then I realized the existence of S-21.
His photo -- he was skinny in his photo.  His eyes were hopeless
and there was a piece of placard hanging from his neck,
displaying number 17.  I was still wondering what happened to
him, as he knew those Khmer Rouge leadership as they used to be
his former students or colleagues, as Khieu Samphan and even Ieng
Sary.  Their home was not far from ours.  So for us, I could not
believe that those intellectuals were the ones who were
responsible for the death of my father.  I still could not accept
it.
And I would like to continue, regarding my survival after that
thrashing moment of learning the news of the death of my father.
Later on we learned that the Tuol Svay Prey High School was
turned into S-21, or prison of Tuol Sleng which was known later
on and at present time.
My mother and I went to that location to search for the truth, to
make sure whether my father was killed at that location.  We
walked from the Department of the Municipal Ports to Norodom
Boulevard and then to the Mepleung Street and we saw the high
rise of those buildings.  I was excited and shocked, and it was
so quiet and scary as it was the buildings to house the ghosts.
I entered the building, the wooden building, and at that time
there were only about 20 people who were looking.  I was shocked
to see such a scene.  I did not go to the location where that
group of people was looking at something.  I went to Building C.
I ran upstairs and I saw individual cells next to each other.  My
mother leaned against the wall and she could not move.  I was
also shocked by witnessing such a scene and then it came
gradually to my mind that my father might have been detained
here.
I looked and moved from one individual cell to the next and I
realized that only one prisoner was detained in each individual
cell and there could be plenty of prisoners who were there before
and after the detention of my father.  My mind was unsettled.  I
tried to look for anything to identify my father.  Unfortunately
I found nothing.
My mother called me as she saw me running up and down.  She
called me to return.  I left with despair.  My body was so light
that I could not feel anything.  I saw the ammunition boxes.  I
saw nothing humanized in that location.  I saw a pile of clothes
of prisoners.  I saw the shackles, the long bars, the torturing
tools.  Despite the many months of the defeat of the Khmer Rouge,
S-21 still had the stench of blood, the smell of people dying
still lingering in the rooms.
My mother and I returned home and along the way nobody spoke any
word because we were so shocked beyond our belief.  That night my
mother and I wept quietly.  We slept turning back to each other.
We did not want each other to hear our weeping.  I did not want
her to feel more pain and suffering and she felt likewise.
We slept under one mosquito net, one sleeping mat, and through
one night we kept weeping and only we were so hopeless.
Many years have past and the suffering was still in my mind and
it's deepened.  Every time I talk about it my throat seems to be
stuck by something and I could never fed up with weeping.  Only
recently that I could speak more about the event, my feeling of
scare and fear that I lost my father at S-21 and gradually I
could not see him alive any more as he was smashed by S-21 after
he was tortured, dehumanized.  And even if his skeleton remains I
did not know where it was or how he died, and how could I accept
that as a daughter?  And that I still respect and hold him in
high esteem.
Many months have passed.  Mr. Ung Pech, the survivor from S-21,
came to my mother's house and asked for the photo of my father,
of him wearing his robe -- his law degree robe -- and also a
photo of him wearing number 17.  Many weeks have passed and Mr.
Pech returned and said that his document was found.  It was a
preliminary interrogation which contained four pages and the
document ER number is 00188839 until 43 in the Khmer language;
and in French 00188444 to 46 in French.
My younger son made a copy of these documents and these documents
are the testimony that my father was sent to S-21.  I read the
confessions, 0020430810, and the interrogator was Mam Nai who
interrogated my father.  And Mam Nai himself acknowledged during
his testimony before this Chamber regarding the interrogation of
my father.
After I learned of the death of my father, my uncles took care of
my two younger sons and another uncle also took care of my two
other brothers in order to help my mother and they were given
education.  My mother and I lived together and my mother had no
ability to raise my children any more.  I feel I miss my father
so much.  I lost the breadwinner of the family, the person whom I
always turned to when I had trouble, and my mother was only
thinking of committing suicide.
My family fell deeper into the tragedy.  That is, how could we
survive facing the daily living condition with such emotion?  My
mother reacted so strongly to the loss of my father.  She didn't
know what to do with the three young children and in her widow
status.  Previously we all relied upon my father and frequently
she thought of committing suicide.  Her deep psychological impact
was so serious and nobody dared to talk or explain to her because
it was so extremely difficult for us and for her.  We did not
know what to do or which solution we should seek.
I look at my mother.  She was not in her best status.  Her mind
was not with her.  And my two younger brothers tried to work hard
in order to support themselves and I myself continued to live
with my mother.  I was so frustrated with the situation that we
lived.  We tried to survive.  Although we survived from that
regime we have now to face the challenge of being survived in
such a situation.
At that time there was no social assistance or no psychological
assistance from any organization.  We both tried to comfort
ourselves in order to survive and my mother wanted to comfort us
so that we could study and should find our future.
She talked about the sacrifice of my father, that he gave up
everything to return to the country in order to be reunited with
the family and that we should study hard to pay respect to my
father.
In about late 1980 I received a scholarship to study in the
former Soviet Union and my other brother also went to the former
Soviet Union and another one went to East Germany.  The rest
tried to find work in Cambodia.
During the five-year period I studied in the former Soviet Union
I missed my father every single day.  I thought of how he was
killed.  One night I dreamed of him.  I saw only half of his body
floating around in the sky near the location where he used to
talk to us at our former house.  He was floating around and he
called my name, "Ole, I already died".  I woke up from the dream.
I tried to feel the war.  I touched the carpet and I realized
that now I am no longer in Cambodia.  I was in the Soviet Union.
But whatever happened to my father back there was still a
mystery.
For the rest of the night I could not sleep.  I wanted to return.
I wanted to go back to see S-21 but I could not come.
I imagined of the times in the afternoon when the cook finished
making the coconut juice.  Then I would take the juice to him
while he was sitting in a hammock in the house.  And my dream was
reoccurring frequently on that occasion when I would go and get
him the coconut juice or the tea.
Despite the scope of the gravity that fell upon my family, we
tried our best to rebuild our family, to find the new life and
new path for our lives.  But the loss of my father is the pain
and the suffering that cannot be forgotten.  One part of my heart
with the deep love for my father by now filled with suffering, a
wound which cannot be cured.
Mr. President, I am still thinking of my father even at this
moment.  The older I grow, the more I think of him, and I even
think of him more when my children talk to me.
When my child talked to me that one of his teeth was about to
fall off it reminds me of the time when I talked to my father and
at that time he would take me to a dentist.  Only later on,
several months later, I smiled at him and then I did not like the
shape of my teeth.  He would smile at me and that would make me
comfortable.  And when my child opened the mouth and talked to me
about the teeth, it kept reminding me of the time that I talked
to my father.
Mr. President, it is almost 12 o'clock now and I'm still only
halfway.  Would you want me to continue?
MR. PRESIDENT:
As the statement is long and it is now appropriate time for lunch
break, you cannot continue, so the Chamber will now adjourn for
lunch.
The Chamber would also like to inform the parties to the
proceedings and the public that this afternoon we will continue
to hear the statement of this civil party and, per our scheduling
as amended yesterday, we will also hear the statement of another
civil party, Seang Vandy.
However, due to the technical problems of the IT Unit, which the
Chamber requires to hear the testimony of another civil party, Ou
Savrith, who has to participate through videoconferencing which
will be held tomorrow starting from 1:30 p.m., the Chamber
received the news regarding the technical issues that needs to be
resolved and that it needs time to do it.
Therefore, for this afternoon the Chamber decides to only hear
the testimony of this Phung Guth Sunthary and if the time is
available then we will hear the testimony of the civil party
Seang Vandy.
But if the time is too short then the Chamber will not proceed
with the hearing of this civil party's statement, as we will then
hear the testimony of the civil party up to half past three.  So
please be informed of this.
Security guard, take the accused back to the detention facility
and bring him back this afternoon before 1.30.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Hearing recesses from 1201H to 1334H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
We are now going to give the floor to Mrs. Phung Guth Sunthary to
proceed with her remaining of the statement.
MS. PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I may now proceed with my statement.
I have now come to section number 5 in relation to my research
about the information of my father and about my journey to S-21.
There have been conferences that were held in relation to the
Khmer Rouge, and whenever there was such an event I and my
husband would be attending such conferences.  One day an author
requested that I gave him the interview in relation to the story
of the Khmer Rouge.  It was in March which marked the Women's
International Day and the moment really made me want to recall
the past and to share with the author.
Later on we learned of the information about the establishment of
the hybrid Court and we conducted for the research and then we
met some journalists, those who specialized in the studies of the
Khmer Rouge.  Little by little we had collected some documents,
both from Cambodia and in France, and these information can be
put together to establish the life story of my father during the
Khmer Rouge regime.
We have already included this into the case file, including the
date when my father came back to Cambodia on the 25th of December
1975.  He departed Paris on the 23rd of December 1975 through the
flight through China and he was on board with other scholars from
France to Cambodia.
He was convinced by the speeches of some senior leaders of the
Khmer Rouge at that time.  Actually, previously he had never
trusted the senior leaders of Khmer Rouge because through his
letters we can read that he said he had a large family in the
country and that he could not leave the country behind to live
the life based on their faith, so he had to be with them and
without being close to the family it would be considered as a
kind of crime already for him.
My father continued saying that.  He maintained his firm position
that he had to come back to Cambodia and to live with the whole
family, and he dared challenge all the devils in Cambodia as long
as he could be returning back to Cambodia and meeting the whole
family again.
When he immediately arrived in Cambodia, like other people they
were transported to K-15 and then to K-6, Talay and Boeng Trabek.
Like Ong Thong Hoeung stated in his book, "J'ai cru aux Khmers
Rouges" in French, along with other people.  On the 12th of
December 1976, according to the decision by Angkar, he was
transferred by the members of the Security Office to S-21, which
was the prison no detainee could come out alive.
Other people were sent to Dei Kraham location while my father was
sent to S-21 instead, the place where death is inevitable.  So my
research went further to find out who actually sent my father to
S-21 and the reason why he returned from France, even he was
convinced by or persuaded by other people to work in France.
The answer could be found in other letters he sent to some of his
friends in Toulouse University.  My father wrote in that letter
that:
"I met several Khmer friends.  Every one of them advised me to
join the FUNK and I followed the idea and I wrote a letter to
agree that I would be part of the group, and I had no other
choice."
Another letter in 1975, in which he said that he did not expect
what would happen in Cambodia; however, he was obliged to return
to Cambodia.  And he was expecting to meet the family whom he
missed for the nine months, and the reunion with the family was a
kind of obligation for him that led to his arrest, of course,
after all.
Why was he detained at S-21?  The documents I obtained at S-21
prove that my father was registered on the 12th of December 1975
under Document 0018857, with the signature of Suos Thy.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Studzinsky, you may proceed.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Mr. President, in the English translation I heard "on 12th of
December 1975".  This is not correct and was not said by Ms.
Phung Sunthary, and maybe it's a translation problem.  It is the
12th of December 1976.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Phung Guth Sunthary, could you please proceed with your
statement?
MS. PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
I would like to proceed.  Suos Thy said that the date was not
correct because it stated the 12th of December 1975, but the date
was not correct.  It was the 12th of December 1976 because my
father came to Phnom Penh in 1975, the 25th of December, because
at that time, the 12th of December 1975, he was still in Paris.
How long had he been detained at S-21?  The confession of my
father is not found.  However, it is no doubt at all that he
could have written such confession because he was detained for
almost seven months at S-21, and he was the one who was detained
that long and that he must have written some confession.
Normally, in some confessions of other prisoners, prisoners would
be detained for up to two months before they were smashed.  In
1981 my brother got a written biography found at the former Ieng
Sary Ministry of Foreign Affairs which later on turned to be the
Cabinet of Ministers for the current government.
In that biography my father stated that he requested that he
would like to meet the family he missed for the last nine months
and he made such writing when he came to Cambodia because he left
for Geneva in 1975.  However, this biography was not obtained
from S-21.
The DC-Cam provided with me the four-page document containing the
testimony, the writing of Mam Nai, and we've got another piece of
document of Ung Pech, which is in the form of the preliminary
investigation paperwork interrogated by Mam Nai, but he did not
make it clear about the death of my father because he was afraid
that he would too be arrested and as warned.
And such a warning to him is a kind of obstacle to reveal the
truth and to stop a person who has to reveal the truth to the
nation because the nation had experienced the very deep sorrow
and tragedy during the Khmer Rouge regime.
I know that on the 6th of July 1977 my father could still be
living because, according to the document obtained concerning the
wellbeing of detainees, and in that record I could prove that he
was still alive.  And the document indicates his wellbeing of his
numbness, his fatigue health and his heart, his problem with
breathing.
So the detainee like my father -- and concerning his medical
check-up, the follow-up of such medical check-up would be
presented and reported to the accused and the accused could have
been well familiar with this.  So since he was the very firm and
meticulous person, so what else could he do with the report about
my father?
Later on I never found the name of my father in the record of the
medics.  And Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, he was a professor,
so he could be the person with good sense of analysis and he knew
that my father was detained for some period of time but we don't
know how long he had been detained because the accused did not
make it clear.
I would like to move to the next chapter which is section number
6, what I am expecting.  Since the Trial Chamber started its
first hearing on the 30th of March 2009 I had been in the
hearings to observe the proceedings.  I have heard the
testimonies of expert witnesses, the testimony of the accused,
the lies, the excuses.  And I could see that the accused tried to
evade to respond to some particular questions.  Until now I have
not yet obtained the right information in relation to my father's
fate.
Mam Nai, the person who wrote the confession of detainee Phung
Tong and Suos Thy also recalled having registered Phung Tong in
the list in the order of number 56.  But still everyone who was
involved in the process did not know much about the suffering of
my father although they had been quite familiar with it,
especially Mam Nai.  He was the person who knew it very well.
Prak Khan, Him Huy, Nhep Hau told me that only the accused who
could shed light on how my father could have died because he was
the Chairperson at S-21.
S-21 was used as a smashing tool and actually the accused would
be the very loyal executioner for the upper echelon or the Khmer
Rouge apparatus.  He even asked Mam Nai to tell me and my mother
and the Court where my father could have been executed.  However,
we still haven't got the information.
I would like to reiterate that.  The accused was once the math
teacher, so he is the person who is meticulous, who has a good
sense of analysis.  However, before the Court, many times the
accused has to lie to the Court.
At the beginning there was some kind of argument that Professor
Phung Tong had never been detained at S-21.  However, later the
accused said that, "My teacher had to suffer the tragedy and the
barbaric acts at S-21".  And in the same document written by
Duch, he said there was no tortures, preliminary tortures, during
the preliminary interrogation, because he knew Mam Nai very well;
that he could never resort quick to torturing the detainee.
And the accused had meals with Hor and he knew very well that Hor
was a very cruel person but the very loyal person to the accused,
the person who was very obedient.  So it is true to say that Duch
ordered Hor to do whatever Hor would like to do on my father.
Duch said openly in the Court that he was the person like a
shepherd and that he also was a very absolute tool for the
security purpose during the regime.  And my father's fate was in
the hands of Duch, so Duch knew very well about how he should
have been smashed or could have been smashed.
Mr. President, I would like to put three questions through the
Bench to the accused.  Before putting such questions, may I
proceed further with the rest of my statement with Your Honours'
permission?
I have not only received the responses in relation to the
activities or the things that committed during the regime.  I
obtained this information from the accused because the accused
said that he was -- or he is willing to cooperate with the Court
and the parties to the proceeding, and I have been here in the
Court for the last few months; however, I can see how tricky this
person is.  I did not believe that the accused exhausts his best
to ascertain the truth.  He's only trying to evade the crimes he
committed.
The accused knows, of course, the questions and the responses to
my questions, so if he will not be able to respond to the
question, how could he become the chairman of S-21?  He was one
-- a chairman -- a chairman of S-21 was not a kind of coward.  He
would be a very brave person to respond to all the questions.  If
the accused still does not want to respond to these questions
then I think it is better that the accused should never ever say
that he is remorseful.  I'm not here to seek revenge.  I'm here
to seek the truth.  However, if the accused refuses to answer to
my questions then I am not ready to open opportunity for any
forgiveness that the accused might ask for.
I would wish that the accused live longer enough so that he will
witness this suffering and also to look back to the deep, long
past and also to see the acts he has one committed toward my
father and, of course, this has affected the whole family
including the grandchildren of my father.
Mr. President, before I conclude my statement, I would like to
make it clear to the whole nation that the tragedy, the miserable
conditions we have suffered during the Khmer Rouge regime has
nothing to do with the theory of karma.  I am Buddhist, but the
Khmer Rouge regime -- the bloodshed regime -- was based on the
idea of killing people and by lying on the theory of Buddhism in
term of karma was just like a faade for a person to just cover
up their crimes.
I would like to also talk to all young people in the country that
although beside this kind of strategy, this suffering then there
still be a person who is -- who has good wisdom to -- or to
struggle and to hold on with love.
And my father, Mr. Phung Ton, was among the person who actually
was brave and the person with wisdom although he had to endure
the very difficult time during the Khmer Rouge regime.  However,
they could kill him, but they could never smash his wisdom and
conscience.
I would like to conclude my statement now and I would like to
proceed with the questions to the accused with Mr. President's
leave.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Phung Guth Sunthary, you are allowed to put questions to
the accused and the accused be prepared to respond to the
questions.
As we already made it clear, although the questions should be or
shall be put through the President of the Chamber, then the
President can just convey the questions to the accused or he may
repeat the questions in order to make sure that the accused can
really follow the questions.
So the floor is yours.
MS. PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would put the questions through you,
Mr. President.
First question:  Who made the decision to kill my father on the
6th of July 1977 or a little bit after that?  At S-21, the
prisoners were not allowed to die naturally, especially in the
case of my father.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to this question?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, upon my analysis of the civil documents and that I
have already reported to the civil party, they're old, what I can
do.  And if I am asked who made a decision for the killing, I
have no documents to base my response on so I cannot really
fulfill the anxiety to know this fact.  Although I have my deep
respect for my former professor, I do not have any appropriate
answer to respond at this time and that is the truth.
I still did not know the detailed that my professor was detained
at S-21 at the time and this is my response.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, you can now ask your second question.
MS. PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Question number two:  What types of tortures were inflicted upon
my father; the person who had a progressive idea, who based the
judgment on justice and who had dignity and who held the ideology
of democracy with his contradicting to the policy of the Khmer
Rouge?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, you already heard the question, sir.  You can
respond.
THE ACCUSED:
Regarding the tortures committed upon my professor, I still
believe that the -- my analysis on those documents that were
given to me, I still stand that he was not tortured during his
interrogation.  My shock for the fate of my professor was on a
different matter because I did not know that he was detained at
S-21.  I only thought of Chao Seng (phonetic) and another person,
but I believed Mam Nai did not torture him.  He rarely resorted
to torture. And believe me, the confession -- that type of
confession was not a result of torture.
Also, I would like to take this opportunity to tell Madam Phung
Guth Sunthary, the eldest daughter of my professor, the fact that
I do not know this matter.  As you can examine all those
documents sent from S-21 to the upper echelon, I had all my
annotations on those.  And if I knew there would be my annotation
on that document and I would seek answers of clarification from
Brother Mam Nai.
I very well know the situation of the pedagological institutions,
and I knew that Pol Pot realized that the professor was working
in that institute and Chao Seng (phonetic) was the chairman of
the association and Mai Man (phonetic) was the professor at that
school; actually, he was director of that university.  And Sous
Nou alias Chou (phonetic), was also a senior professor at that
school and later on he was the Secretary of Sector 24.
So Son Sen clearly ordered me to monitor the activity of Sous Nou
alias Chou (phonetic), and through my monitoring activities I
learned that he was not implicated in that matter.
So the fact that if I knew the professor was detained there -- if
I knew that and the interrogation would then focus on all these
links but, as I said, I did not know he was detained.  That's why
there was no annotation that I made on the confession.
And this is my response.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, you may proceed with your next question.
MS. PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Question number three, which is the last question.
Who made a decision to transfer him to S-21?  It was said that
S-21 came to take him from Psa Daem Thkov.  That is the statement
of Chanphal Norng (phonetic) and Ham Ham Keng (phonetic) that he
was taken from Psa Daem Thkov at that time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to that question?
THE ACCUSED:
The arrest of my professor to S-21 or whether he was sent from
Boeng Trabek or not, I did not have the knowledge of that.  S-21
vehicle did not bear any plate number, although I do not deny to
the testimony of Ham Heng Kheng and the other person.  And I knew
this person, Ham Heng Kheng.  He used to be my former maid.
But the background and history of S-21, as we all know, there
were two chairman.  Nat was from the establishment on the 15th of
August of '75 until March 1976 when he was removed and replaced
by me.
So I believed all the documents that Brother Mam Nai had probably
was done during Nat's period if those documents do not bear my
annotation.  And I think it was done also based on the order of
the Standing Committee.  Everything was decided by the Standing
Committee and this S-21 was under the direct order of that
Standing Committee.
Of course, S-21 had people who were ordered or assigned to make
the arrest, but it is hard to know who actually made a decision
to order that arrest.  It is possible that S-21 vehicle was used
to transport him during the time or the chairmanship of Nat.  And
at that time, I was only the Deputy Chairman of S-21.
This is my response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to civil party
counsel, Studzinsky, to put questions to this civil party.
Hold on, Ms. Studzinsky.
Judge Lavergne, you may take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
This morning, madam, you showed us a certain number of pictures.
Could you supply us with a list of these pictures and explain to
us what these documents represent, so that they may be filed
along with the hearing notes?  Otherwise, we will have no trace
of what you submitted today.
I'm not asking that you show them again, but simply to tell us
what has been shown on screen and to explain who was on the
pictures and when the pictures were taken, for instance.  This is
for the record.
MS. PHUNG GUTH SUNTHARY:
Thank you, Your Honour.
The ID photos of the two people, they are my parents.  And
another photograph, the seven children, that's my siblings and
myself.
And another photo is a photograph of my parents while they were
on a visit to France.
And another photo was the photo of my father during the summer
after the fall of Phnom Penh.  It was taken a few months after
his return in '75.
And another photograph was a wedding invitation of my parents.
And the last photo was the photo of my father at the S-21
Detention Centre.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil party counsel for group 2, you can put your questions -- I
mean additional questions to the civil party if you have any.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MS. STUDZINSKY:
Q.  I have only one question after I heard the responses of the
accused to your questions.  And, therefore, I only want to let
you clarify what is the result of your research and the date when
your father entered Tuol Sleng, S-21.
And maybe you could answer to my question in this way, that who
had, at the time when your father entered S-21; who was the
chairman of S-21 because after the responses, I have the
impression that there is some confusion.
And, therefore, my question who was the chairman at the time, and
if it is agreed upon by the accused and everybody here in the
courtroom.
A. Thank you for the question, Madam Counsel.  I was also
surprised when the accused said that the arrest of my father to
S-21 was not under his chairmanship.  In fact, he became the
Chairman of S-21 in March 1976.  Therefore, the arrest of my
father on the 12th of December 1976 was in fact unfolded under
the leadership of this accused Kaing Guek Eav.
Q. Thank you for this response and maybe on later the accused
could after this clarification, which he knows very well of
course, give further response to your questions.
I have no further questions and I would like to thank you very
much for all the efforts you've gone through and for the very
moving and emotional statement that you have given to the
Chamber, to the parties, and to the Cambodian people.
Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, can you stand up?
Can you verify the point raised by the counsel and the civil
party?  As you have just heard, the civil party just wants to get
clarification regarding the detention of her father and it is
true that he was detained and killed there.  So there are some
issues that need to be clarified.
According to the information she received, her father entered
S-21 on the 12th December 1976.  And you in your response, and as
previously you repeatedly said, when it happened during the time
that you were the Deputy Chairman and you only became Chairman
from March 1976 when Nat was removed by the upper echelon.
So the date of the arrest of Phung Thon on 12th of December 1976
is not in line with what you said in your analysis of the S-21
documents.  And that you said the documents do not bear your
annotations.  So you can see the contradictory views regarding
his arrest and the date of you becoming a chairman of S-21.  Can
you verify this matter?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, this is going to be a bit long.  I also would like
to clarify the matter to Madam and to her mother that before 1970
I had the feeling of being afraid and respected of the six
persons.
One was Chuon Nat.  He died in 1966.  And another person was also
a monk.  He also died in 1966.  And the third person that I
respected was Roath Kut, the doctor whom I regard as my senior.
And all the students at Monk residence number 3 always respects
the previous generation, and he was very respected by the most
and Comrade Pon who was with me, he was also a former student of
Monk residence number 3.  So Dr. Roath Kut was the third person
that I respected the most.
And Chao Seng was the fourth person that I respected the most.
It's because he changed the curriculum of 1958 and he confronted
with Lon Nol and he said that he only fight with a pen, not a
gun.
And the third point or quality of Chao Seng was that he
established the pedagogical institution which later on I entered
and studied there.  So he was the fourth person.
And next Khieu Komar, the fifth person.  In 1963, '64, the
demonstrations were everywhere at the Sisowath school and he
defended the progressive students who rebelled at the time.  And
at the pedagogical institute I, myself, including Chum Nareth and
the rest were mistreated by Kao Lun and my professor defended us.
That's why I respected my professor because he defended us and
not to let them mistreat us, the progressive people.
These people I knew.  I knew that Khieu Komar was evacuated along
Road number 4 and he was executed if he was sent to the south by
Ta Mok.  So this is the trust that I had.  And Roath Gut stayed
with me and I protected him and Chao Seng.  The Communist Party
of Kampuchea sent him to me.  I could not do anything.  The best
I could do was to provide him with sufficient food and proper
accommodation.
I regretted if I knew my professor was sent there.  Of course I
would not ask for him to be spared but he would be able to live
in a better condition as my gratitude for him.  Therefore, later
on, in 1993, the VOA broadcast about the production Chhlang Den
and the director was Thing Sun.  And I heard and I was surprised.
How could Thing Sun became the manager of the production of that
musical company?  But at the Military Court I was asked about
Professor Phung Ton.  Kar Savuth asked me and I protested that
no, he was not there.  And that Oeng Pich took the ashes to his
kin and later on he went, if Kar Savuth now is representing me I
still maintain that he was not there.
I even challenge him to test, to have a DNA test of those ashes.
But later on when I saw his photo there I was speechless; I could
not deny anymore.  And when Phung Guth Sunthary gave me the
documents, then I learned his fate and yes there were some
inconsistencies in the dates.  Actually there were three dates
which are not consistent.
And as I said, the dates on the list of S-21 are not always
accurate, as I was asked by the Co-Investigating Judge Marcel
Lemonde.  So this is regarding the inconsistency of the date of
entry.  At that time, however, I was not aware that Mam Nai knew
you very well and knew the grandfather very well.  I only learn
that during the proceedings before this Chamber.
So the fact was not yet revealed.  And I would like to frankly
say that all the victims, the people that I really wanted to pay
my gratitude and the condolences are three.  The two already have
done that and the last remaining one was Phung Ton.  That is my
professor.  And of course I do not deny that he was there, but
then we can argue or we can question more on the dates which are
inconsistent.  Maybe only Mam Nai is the only person who can
actually shed light on the exact dates of his fate, if he is
willing to do so.  So please can you preserve your own stance and
try to do the research together in order to find out the truth?
And I strongly believe you make a complaint to become a civil
party here is not in the nature of vengeance, and I believe that.
But of course it cannot be left unanswered for all the crimes
committed at S-21.  And I believe of course you do not come here
to seek vengeance but to seek out the truth, and we all should
seek out the truth.  We need to find out first.  So I again would
appeal you to proceed with your truth-searching and I myself will
do my best to reveal the truth.
This is my response and with respect, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next the Chamber would like to give the floor to the
Co-Prosecutors if you have questions to be put to this civil
party.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
The prosecution do not have any question for this civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you may proceed.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have just listened to the answer of
the accused to the question that was put to him and I'm not quite
sure that I have understood everything.
There was mention of a person named Chao Seng and you stated, it
seems to me, that that person was sent to you.  So if you say
that that person was sent to you, do you mean sent to S-21?
That's the first part of my question.
The second aspect you said -- but here again I'm not sure I fully
understood -- that you were concerned to find decent
accommodation for him and that you also tried to make sure that
he would have sufficient food to eat.  So I don't really
understand any more.  So what are you referring to?  Are you
referring to conditions of detention in S-21?  What is decent
accommodation when you're in S-21?  And did you effectively have
the power to give more food to certain detainees than was given
to others?
THE ACCUSED:
Thank you, Your Honour, for raising these questions.
Chao Seng, he received the first pedagogical degree in Cambodia
and I said he also made the curriculum, the 1958 curriculum, for
the training of teachers and the National Pedagogical Institution
was first established by him.  And he also confronted Lon Nol, as
I stated, and later on Pol Pot ordered his arrest and sent to
S-21.
And there was also an order to change his name from Chao Seng to
Chen Suon, alias San.  He got a doctoral degree in pedagogy and
in fact, yes, he was sent to S-21 and after his interrogation I
ordered him to be left separately and that he was given decent
food and accommodation.  I did not know where his accommodation
was because I did not go and look.
And a few days ago I also stated that occasionally I went to
visit Chao Seng and on one occasion he talked about the situation
during the Sihanouk regime, and I mentioned that before this
Chamber, and that I supported Chao Seng, and it is my idea of
paying my gratitude to him.
And for my professor, I did not know of his detention or that he
was suffering from insufficient food or the living condition.
That's why I was moved after hearing that.
And this is my response, Mr. President and Your Honour, and if
you have more questions regarding this matter I am ready to
answer.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
What happened to Chao Seng?
THE ACCUSED:
Your Honour, I already reiterated on several occasions that
anyone who was sent to S-21 was regarded as enemy.  Enemy had to
be smashed.  Later on Uncle Nuon -- I want to say it straight --
knew that I would like to keep Chao Seng.  That's why he ordered
immediately that Chao Seng was smashed, and Hor was ordered by
Nat to smash Chao Seng.  So Chao Seng was killed, Roath Kut was
killed.
And I am not quite sure how I can really say anything else about
my professor, Phung Ton, because I did not know whether he was
very sick and died of sickness or he was executed.  But he died,
of course.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
What you're telling us, therefore, it is Nat therefore in the end
who ordered Chao Seng's execution.  Or was it you?
THE ACCUSED:
I'm sorry, Judge Lavergne, because I made it rather unclear.  Nat
ordered that Roath Kut, who arrived recently, to be smashed but I
received order from Nuon Chea to smash Chao Seng.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused may be seated now.
The Chamber would like to give the opportunity to the defence
counsel to put questions to the civil party if they would wish to
do so.
MS. CANIZARES:
The defence has no questions to put to the civil party, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next the Chamber would like to give the floor to the accused to
make his observations in relation to the statement made by Madam
Im Sunthy and Phung Guth Sunthary.
Please be reminded that this is the rights for you to make your
observation; however, you can exercise your right to remain
silent if you so wish, but the floor is yours.  So please respond
to the statement by the two civil party who were the family
member of Phung Thon.
THE ACCUSED:
I would like to make a very brief observation as follows.  The
statements of Madam Im Sunthy and Phung Guth Sunthary are
approved in principle and I know that you have not been satisfied
yet because you have not obtained all the information you would
wish to get.
And I will do my best to make sure that I can be of any assistant
to ascertain the truth, without any denial.  So I will do my best
to help to respond to your request to search for the information
of the fate of your father and your husband.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The proceedings to hear these statements of the civil parties Im
Sunthy and Phung Guth Sunthary have come to an end.
Madam Phung Guth Sunthary, you may now be seated at the civil
party reserved seats in the courtroom.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Next, the Chamber would like civil party, Seang Vandy, to come to
the seat reserved for the civil party before the Chamber.
The civil party lawyer, Ms. Studinsky, you take the floor.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Before you start with the civil party, Mr. Seang Vandy, I only
seek some clarification about the proceeding today because -- as
far as I have understood -- the hearing will be finished at 3.30
and do you intend to make a break or -- only to be orientated how
far we can go with Mr. Seang Vandy today.  It would be useful for
me because that is what I have learned from your statement before
the last break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The reason that the Chamber would be proceeded until 3.30 today
that we are not going to take any adjournment and then we will
just proceed from now until 3.30 and then we will take the
adjournment and the rest of the afternoon will be used for the
A-V Unit officers to fix the technical glitch so that we can
actually hear the testimony based on the remote participation
tomorrow.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH:
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Seang Vandy.
Is Seang Vandy your name?
A. Yes, my name is Seang Vandy.
Q. Mr. Seang Vandy, can you read and write?
A. Yes, I can.
Q. How do you spell your family name?
A. Seang in Khmer -- I think in English S-e-a-n-g.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 63 years old.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I was born in Khsach Tob; Chrouy Banteay sub-district, Preaek
Prasab district, Kratie province.
Q. So where do you live and what is your occupation currently?
A. Now, I live in the same village I was born and I have been --
I had been a school teacher, primary school teacher, but I am now
a pensioner.
Q. What is your father's name?  Is he still alive or is he
deceased?
A. My father is Seang Phan.  He's deceased.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. My mother's name is Khat Yin. She is deceased.
Q. Mr. Vandy, how many brothers and sisters have you got and
could you please tell the Court the names of your siblings?
A. I have nine siblings; six boys, three girls.  I am the first
child; number two, Seang Phat; three, Seang Phon; four, Seang
Chhun; five, Seang Yoeun; six, Seang Mao; seven, Seang Min;
eight, Seang Toeu; nine, Seang Khlok.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Silke Studzinsky, since you are now representing the civil
party could you please briefly tell the Court the identity -- the
reason or the grounds for the claim for reparation in relation to
the crimes alleged against the accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias
Duch; the crimes committed at S-21 during the period from 1975 to
the 6th of January 1979 and other grounds to support such claims.
You take the floor.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. Seang Vandy is, as follows, related to the case before this
Trial Chamber.
Mr. Seang Vandy lost at least one brother -- that is Mr. Seang
Phon, at S-21.  He became later -- that means recently -- he got
knowledge that his brother was imprisoned in S-21, that he gave a
confession, and that he was then killed.  One of the other
brothers of Mr. Seang Vandy, Mr. Seang Phat, disappeared since
then, but his fate is unknown.
Mr. Seang Vandy will focus on how his suffering was, and is,
which means over 30 years concerning his brother Seang Phon to
consider him as disappeared and to have no knowledge about his
fate, and this is the focus of the statement of this civil party,
Mr. Seang Vandy.
The reason for becoming a civil party is the search for justice
and also for reparations.  Mr. Seang Vandy, however, leaves the
point of reparations to his lawyers.
Another -- and further reason for becoming a civil party and
applying here before this Court, is to preserve the memory of his
younger brother, Seang Phon.
The statement of Mr. Seang Vandy will be supported by one
document, which is already on the case file.  It is a confession
of his brother Seang Phon, where we find the English version was
notified yesterday, and was so far only in summary versions on
the case file; and to one remark.
On the first page of this confession from S-21, we find a slight
difference of the name.  It is written in English as "I-E-N-G"
and not like the family name should be,"S-E-A-N-G".  According to
other unique facts, Mr. Seang Vandy could recognize that this
confession was made by his brother.
We will decide later on to refer to this document.  I will give
you the ERN numbers.  That is the ERN in Khmer is 00004458
through 00004477 and in English from yesterday, Court document
number E141.1 and the ERN 00363590 through 00363605.
Then we will also refer to the colour copies of the annotation on
this first page mainly, and on this confession, and we will refer
to the document then with the ERN 00173881 through 882 in Khmer,
and in English 00221765.
I would also like to inform the Chamber and the parties that we
intend to proceed as follows.  Mr. Seang Vandy has prepared a
statement that he will read out and then I will put some
questions to him and, at the end, he has four questions to put
before the accused, and so I would like to give then, with your
leave, the floor to Mr. Seang Vandy.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We would like to now give the floor to Mr. Seang Vandy, the civil
party, to make his statement before the Chamber, especially the
facts in relation to the alleged crimes and the facts that the
accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, was charged with and that
these facts have caused some kind of sufferings, and that you
made the decision to join as a civil party to seek civil
reparations.
The Chamber would like to hear also especially the physical and
the psychological damages caused by these acts.
MR. SEANG VANDY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to briefly tell the Court
the suffering of my family during the last 30 years and the
suffering that my brothers endured.
My family is a poor family, so we earned the living by chopping
firewood to burn the charcoal for making the ends meet.  During
those regime, my brother, Seang Phon and I went to school and I
would like to tell this Court about the life story of my brother,
Seang Phon before he joined the revolution.
Seang Phon was my second brother who was born in the Year of the
Horse.  It was in 1953 in Khsach Tob, Chrouy Banteay, Preaek
Prasab, Krati.  In the former regime, he could only finish grade
8, the old educational system, and he lived with his uncle, Kiev
Vuoch.
My brother was a very gentle and honest person.  He was a very
obedient child.  He loved his brothers.  He was very helpful in
the family.  He was a very determined person.  He was the strong
brother who could help with the house chores.  Another brother
Seang Phat, born in the Year of Rabbit, which was the first
brother.  However, in 1971 he was ordained as the monk in Po
Andet village in the home town.
In 1972, with the United Nation front under the leadership of
then prince Norodom Sihanouk -- and he made the announcement on
the radio and to appeal the people, his subjects, to go into the
muggy jungle to liberate the country from Lon Nol.  And after the
demonstrations in my area, in my home town, it was called the
Liberated Zone, captured and controlled by the Khmer Rouge.
I would like to go back a little bit to 1970 after the coup
d'tat, as a Liberated Zone, the place where we lived, and after
the declaration or the appeal of the Prince Norodom Sihanouk, I
joined the local militia in the village.
Later on in 1972, Angkar transferred me to the photography unit.
In 1973 Angkar put me to do farming in order to support the unit.
After the 17th of April 1975 the upper echelon collected or
gathered the cadres who once fought in North Vietnam to go to
Phnom Penh, and as a normal combatant I was also requested by
Angkar and moved to the fishing unit at Sector 42 in Kampong Cham
province.  I was put to be tempered at that unit.
I would like to go back a little bit too.  When I joined the army
and to join the revolution, before I departed, my parents and my
brothers and sisters did not want me to leave them behind but my
parents, however, left me with some words that they advised me to
be obedient, to show respect to the senior people, and they
advised me to be caring.
But my brothers and sisters, they came to me and hugged me and
they even wept.  They did not want me to leave.  I asked them to
be nice to one another, especially to the second brother, because
Seang Phon -- and I asked them to please be helpful with the
house chores because the parents were getting older.  They were
saddened to learn that I would be leaving soon.
In 1973 Angkar collected all the young combatants and my father,
who was back then a monk, was defrocked.  And then he was forced
to join the army, including my second brother too, and my parents
were left alone to help in the family while the elder children
already left to join the army.
In 1975 when I came home -- I forget actually the date -- my
father told me that the two brothers, who joined the army, on one
occasion came to visit the home town and they told them about
their being soldiers but they did not tell them in which unit
they belonged.  But on the 7th of January 1979 the children of
the villagers who once joined the Khmer Rouge revolution returned
home to be reunited with their families.
So gradually people are returning home, but the two brothers of
mine disappeared.  So that we were still expecting their return
and we were very worried about their fate because during the
Khmer Rouge regime we only heard about the arrest and execution
en masse.
Later on in the early 1980s there was Em Siet, a son of a
villager, came home and he used to be a soldier in the same unit.
He is now 61 years old but he passed away already.  He told us he
saw the security people calling Seang Phat away and he never
returned.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Civil Party, can you stop?
The Chamber needs a little bit of time for the IT Unit to change
the DVD for the record.
And the IT officer, please inform the Chamber once the change is
over.
(Pause for technical reasons)
Mr. Seang Vandy, you can continue with your statement?
MR. SEANG VANDY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
At that time my family as a whole, including myself, were shocked
upon hearing the news.  Our hope dissipated that my younger
brother was arrested and killed.  So then we held a ceremony, a
traditional ceremony to pray for his soul, and at that time there
was no monk yet; only the elder villagers were invited to
participate in the ceremony.  No currency was circulated at the
time.  Only rice was used as a means of exchange to buy goods for
the ceremony.
We prayed for the souls of the two brothers and it has been held
annually, especially during the Pchum Ben and Khmer New Year
periods.
We had been holding the ceremony with little hope that they are
still alive.  The situation at that time was still unstable as
the integration of the Khmer Rouge did not take place yet.  So it
was very likely that they were killed.
As my parents, who were elders, they were despaired in losing
their children and they were traumatized and both of them now
have critical diseases and as a result they passed away one by
one.
In late 2007 or early 2008 Ngoem Un, the deputy chief of
Rokartham village in the same sub-district, brought us a
magazine, "Searching for the Truth."  He showed us the magazine
but I did not pay my attention to the exact publication or serial
number of that magazine.
I saw the name of Seang Phon, male in Chroy Banteay, Prek Prasab,
Kratie province, age 25 years old was arrested on the 2nd of
October 1977 and upon reading that news I was extremely shocked.
I could not stand.
I felt so terrible because in 1983 I came to Phnom Penh for my
eye surgery and my relatives took me to visit the Tuol Sleng
Genocidal Museum.  We went there.  We saw the remnants of the
barbarity and cruelty left by that regime.  Upon receiving that
news I subsequently informed my younger siblings and they felt
shocked and they felt the pain for the suffering inflicted upon
my younger brother.
Since then I could not sleep well. I dreamed of him.  Sometimes I
had like a waking dream to see him calling us for help but we
were not able to help him.  And my memory was not stable; I felt
undecided in doing anything.
And later on there was a magazine publishing about the suffering
and the trauma by those people who lost their relatives --
brothers, sisters, parents -- during that regime to apply to join
the proceedings before this ECCC through the open democratic
institution KID and then subsequently the application was sent to
the Victims Unit.
I lodged my application at the time and the KID invited me to
Phnom Penh to fill in additional forms and I was accompanied to
look for further documents at the DC-CAM centre at the Tuol Sleng
Genocidal Museum.  And indeed I found certain documents.
On the cover of his file the number is 576 Seang Phon alias Pha
but the spelling in Khmer is a bit different although the
pronunciation in English it is same, Seang, Seang Phon alias Pha.
He was an assistant of Battalion 60701, Brigade 601 and he was
arrested on the 2nd in '77.  And there were two records of his
confessions in that folder.
In the first record the name was also incorrectly spelt but on
the next two pages the names appear to be correct.  The
interrogators -- there were three of them; namely Phan, Heng and
Hong.  The record was made on the 28th of October '77 and it was
reported on the 5th of November '77.
According to the examination of this document he implicated 34
other people.  By seeing this document it made me -- it gave me
more pain and I felt pitiful for my younger brother.  I felt
shocked, moved, stuck, and my tears dropped.  I was speechless.
Later on I could speak and I said indeed my brother was killed at
Tuol Sleng.
After participating in the proceedings before this Chamber on
many occasions my feeling has become better in the hope that
justice is being found for my brother.  And I would pray for his
soul to detach from this world and to find a peaceful world.
Brother Phan,  I truly believed that you are here to listen to
the proceedings before this Chamber because this afternoon I
prayed to you to come here and to participate in the proceedings
so that you can witness and hear and that I have attempted to
find the justice for the criminal act committed upon you.  So may
your soul receive the peace and that you rest in peace.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the opportunity to the civil party
counsel to put additional questions if there is any.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you.  Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL:
BY MS. STUDZINSKY:
Q. First, thank you very much, Mr. Seang Vandy, for this very
moving and very emotional statement that you have given.  I would
like to put some questions, very few questions, to you.
Can you describe what is your feeling on having such an
incomplete family left for you through losing your brother Sieng
Thon?
A. I would like to express my feeling towards my younger brother.
Naturally brothers are always close, so when the two brothers
disappeared my feeling -- I had a feeling of being despaired, of
hopelessness.  The separation was indescribable.  I felt weak and
the pain not only inflicted upon me but also upon my parents
until they became seriously ill and passed away.  So the loss of
the brothers were the greatest loss and suffering upon the
family.
In addition to this I've been trying to find justice for my
brothers and that the soul would be peaceful and detach from this
world and move on to the next peaceful world.
Q. Thank you.
Mr. Seang Vandy, you have already heard during your attendance in
these hearings the apologies of the accused.  What is your
opinion in relation to your sufferings?  What is your opinion on
these apologies of the accused?
A. Thank you, Madam Counsel.  Every time I attend the hearing the
accused always acknowledges his guilt before the public.  He puts
his hands together before the television to show the world.  This
is a part on his action to relieve our suffering.  However, the
crimes cannot be forgiven.  It can only be judged by the Tribunal
and by the Constitution and the law of the Chamber.
Q. I'm not clear, Mr. Seang Vandy; did you want to continue or
was your answer complete?
A. That is the response to your question.
Q. Thank you very much.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I have now no further questions but there are still questions of
Mr. Seang Vandy to put to the accused, and one question is
related to the first page of the confession, and I would like to
ask Mr. President's leave to advise the AV to show a document
with the ERN 00173881 so that the civil party, Mr. Seang Vandy,
could ask his question related to this document -- this is one of
the questions -- and then to put it to the accused.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you change the headset for this civil party?
Court officer, can you show the document 00173881 on the screen?
Mr. Seang Vandy, what question would you like to ask the accused?
You can put the questions through the President of the Chamber
and then it can be conveyed to the accused to respond.
MR SEANG VANDY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
My first question:  Does the accused know the name Sieng Thong,
alias Pha, as a detainee at S-21?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to this civil party question?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, this document clearly states that.  Of course I
would not know more than 10,000 people who diminished (sic) there
but I recognize by this document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Seang Vandy, please move on to your second question.
MR SEANG VANDY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
My question number two:  Regarding the confessions of Sieng Thon,
alias Pha, who is my brother, did you read and annotate that
confession?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to the question of this civil party?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Maybe the AV could now show the document on the screen and maybe
the Greffier could read out the annotation on this document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The counsel, can you state clearly your intention?  Which portion
of that document you wanted to be read out, or you want the
entire confession to be read out?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
No, I want to clarify.  It is the first page and that is exactly
the ERN number that I have read out and the document was already
on the screen but it disappeared now, and it is from this first
page.  The handwritten -- all is handwritten, sorry, but the
annotation and which must mean one copy for Brother -- that is
the centre of this page -- and then one copy for Brother Nuon to
deliver to the Central Zone, and then follows the date, 11th of
November '77.  And this part should be read out and then
translated.  I'm sorry I cannot say it in Khmer.
And I would like that then the accused answers to the question of
Mr. Seang Vandy regarding to this part of the confession and that
is what I want.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused responded clearly to the questions, so there is no
need for the Chamber to ask the accused to respond again.  Of
course, the request for the annotation to be read is possible.
It's granted.
Court officer, can you project that document again?
The Greffier, can you read the writing on the document shown on
the screen?  This is in addition to what has been said by the
civil party in order to satisfy the civil party counsel.  And if
you cannot read it out, report to the Chamber so that the Chamber
can instruct the counsel to read it by herself.
THE GREFFIER:
"Record.  Confession of Sieng Thon alias Pha.  A farmer before
arrested.  Assistant of the Battalion 701, Division 174, Central
Zone."
The annotation is illegible.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil party counsel, it cannot be read and I myself cannot read
it.  What do you want to propose next?  But the Chamber already
instructed you that the accused clearly acknowledged this is the
document from S-21.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I only would like to clarify then the question to be put from Mr.
Seang Vandy concerning this annotation and to be put to the
accused, so that the accused should be asked if he can read and
recognize what annotation is on this first page, and if he knows
who has written this annotation and what does it mean.
That is what Mr. Seang Vandy wanted to know.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Seang Vandy, is the statement made by your counsel is what
you want?  But I do not hear what you said regarding this matter
when you spoke to us in the Khmer language.  So what is your
intention in reading the writing on the screen?
I want exactly what your intention is.  Can you tell the Chamber?
MR. SEANG VANDY:
My counsel is correct, but that is related to my third question.
I want to ask him regarding the annotations on the sending a copy
to the Central Zone and a copy to Brother Nuon, whether this is
in fact the handwriting of the accused.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to the three handwritten lines, with
the last line indicating "11 November '77", and respond to the
question of the civil party?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the 28th of October 1977 is the date written by
the interrogator.  Regarding the annotation, I stopped annotating
at that time because I had no time to do it and Brother Nuon did
not need my annotation at that time.  This is the handwriting of
my superior, Son Sen alias Khieu, dated 11 November '77.
This is my response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Can you please read the contents of the annotation, the two lines
in shortcuts?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, it is read as:
"Attention: one copy to be sent to Brother Nuon to be sent to
Central Zone."
And that's all.  The last note was just to make sure that no one
could add to the annotation except superior Son Sen.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit is instructed to change to the normal view and the
civil party can proceed with the last question.
MR. SEANG VANDY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I would like to put another question through the Bench to the
accused.
The accused said he followed the political line, the Party's
line, and he said he is a patriotic person.  How could he claim
that if he only killed Khmer nationals?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, are you able to respond to this question?
And the accused can be informed that in case you would like to
remain silent, then you can exercise your right to remain silent.
It doesn't mean that whenever I refer the question to you and
then you have to answer, so you can still enjoy your rights to
remain silent.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to reiterate that I have never
claimed that I was a patriotic person.  I never stated this.
That's all.
THE PRESIDENT:
The civil party, would you have any further questions?
MR SEANG VANDY:
Mr. President, I have no more questions.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, you may be seated.
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to
put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, we have no questions to put to the civil party.
We only wish to thank him for his statement.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, we would like to give the floor to the defence counsels to
put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MS. CANIZARES:
The defence has no questions to put to the civil party, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to now give the opportunity to the accused
to make his observation in relation to the statement recently
made by the civil party Seang Vandy.
The floor is yours.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to reiterate that I agree with the
statement of Mr. Seang Vandy and that's all.  Thank you, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now coming to an end in relation to the testimony -- the
hearing of the civil party, and it is now also appropriate time
to take the adjournment because the AV officials would like to
make sure that they can test the IT system which is hooked to the
system in France so that we can hear the civil party from France;
concerning civil party Ou Savrith, who is to testify in the
afternoon session at 1.30 tomorrow.  So we need time for them to
make sure that the technical glitches can be fixed so that the
hearing can be proceeded tomorrow.
We would like to adjourn the hearing now and resume the session
at 9 a.m. tomorrow.  We are going to hear three more civil
parties, including the civil party who will be heard from France
through a remote participation.
Mr. Seang Vandy, the Chamber has already heard the complete
statement of yours and from now on, as a civil party, you can
either join the proceeding by sitting here in the reserved seats
for the civil party or you may go to your residence as you wish.
(Witness exits courtroom)
The security personnel are now instructed to take the accused
back to the detention facility and return him to the courtroom by
9 a.m.
The Court is adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1536H)
