P R O C E E D I N G S
(Court opens at 0858H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber continues to hear the remaining testimony of
expert Henri Locard and begins hearing testimony of a witness,
2-TCW-976, in relation to the segment on Internal Purges.
And before we resume hearing testimony of the expert, the Chamber
wishes to inform the parties and the public that, for today's
proceedings and the subsequent days, the President of the
Chamber, Judge Nil Nonn, is absent for urgent personal matters
and that he cannot avail himself to the Bench.
After the deliberation among the Judges of the Bench, I, Ya
Sokhan, will lead the Bench for today's proceedings and the
subsequent days, and Judge Thou Mony, the National Reserve Judge,
will replace my seat until Judge Nil Nonn is back to the Court.
And that is pursuant to Rule 79.5 of the ECCC Internal Rules.
Greffier, please report the attendance of the parties and other
individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present except Pich Ang, the National Lead Co-Lawyer, who is
absent for personal reasons.
Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell downstairs. He has
waived his rights to be present in the courtroom. The waiver has
been delivered to the greffier.
The expert who is to conclude his testimony today, Mr. Henri
Locard, is present in the courtroom. And the upcoming witness,
that is, 2-TCW-976, confirms that, to his best knowledge, he has
no relationship, by blood or by law, to any of the two accused,
that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any of the civil
parties admitted in this case.
The witness took an oath before the Iron Club Statue this
morning, and he has Counsel Chan Sambour as his duty counsel.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Ms. Se Kolvuthy. The Chamber now decides on the
request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 2nd
August 2016, which states that, due to his health, that is,
headache, back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long. And
in order to effectively participate in future hearings, he
requests to waive his rights to be present at the 2nd August 2016
hearing.
He advises that his counsel advised him about the consequence of
this waiver, that in no way it can be construed as a waiver of
his rights to be tried fairly or to challenge evidence presented
to or admitted by this Court at any time during this trial.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the Accused at ECCC, dated 2nd August 2016, which notes that
Nuon Chea has a chronic back pain and it becomes severe when he
sits for long and recommends that the Chamber shall grant him his
request so that he can follow the proceedings remotely from the
holding cell downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via an audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies for the whole day.
The Chamber now hands the floor to the defence team for Khieu
Samphan to continue putting further questions to expert Henri
Locard.
You may proceed, Counsel.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSE RESUMES:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning to all of you.
Good morning, Mr. Locard. We are going to now question you for
the last half hour that is given to me, and I'm going to ask you
to try to answer as accurately as possible.
Q. Before I get back to your book, "Why the Khmer Rouge?", one
point of clarification, however. Yesterday, we spoke about Ong
Thong Hoeung, and you spoke about the description he made of a
training session that was given by Khieu Samphan. So my question
is the following: Are you sure that it is he who attended this
training session?
MR. LOCARD:
A. Thank you, Counsel, for this question.
I didn't sleep very well this night, so it might be difficult for
me to answer you because yesterday, you practised cold torture on
me, and now I know what that cold torture means. I wasn't able to
sleep between 1.00 and 4.00 o'clock in the morning. <So I did my
reviews.>
And I found on pages 61 to 62 in "I Believed in the Khmer Rouge",
the fact that he did attend seminars that were chaired by Khieu
Samphan.
The other reference, as I said, is Philip Short's book, and the
reference in particular is pages 316, 317, which shows <a more
detailed> testimony by Long Visalo, and Long Visalo speaks here
about re-education given by Khieu Samphan, a re-education session
that lasted one month.
And basically, the point of this re-education -- this is what I
saw on . We had to <give over> our entire persona. This
reminds me of what Maréchal Pétain claimed, who was <giving> his
persona <over> to France.
Here, when people would return from abroad, the idea was to
<give> one's persona <over> to Angkar. So if you want to continue
with cold torture, after three days maybe I will <give> my
persona <over> to Angkar as well.
Q. Mr. Locard, I'm not used to debating with witnesses on private
matters, but I would like the Chamber to remind the witness that
I am only doing my job as a counsel when <put questions or>
point to contradictions, even if Mr. Locard <has clearly>
demonstrated that he doesn't <take> the Defence's work <very much
into consideration, as he greeted everyone upon entering the
courtroom except the Defence, that is his fundamental right>, but
accusing me of torturing him whereas I'm only doing my job is a
little bit excessive.
So Mr. Locard, I'm only putting questions to you the way I put
questions to all witnesses, by pointing to contradictions when I
find them and, therefore, asking <for> clarification. But in no
case I am torturing you. This is <known as> a cross-examination
in the context of a trial.
I don't know if this was a joke or if there was a deeper meaning
to what you said, but what I'd like to say is that the comparison
seems to be a little bit inappropriate in a courtroom.
Now, unless the Chamber may have something to say about this, I
would like to refer you, as well as the parties, to the WRI of
Ong Thong Hoeung before this Chamber on 7 August 2012, document
; French, ERN 00833728. And it's a little bit before
15.36.23, and Ong Thong Hoeung explains that, a priori, he
neither saw Khieu Samphan nor Nuon Chea nor Ieng Sary. However,
he says, and I quote:
"My wife told me that when they arrived, there was a study
session led by Khieu Samphan."
And then questions are put to him about this <study> session, and
that's what he testified before the Chamber.
So my question is: does that refresh your memory? Was it rather
one education session which Ong Thong Hoeung's wife attended that
he is describing here?
A. I am referring to pages <60 - 61> of the French version of the
book. I don't believe there is an English version, but I hope
that the Chamber translated his book, which would allow us to
have an English version, which is something that he would
<really> like to see. He says clearly that the first seminars
chaired by Khieu Samphan <were> focused on the <history and>
struggle of the Kampuchean people, etc., and it was based <on the
autobiography,> that <they> had to give up everything, including
family life, <not just material things, but family life,> and
finally, give up one's <entire self, give over one's self> to the
revolution, which summarizes my last chapter in the collection of
slogans, which describes the end of individuality.
Q. Now I would like to focus on another excerpt of your book,
"Why the Khmer Rouge?", and this is something that you repeated
often regarding the chaos and regarding the fact that the rules
were not clearly defined. And you quote in your book, E3/10640,
at French ERN only 01303587. And you mention Suong Sikoeun, and
you say the following:
"But in reality, it's very difficult to determine what his exact
role was within the Central Committee of the Party owing to the
fact that, according to Suong Sikoeun, under Democratic
Kampuchea, each one's position was not set in a clear and rigid
manner as in a regime where there's the rule of law. The roles
were determined according to the agenda set by the higher Angkar
and the consequences of the <endless> purges, so such and such
was given a position according to the needs of the moment. So, in
short, everything fluctuated and everything was very poorly
defined." End of quote.
So my first question is: In which context did Suong Sikoeun
provide you with such a description of the fluctuating and
ill-defined nature of the tasks?
A. Well, the Court knows very well that I have been interacting
with Suong Sikoeun since <1999>. It's his wife who sent me to
him<, Laurence Picq, more than fifteen years ago>. I'm still
interacting with him <today>. And we had very long discussions
together. He was an interpreter for me with Phy Phuon <and So
Hong>, and it's thanks to him that I was able to interview Khieu
Samphan.
So I believe that the sentence is accurate and that it sums up
the situation very well. And based on what I understood on how
Democratic Kampuchea operated, I believe that it defines DK
exactly in the right words.
Now, of course, this is based on Suong Sikoeun's lengthy
experience. Regarding Suong Sikoeun, everyone knows that he was
not part of Office 870, nor of what I rather call "the
politburo", that is to say, the Standing Committee of the Party,
which was standing and fluctuating at the same time because the
members, week after week, were not the same. In particular, the
representatives of the major regions were only -- and they were
only present on a temporary basis as Duch explained last month.
Q. Excuse me.
<A. So it's essentially based on -
Q. Excuse me.
A. Let me finish, please.
Q.> Im sorry. There's a problem with the sound. We cannot hear
you.
<A. Oh, excuse me.
Q.> I do not know if everyone had this problem, but at one point,
I could not hear the witness any more. So please, can you get
back to your answer from the moment when you witnessed the
attendance at the committee meetings?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, please repeat your last response. Thank you.
MR. LOCARD:
A. Indeed. Sometimes I hear an echo, and it's true that there is
-- there is a bit of distortion in the sound.
So I think that the sentence that you just mentioned, Counsel,
corresponds not only to what I think, but -- after having
interacted with the Khmer Rouge leaders on a lengthy basis, the
Khmer Rouge intellectuals as well, and after having read almost
everything that was written on the regime -- that what is written
there corresponds to the reality, in particular regarding Office
870 or the Standing Committee or the politburo, whatever name you
want to give to it.
The attendance would vary according to the <constantly>
fluctuating circumstances. This was a regime that was moving
ahead at breakneck speed. In particular, Duch made a very
interesting distinction between what he called the intellectuals,
that is to say, the people you are defending, in part, and the
people who <were> in Phnom Penh on a permanent basis and the
region leaders, the zone leaders, who de facto were members of
the Standing Committee.
And their attendance, however, was not at all regular, so this
statement, based on Suong Sikoeun's testimony, is based on his
experience within B-1, that is to say, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. And here, indeed, duties would change according to the
needs <at the time>. And everything was hurried.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. So Suong Sikoeun, when he made this statement to you, is,
indeed, speaking about his experience within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs?
As many witnesses testified between this Chamber, did he speak to
you about the principle of secrecy which basically explained that
each one's tasks were <partitioned>? Is that something that he
explained to you?
MR. LOCARD:
A. Yes, of course. Everything was partitioned. This partition
started from the Marxist-Leninist circle in Paris. These were
small groups that did not know each other very well, necessarily,
so the principle of -- and their slogans to support this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Expert, please move a bit away from the microphone.
Otherwise, there's a hiss and your voice is clipped.
MR. LOCARD:
Fine.
A. Yes, this partitioning existed already in the informal
Marxist-Leninist circle in Paris, and it existed as a general
rule. And this is also included in my slogans, that is to say,
everybody had to do his or her own job and not look around, not
get involved in other people's business, basically.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. So my question because I understood that you understood from
Suong Sikoeun's testimony regarding the fluctuating duties within
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in which he was working that --
so how do you tally your interpretation of what was going on at
higher levels <above Suong Sikoeun, that he did not understand,>
with this principle of secrecy?
How can you somehow align the fact that everybody was pretty much
doing everything while preserving this principle of secrecy at
the same time?
MR. LOCARD:
A. Indeed, this is extrapolation here. But the principle of
secrecy and being <versatile> at the same time, versatile in
secrecy, could only be applied to the higher, higher Angkar.
There are three, four, five people who are aware of everything
and who worked in all fields, basically.
Q. You are the one using the word "extrapolation", so we do agree
that you, aside from a brief meeting with Khieu Samphan and Ieng
Sary, and during which you essentially spoke about their youth,
so you did not do in-depth work neither on the documents from the
period or <on meeting minutes>, nor on the documents relating to
<communication and potentially> the encoding of telegrams to keep
the <secrecy>. So here, you're providing us with an opinion in
relation to an impression that you have, so it's not based on any
form of particular research. Am I correct?
A. No. This is based on other people's research, and it's based,
essentially, on statements made by Kaing Guek Eav, or Duch, in
June past before this courtroom. This is what he was explaining.
And he, obviously, knew the higher Angkar better than I or then
Suong Sikoeun.
Q. So this is stuff that you say <is> based on the hearing,
except that in your book that was published before Duch made his
statements in June, in this book, you make the same statements.
So what did you base yourself <on> before listening to what Duch
said here before the courtroom?
A. Counsel, I think I already answered this question. It appears
to me that this is a repetitive question.
Q. Well, I will not insist, therefore.
A document that I would like to submit to you, which is the
meeting of the Standing Committee of 9 October 1975, document
E3/182, I have a copy of the first page. I know it was in your
folder, but with the leave of the President, may I provide this
document to Mr. Locard?
The French ERN is 00292868 and the following page. The English
ERN is 00183393 and the Khmer document, 00019108. Can we provide
this document to the witness, please?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, please hand the document from the counsel to the
expert.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. So I conclude from this that you already have the document, so
no problem.
So my first question is: Were you aware of this document before
reading it in your folder here?
MR. LOCARD:
A. Of course not. I believe I told you several times that I did
not work based on internal documents from the Party for the
simple reason, first of all, I did not have access to these
documents, and the other reason is I worked on the base of the
victims' testimonies and not the voices of the perpetrators.
So the last document I based myself on is this book published in
2015 in France written by one of the victims of the DK regime.
Q. So since you did not base yourself on this document or since
you did not read this document, were you able to conclude that,
at this meeting of the Standing Committee of 9 October 1975,
there was a division of the labour and <the people given>
specific tasks? Without having based yourself on this document,
was this something that you were able to discuss with Suong
Sikoeun, that is to say, who was in charge of what <outside of>
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs?
A. This was not at all the point of my discussions with Suong
Sikoeun. I simply note here on the second page that at number 8,
we see Comrade Doeun, who was the head of the political office of
870, we see Comrade Yem, who was the head of Office 870, and we
see Comrade Pang, the government office. So this is a good
example, in my eyes, that <it was> total confusion. It was chaos,
anarchy.
Even when we read this document, we do not understand who was
doing what.
Q. That is your interpretation. No problem.
Another point that I would like to get back to, which is present
in your book, <and I'll end with this document--> "Why the Khmer
Rouge?" -- so before, however, we talk about this point, I forgot
to put the question to you yesterday.
Yesterday, you spoke about the role of the army in the arrest of
people who were brought to <> security centres. In any case, you
discussed the role of the army in arrests <of people brought to
security centres, soldiers in any case,> and you said that most
of the security centres were connected to the district.
So my question is: Did you conduct any particular research or did
you interview former soldiers on the <potential> differences
between the district army and the commune army and possibly the
militia? Is this something that you researched?
A. I did not do any particular research on the organization of
the DK army. However, it is clear in everyone's eyes that there
was a distinction, basically, between three kinds of armies.
There were the "chlop": the militiamen or the militia, and they
were despised. They were the people who were watching people in
the people's communes. Basically, they were the people who would
listen to conversations at night under people's homes or who were
in charge of monitoring people's behaviour or of relating
whatever so and so might have said. That is at the base level.
Above that, there was what was called the "yothea". In general,
that is the normal national army that was stationed, generally --
very often, in any case, in pagodas, in barracks. Those were the
yothea. And they were in charge of the prisons, I believe,
because there was no police. So they were the people who were in
charge of internal security.
And there was a third kind of soldier, that is to say, elite
soldiers. I found an example of these at Kampong Thom or in the
East Zone, and they were in charge of guarding the borders in
particular. And they had been trained to carry out flash attack
missions to invade Vietnam in 1977-1978 and massacre <entire>
villages. So these were special forces.
Q. At the district level, was there a particular army in your
discussions? Because I believe that <these> discussions are the
base of your research.
So in your discussions, did you ever speak about the district
army? Because you spoke about the normal army here.
I don't exactly understand what you mean by this, however, but do
you make a distinction between this normal army and the district
army?
A. Yes. This is what the Cambodians call "yothea", contrary to
"kangtoip", which is the army nowadays.
Of course, the "yothea" were present in every district. There was
at least <one barracks> in each district <-- I did not do this
study myself, so it's an assumption, but there should have been
at least one barracks per district,> necessarily because there
was at least one prison per district, and they were in charge of
internal security.
Q. No problem. Sometimes I am putting questions to you, I don't
necessarily know if you researched it or not, so if you haven't
researched this point, just say it. There's no problem.
I'm not giving you any kind of trick questions. I just wanted to
understand what you gathered from your discussions.
Another point -- and I found the passage that I wanted to submit
to you. So in your book, "Why the Khmer Rouge?", document
E3/10640, ERN 01303590, it's an excerpt in which you speak about
Son Sen and then you speak about his death. And there is a
passage on which I would like to ask you questions.
And you say that he "was savagely murdered with his wife, Yun
Yat, and his entire family by Ta Mok under the orders of Khmer
Rouge General Saroeun with whom he had had a bloody feud in the
past." End of quote.
So what I'd like to focus on is not how Son Sen was killed, and I
only have a few minutes left and I'm not going to question about
this. But here, you speak about a bloody dispute that Son Sen had
with Saroeun.
So can you speak to us about what kind of dispute this was and
when this quarrel took place, and what are your sources to
describe this quarrel?
A. As regards Son Sen's assassination and that of his wife, <Yon>
Yat, we know very well since it's <straight> from the horse's own
mouth--
Q. Excuse me. At the beginning of my question, I stated that I
don't want to talk about this assassination. What is of interest
to me is the <part of> sentence in which you say that there was a
dispute between him and Saroeun.
What was the subject of this quarrel or dispute, when did it take
place? That was my <specific> question.
A. Well, that is what I was going to explain to you. I'm looking
at the clock. We have gone beyond the time allotted.
The assassination of Son Sen and his wife, Yun Yat, was the last
crime. We know that it was ordered by Pol Pot because he admitted
to having doing that.
I know, based on my resources through <Suong> Sikoeun, but also
through Saloth Ban, <So Hong,> that Pol Pot never asked for the
extermination of the entire family of Son Sen and his group. It
was only Son Sen and his wife.
Please allow me to complete my answer.
Q. It is not my question. I am sorry. As you see, I am running
out of time. I have only a few minutes.
I am not talking about the assassination of Son Sen. I read it
because the passage that is of interest to me is the following.
You said that there was a dispute between Son Sen and Saroeun.
My very clear question to you is as follows. What dispute are you
talking about, when did it occur, and what are your sources for
this information?
This is the only part on which I would like you to respond.
A. That is exactly what I'm trying to explain to you. My source
is <So Hong, or> Saloth Ban. At the time  he was in the vicinity,
so he's a direct witness.
I believe I do recall that Son Sen had been responsible for the
assassination of persons that Saroeun knew, or at least members
of his family or persons in his <close> circles. He took revenge,
and the entire family was exterminated under atrocious
conditions.
That question should be put to <So Hong, Saloth Ban.>
Q. Since you had interviews with him, do you recall on what date
that dispute occurred?
A. Not at all. Since Son Sen was in charge of internal security,
in any case, between -- since 1975, as you know, this kind of
violence continued throughout the regime.
Q. Another point that I would like you to comment on this time
has to do with your book, "Pol Pot's Little Red Book", E3/28112
<(sic)>. The ERN in English is 00394645 and in French, 00394991.
And you state -- as part of the slogans that you collected, you
said you did not find any slogan that classified the Cham among
the enemy to be eliminated.
My question to you is whether that is in line with what you said
regarding slogans you heard nationwide.
A. Thank you, Counsel, for this interesting question.
In fact, nowhere in the country did I ever hear any slogans
uttered that targeted specifically the Cham. Similarly, I did not
hear any slogan targeting the Chinese, the Chinese who have been
<somewhat> forgotten in this trial.
No specific slogan was uttered against the Catholics. This is a
category that suffered <the most> under the regime. Forty-eight
per cent of the Catholics were exterminated. What was of interest
to me was religion, but not ethnic origin.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, I see that I've run out of time, so I have no
further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Anta Guisse, do you have any requests to make?
MS. GUISSE:
No, I do not have any particular motion to present.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now proceed, Judge Lavergne.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes. Counsel Guisse, yesterday, you requested Mr. Locard to say
whether he had any recordings of some interviews. So the motion
the Chamber is thinking of is applications regarding your request
for admission of <new> documents relating to Mr. Locard.
If you have any <requests> to make, you should do so while Mr.
Locard is present.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Perhaps I'll have some complementary questions regarding the
nature of the documents in Mr. Locard's possession in order for
my motion to be more precise.
Q. Yesterday, you stated, whether you were talking to my
colleague or myself, that there were a number of audio recordings
<and notes>. My first question has to do with Phy Phuon.
Do you have in your possession audio recordings and, if so, what
is the nature of those recordings of your interviews with Phy
Phuon?
MR. LOCARD:
A. I have the full audio recording or recordings of all my
interviews with Phy Phuon. I interviewed him, I took <a lot of>
notes.
Everything was recorded by Suong Sikoeun, who was extremely
meticulous and who worked for years in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and was in charge of cassettes, so he transcribed those
cassettes in French <for me>. He was also the person who
translated the transcripts.
So I took notes. <I have three versions, if you will, my notes,>
the recording itself and Suong Sikoeun's translations, I also
have them.
Q. You are saying that these are cassettes. That is, magnetic
tapes that we used in the past, not in electronic form. Is that
the case?
Can you tell us how many hours of recordings you have in terms of
the interviews you had in their entirety<, even an estimate>?
A. There are several hours, hours and hours. I believe there are
<30 or> 40. So there were 60 minutes audio recordings or
cassettes, 30 minutes per side. That's one cassette. <So that is
30 or 40 hours.>
I have a lot <less> cassettes for Saloth Ban<, but for So Hong
(sic), it's the same thing>.
Q. Did you have an index system <by topic> which you used for
those recordings?
A. No, not really. The initial work <was done by> typing the
transcripts<, in French, and then with Suong Sikoeun, I worked in
Khmer and French, to make the manuscript almost publishable.>
Q. I'll speak in technical terms to be sure of how we can obtain
particular cassettes we may need. The transcripts <done by> Suong
Sikoeun, were they done on the computer<,> in a Word format<, for
example, that we can search>?
A. Suong Sikoeun, who knew how to type <very well>, typed
everything on the computer and I provided that computer, so those
transcripts can be consulted electronically.
Q. Another question: Were those transcripts done one cassette
after the other, and are they numbered? I'm talking of the
transcripts and the cassettes.
A. The cassettes are numbered, but not the transcripts. The
transcripts are in <the> chronological order <of> Phy Phuon's
<life>.
Q. I am saying this in the interests of the Chamber. <Given the
high number of hours of recordings in the cassettes, I am trying
to see if --> if we look at the electronic versions of those
transcripts and if we can find out what are the themes of
interest and then select the audio recordings that we may ask of
the witness, that is why I'm asking all these questions<, so the
Chamber understands why I am going down this path>.
Now, regarding Saloth Ban, you have stated that there were fewer
audio recordings. Can you give us the approximate number of hours
of audio recordings in this case?
A. It's difficult for me to do so. <We have not yet transcribed
what we did for So Hong, but it's> two or three times less than
Phy Phuon's interviews.
Q. Do you remember the number of cassettes we are talking of?
A. No, not really.
Q. If I understand correctly, what you have in your possession
now has not yet been transcribed. All you have <right now> is the
notes you took during those interviews and the audio recordings,
audio cassettes. And we should bear in mind that this question
applies to the two -- are these cassettes available here in
Cambodia?
A. <Yes, it's in Cambodia.> Well, let me correct myself. The work
started with So Hong as well. Some transcripts have already been
typed for So Hong as well.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, bearing in mind the information provided by Mr.
Locard, my first application as regards Phy Phuon would be to ask
Mr. Locard whether he would provide the Chamber with the written
translations of the audio interviews so that we can identify the
audio cassettes that we would like to listen to in their
entirety. That would be my first <request>.
As regards So Hong, as regards Saloth Ban, indeed, if we do not
have transcripts that enable us to carry out expeditious
research, I do not know whether it is possible to identify the
part in which reference is made to years prior to 1975. That
would be the part of interest to us <a priori>.
So I don't know whether, as time goes on, as Mr. Locard looks
through his archives, would he be able to find a way of
fine-tuning the research and assembling all what is necessary.
That is what I request now before even making a Rule 87.4
request.
JUDGE FENZ:
Sorry. You heard the question of -- the last question of Counsel
Guisse, so what's your answer to that?
If he's able to clarify how it would be -- how it would be
possible to fine-tune searches.
MR. LOCARD:
A. Let me make something clear. Let me point out here that -- I'm
sorry. I'm going to speak English.
Yes. I have to specify here since I'm in front of the judicial
profession that we have copyright questions. I don't consider
myself as the owner of what both Phy Phuon and So Hong said to
me.
Now, as far as Phy Phuon is concerned, everybody knows that he
died just in the new year 2015, just a year ago, and therefore,
the owner of the copyright must be his wife, who lives at Phnom
-- on the Thai border.
As to So Hong, the fact that his cassette or his recordings would
be given to the Chamber, I think we would need his approval. I
cannot take it upon myself to give somebody else's property to
the International Tribunal.
JUDGE FENZ:
So for the record, you're not prepared to provide these documents
to the Chamber at this point?
I'm not going into the question whether this is legally valid or
not. You're saying, "I'm not doing it" at this point in time. Is
that correct?
MR. LOCARD:
A. Absolutely not. I'm not saying no. I'm saying that these
cassettes, I don't think that -- legally, they're not my
property. Therefore, we must have the approval of Phy Phuon's
family, evidently his wife, or perhaps the Chamber thinks that it
is not necessary. Then, in that case, I should be very happy to
give the copies or -- perhaps not the original. I want to give
the original to Bophana Centre. But I could -- we could give
copies. If the Tribunal thinks that there's no legal obstacle, I
shall be happy to give them.
But as far as So Hong is concerned, I'm sure that he must be
informed.
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, Mr. President. We would have a similar request in relation
to the notes or possibly recordings of Mr. Locard's interview
with Pen Sovann. That's the only thing that the Nuon Chea defence
team is interested in. And the same would apply there as just
discussed.
JUDGE FENZ:
Can I use this opportunity to request of counsel if this takes
care of your Rule 93 request? You made a Rule 93 request before
we started, obviously, the testimony, E415.1, where you asked,
rather broadly at the time, for supporting material for books.
And can I take it that what you said in the end now, the only
thing we're interested in is these tapes, takes, then, care of
the rather broad scope of the 93 request?
MR. KOPPE:
Indeed, it does.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you have the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes. Thank you, Mr. President.
First of all, I would like to make an initial remark for Mr.
Locard. I believe that the disclosure of transcripts as part of a
judicial process obviously doesn't involve copyright issues. The
Chamber would request those disclosures purely for the purposes
of this case. It would not <authorize anyone to publish or
disseminate> the documents in question. That would perhaps also
address the issues that you've raised.
This said, how long do you think you need to consult Phy <Phuon's
family,> or Saloth <Ban's family,> or Mr. Pen Sovann's family, or
Mr. Pen Sovann himself? In how much time do you think you can do
all that?
MR. LOCARD:
A. As regards Phy Phuon's family, I believe a simple phone call
would suffice. It is perhaps not necessary because I do not know
whether his Cambodian wife would be concerned about this problem.
As for Saloth Ban, I can call him. My Khmer would suffice, or I
could call him with the assistance of a Khmer. I don't know
whether I could do so in writing or by phone.
Yes, I think copies of recordings can be provided. There
shouldn't be any obstacle. I have the phone numbers and the
addresses of those persons, and it should be easy for me to reach
them.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Can you inform the Witness Support Section of the Tribunal <by
the end of the week,> how possible it would be for you to
disclose those documents?
MR. LOCARD:
A. Yes, of course. I can do so by the end of the week, and to
tell WESU whether I <have reached them and there is no problem,
but if you are telling me there is no issue with the copyright, I
think that as far as> Phy Phuon, there shouldn't be a problem,
since Phy Phuon testified <openly> before this Court, there
shouldn't be any problem with Phy Phuon's <family>.
As for So Hong's family, I think the problem is a lot more
sensitive.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
One last clarification for the parties. I think the applications
made today are only for disclosure, and subsequently, in light of
the results we obtained as regards these documents, you'll have
to make a Rule 87.4 application. Have I properly understood,
Counsel?
MS. GUISSE:
You have properly understood, Judge Lavergne, all the more so as
I have understood the procedures, the process Mr. Locard has
presented. He has <a French> translation <done by> Suong
Sikoeun<, but if we have the passages that interest us on the
audio> what we are asking for literal audio transcripts from the
original Khmer in order to have the transcripts translated by the
Tribunal.
So I'm speaking in hypothetical terms <right now>. We should at
least have the French transcript in order to be able to identify
the cassettes that correspond to the different interviews, so
there are various stages that we have to go through before we
make the <final request>.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Mr. Locard, do you have transcripts of the interviews you had
with <Pen> Sovann?
MR. LOCARD:
A. I believe I answered that question -- I've answered that
question before. I took notes. I didn't record the interview of
Pen Sovann. In the case of Pen Sovann, it <wasn't very useful,>
because in my article <on> Tram Kak, "Under the <Grip of the>
Khmer Rouge", I've already said essentially what Pen Sovann said
during the interview. <I don't believe there are - I can go back
to my notebooks, I did not lose them.>
I have them here in Cambodia. I can look at my notes again, the
notes I took during those interviews, but I do not think there
are any particularly fascinating things said in those -- in that
interview that I didn't <already> use in my article.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honours. Of course, the
handwritten notes and the transcripts of Phy Phuon's interviews
as well as So Hong's interviews have already been transcribed.
Those interviews have already been transcribed; that will be of
interest to <the> Khieu Samphan <Defence> and all the parties.
So, the proposal I would like to make is that when the
transcripts done in French with the assistance of Suong Sikoeun
have been <turned in> to the Chamber <by the expert witness>,
they should be placed on the shared drive so that all of us can
have access to those interviews and the parties that are
interested in <using parts of> those transcripts can consult
them. And they will need to make a Rule 87.4 application.
That would be the right approach for all of us. It would also be
of <great> interest to us <as well>, so it is in the interests of
the Office of the Co-Prosecutors to read all those transcripts.
Thank you.
JUDGE FENZ:
That's exactly the request that was made. Is that true?
MS. GUISSE:
Yes, it goes without saying that I didn't intend to request that
those disclosures be made only to the Khieu Samphan team. Of
course, it -- they should be done to all the parties to this
trial.
Let me repeat that what is important is to make an initial
ascertainment to <identify the cassettes> and what was <said and>
translated and recorded <on the audio, without any of the issues
caused by translations done by someone outside the court.>
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. I am grateful to you, Mr. Expert, Henri Locard. The
hearing of your testimony as an expert has now come to an end.
Your testimony will contribute to the ascertainment of the truth
in this case. You may now be excused.
You may return to your residence or to any place you wish to go.
I wish you good health and good luck and as well as prosperity.
Court officers, you are instructed to assist -- to work with the
WESU unit to assist Mr. Henri Locard and send him back to his
residence or to any places he wish to -- he wishes to go.
(Witness excused)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, please invite 2-TCW-976 to the witness stand
before the Chamber and also invite the duty counsel, Chan
Sambour, to accompany the witness while testifying.
(Witness enters the courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Chan Sambour, please be on your feet. This is your first
time to be present before the Trial Chamber. Could you please
inform the Chamber of your ID number, your office of practice as
well as the address of that office?
Counsel, please move a bit away from the microphone.
MR. CHAN SAMBOUR:
My name is Chan Sambour. My ID number is 624 at number 61, Street
<606, Boeng Kak Pir, Tuol Kouk> in Phnom Penh.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. Please be seated.
The Court now proceeds to hear testimony of witness 2-TCW-976.
And before we begin, the Chamber noticed that this witness has
been interviewed during the investigation stages of other cases,
and the International Co-Investigating Judge placed him in Group
A of the three groups. Please refer to two documents, E319/35 and
.
And the recommendation from the International Co-Investigating
Judge is to use pseudonym only for this witness, and not his full
name. The Chamber concurs with that view. This is also to balance
the publicity of the proceeding as well as the fairness and
confidentiality of the investigation.
Therefore, parties are reminded to adhere to the instruction in
document E319/7 in using disclosures from other cases.
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Witness. In the proceedings before the Chamber
and pursuant to request by the International Co-Investigating
Judge, you shall be referred to by a pseudonym only, and your
pseudonym is 2-TCW-976. And parties shall refer you by the
pseudonym or simply as "Witness".
Parties are prohibited from using your full name, and that also
applies to Judges of the Bench during these proceedings.
Mr. Witness, the Chamber would like you to confirm your identity
in document E3/9474 at Khmer, 00967994; and in English at
00975005; and in French, 00976333.
(Short pause)
BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Witness, can you read Khmer language?
2-TCW-976:
A. No, I cannot.
Q. Duty Counsel, could you read it quietly the personal
information of the witness, that is, his full name, <his
nationality,> his place of birth, date of birth, occupation, his
parents' name, his wife's name as well as the number of children.
And Mr. Witness, is the information correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. The greffier made an oral report that, to your best knowledge,
you are not related, by blood or by law, to any of the two
accused, that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any of the
civil parties admitted in this case. Is that correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. You have taken an oath before the Iron Club Statue; is that
true?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. I would like now to inform you of your right and obligations
as a witness before the Chamber.
Your right: As a witness in the proceedings before the Chamber,
you may refuse to respond to any question or to make any comment
which may incriminate you. That is your right against
self-incrimination.
As for your obligations, as a witness in the proceedings before
the Chamber, you must respond to any questions by the Bench or
relevant parties except where your response or comments to those
questions may incriminate you, as the Chamber has just informed
you of your right as a witness.
You must tell the truth that you have known, heard, seen,
remember, experience or observed directly in relation to an
event, occurrence in the questions that the Bench or parties pose
to you.
And Mr. Witness, have you been interviewed by investigators of
the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges? If so, how many times,
when and where?
A. Yes, I remember that.
Q. How many times have you been interviewed, and where?
A. I was interviewed once downstairs, and I was also interviewed
at my home.
Q. And before you appear before the Chamber, have you read or
reviewed your previous statements with the OCIJ investigators in
order to refresh your memory?
A. I remember some, but not everything.
Q. To your best knowledge and recollection, can you tell the
Chamber whether the written records of your statement are
consistent with what you told the OCIJ investigators?
A. Yes, they are.
Q. During your testimony, the Chamber took a request from WESU
per your request <to be> provided with a duty counsel and <that>
his assistance be made to the point that you may raise in terms
of self-incrimination if you provide a response, and you can
consult your duty counsel in this regard.
Do you understand that?
A. Yes, I understand that. And I will answer questions based on
my recollection.
Q. Thank you.
It is now convenient for a short break, and we'll take a break
now and resume at 20 to 11.00.
Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room
reserved for witnesses and experts during the break time and
invite him back into the courtroom at 20 to 11.00.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1015H to 1038H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
In accordance with Internal Rule 91bis of the ECCC, the floor is
given first to the Co-Prosecutors to put questions before other
parties. The combined time for Co-Prosecutors and civil parties
is two sessions.
You may now proceed to put questions to the witness.
QUESTIONING BY MR. BOYLE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, counsel.
Q. Good morning, Mr. Witness. My name is Andrew Boyle. I'm going
to be asking you some questions on behalf of the Prosecution this
morning and this afternoon.
I'd like to start off by asking you when it was that you joined
the Khmer Rouge.
2-TCW-976:
A. <Since> 1979.
Q. And the translation that I heard was 1979. Was that your
answer?
A. That is correct.
Q. Let me ask my question again. Perhaps it wasn't clear.
I'm asking what year it was that you joined the movement commonly
known as the Khmer Rouge that established the state of Democratic
Kampuchea.
A. I cannot recall it. I do not recall which year it was. I do
not remember it.
Q. Allow me to read from a statement that you gave to the
Investigating Judges. This is at E3/9474, answer A1, and this was
your answer to them, Mr. Witness - quote: "I joined the
revolution in 1972 when I was only
years old."  
         12   Does that -- close quote. Does that refresh your memory that you
joined the revolution in 1972 when you were 12 years old?
A. That is correct.
Q. And where were you living at that time?
A. I was living at Phnum Den.
Q. I heard you say that you were living at Phnum Den. Is that
your home village?
A. No.
Q. I'd like to read to you another answer that you gave, same
statement, E3/9474, answer 1. You said: "I joined it in my home
village of Tnaot Chum, Trapeang Thum Khang (sic), Tung commune,
Tram Kak district, Takeo province."
Is that correct, or is it correct that you joined at Phnum Den?
A. There was a coup. In fact, we were attacking the <advancement
of the> Vietnamese at Phnum Den.
Q. I believe that you are discussing a point later in time. I'm
asking about where you were based at the point that you were 12
years old and you joined the Khmer Rouge.
Were you in your home village at that point?
A. I was within Kiri Vong after I had left my home village.
Q. At the time in 1972 when you joined the Khmer Rouge, had other
members of your family also joined the Khmer Rouge?
A. No. <At that time,> I had <just> married another wife.
Q. I'll try asking the question in a more clear fashion.
At the point in 1972 when you joined the Khmer Rouge initially,
had other members -- and you're 12 years old -- had other members
of your extended family such as your parents, brothers, sisters,
uncles, had any of them joined the Khmer Rouge?
A. No. I was alone joining the movement.
Q. I'd like to read to you an answer that you gave to the DC-Cam
organization, E3/9029; English, ERN 01060635; Khmer, 00930403.
Mr. Witness, this is what you were asked:
"What made you join the Khmer Rouge?"
And you answered: "All my family members were part of it, part of
Ta Mok's group." Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory that all of your family members
were part of the Khmer Rouge at the time that you joined?
A. That is true. My parents at the time were quite old, so I
joined the movement alone.
Q. I just heard you say that you joined the movement alone. The
quote that I read to you that you provided to DC-Cam said that
the rest of your family had also joined the Khmer Rouge.
Can you tell us which of those two answers is correct?
A. They were old. They were repairmen <> at the time. <So, it was
like they did join the movement.>
Q. Can you tell us what position you had when you first joined
the Khmer Rouge in 1972?
A. I was simply a combatant.
Q. Are you able to say what level you were a combatant at:
commune, district, zone?
A. I was a <soldier> at the zone level.
Q. Were you a combatant at the zone level from the outset, or did
you -- were you a combatant at lower levels before you joined the
zone level?
A. I do not recall the exact date and month.
Q. I will read you a quote that you provided to DC-Cam, the same
document E3/9029; English, 01060636; Khmer, 00930405:
Question: "Commune militia?"
Answer: "Yes."
Question: "You first joined it as a militiaman?"
Answer: "Yes, I did." Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory that you first joined as a commune
militiaman?
A. That is correct. I was first <a> militiaman <at the commune
level>, and then I was moved and transferred to the zone area.
Q. And when did you join the zone level militia?
A. I do not remember the date well.
Q. I'll attempt to assist you. In your DC-Cam interview, you
stated at English, 01060637; Khmer, 00930405:
Question: "Meaning, you joined the zone in 1973?"
Answer: "Yes."
Question: "Was it called the Southwest Zone?"
Answer: "Yes." Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory that it was 1973 that you joined
the zone -- the Southwest Zone army?
A. That is correct. Later on, I was transferred to the Southwest
Zone in 1973. Before 1973, that is, in 1972, I was a militiaman
at the sub-district level.
Q. And did you receive military training when you were part of
the district or the zone military?
A. No. I was a rank and file soldier.
Q. Were you given a weapon of any sort, a gun, for example?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. Sorry. I didn't hear your answer. I don't believe your
microphone was on. Could you repeat it?
A. I got <a> CKC rifle.
Q. And when was your first combat against Lon Nol forces?
A. I cannot recall it, counsel.
Q. Are you able to tell us who it was that was in charge of the
Southwest Zone armed forces?
A. Ta Roeun, the commander of the division.
Q. And who was in charge of the divisions in the Southwest Zone?
A. Ta Roeun.
Q. Are you familiar with the name Ta Mok?
A. I have heard of it.
Q. Do you know what Ta Mok's position was within the Southwest
Zone?
A. He was the chief of the zone.
Q. Are you -- are you related to Ta Mok?
A. We were living in adjacent villages. However, we were not
related by blood.
Q. I'd like to read you a couple of quotes that you gave in two
interviews. The first is your DC-Cam statement, E3/9029; English,
ERN 01060635; Khmer, 00930404:
Question: "Are you a relative of Ta Mok?"
Answer: "A nephew." Closed quote.
The next quote is from one of your Written Records of Interview,
E3/9474, answer 5, quote:
Question: "Are you related to Ta Mok?"
Answer: "My father is Ta Mok's cousin. I am a type of nephew."
Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory that you are related by blood to Ta
Mok?
A. That is correct.
Q. Were you ever made a member of the Communist Party of
Kampuchea?
A. No.
Q. Were you ever made a member of the "Youth League"?
A. No.
Q. Can you tell the Court what division, regiment and battalion
of the Southwest Zone forces you were in?
A. Division, the division belongs to Ta Saroeun.
Q. Do you recall the numerical designation of the division? What
was the division number?
A. Division 310, Regiment 14.
Q. I heard you say Division 310, Regiment 14. Is it possible that
you meant Division 14?
A. I am not sure. I do not really understand your question.
Q. I'm trying to identify the number of the division that you
were in when you were in the Southwest Zone forces.
Perhaps if I read you two quotes. You have actually given
divergent answers on this question.
The first quote is from your DC-Cam statement: English 01060640
to 41; and Khmer, 00930407.
Question: "Now, I want you to describe when you fought along
Highway 3 up to Phnom Penh. Was Saroeun the chairman?"
Answer: "Saroeun led my division."
Question: "What was the division's designated number?"
Answer: "Division 14." Closed quote.
And then in your -- in your Written Record of Interview, E3/9485,
answer 26, you say -- quote:
"I was a soldier in Division 10, but I forgot the numerical
designations of the battalion and regiment." Closed quote.
Are you able to tell us whether either of those answers are
correct, either Division 14 or Division 10?
A. In fact, it was Regiment 14 and Division 310.
Q. Do you know if your division merged into another division at
some point later in time, perhaps after the establishment of
Democratic Kampuchea or after April 1975?
A. I do not know about that.
Q. Were you ever aware of your division number changing from the
time you joined the division which you say was Division 310 until
1979?
A. Soldiers <still> remained with the division. However, the
commander was replaced by <someone> from the Northwest Zone.
Q. You've mentioned already that the head of your division was
named Ta Roeun. Are you able to give us his full name and any
aliases that he had?
A. I do not know his full name. I only knew that name, Roeun,
when I was there. And I did not know his surname.
Q. Are you familiar with an individual named Sao Saroeun, Saroeun
05?
A. No, I did not hear of that. I only heard <of> Roeun.
Q. Do you know if your division ever came under the authority of
the Centre? Was it ever transferred in authority from the
Southwest Zone to the Centre where it would report to Son Sen and
the Central Committee -- sorry, the general staff?
A. I did not know about that since we did not stay together as a
group all the time.
Q. Did you ever attend any meetings of the Standing Committee
with Ta Mok?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did you know who was the Party Secretary and the Deputy Party
Secretary of the Communist Party of Kampuchea during Democratic
Kampuchea?
A. No, I did not know who <was> in those positions.
Q. Do you know what position Ta Mok held within the Communist
Party of Kampuchea?
A. I know Ta Mok was chief of the zone.
Q. Other than being chief of the zone, were you aware of him
having any other position within Democratic Kampuchea?
A. Ta Mok led the people.
Q. Can you explain what you mean when you say "Ta Mok led the
people"?
A. I saw him issue orders to people.
Q. I'd like to read you a quote that you said in one of your
Written Records of Interview. This is E3/9474, answer 18. You
said -- quote:
"Ta Mok was in charge of all zones in Cambodia. Ta Mok ranked
second after Pol Pot. He was in charge of all infantry forces."
Closed quote.
Can you tell us whether that is a statement -- an answer that you
gave and, if so, do you believe it is accurate?
A. Yes, that is correct because all soldiers in the infantry <>
belonged to him.
Q. And how did you come to know that his rank -- what Ta Mok's
rank was within the Communist Party of Kampuchea?
A. Since I built a house for him, I knew about that.
Q. On what basis did you base your conclusion about the authority
of Ta Mok?
A. I did not base on anything. I only say what I knew.
Q. Did you know what decisions were made by Ta Mok and what
decisions were made by others that he was just carrying out?
A. I did not know the details about that.
Q. You mentioned earlier that Ta Roeun was replaced by someone
from the Northwest Zone at some point. Are you able to tell us
when that replacement took place?
A. I do not get your question which Ta Roeun you <are referring>
to.
Q. I apologize. Let me clarify.
The Ta Roeun that was in charge of your division, I believe you
said earlier that he was replaced by someone from the Northwest
Zone at some point. And I'd like to know the date that that
replacement took place.
A. Ta Saroeun returned to his village in the Southwest Zone, and
there was only Ta Mok who was in charge in Battambang.
Q. And do you know when that was that Ta Roeun returned to his
village and there was only Ta Mok in charge?
A. I cannot recall the date since it happened a long time ago.
Q. Were you in the same division for the entirety of the period
of Democratic Kampuchea?
A. No. Later on, I was no longer in that unit.
Q. And when you were no longer in that unit, what unit did you
join?
A. I lived with my wife and children under Ta Mok.
Q. What year was it that you changed out of Division 310?
A. It was during the early part of the year, and it was probably
in early 1978. <If not in 1978, it would have been in 1980.>
Q. Were you part of a unit or a team when you left Division 310?
A. I became a house builder for Ta Mok after I left the division.
Q. Did you ever serve as a messenger for Ta Roeun, who was in
charge of your division?
A. No, I did not.
Q. I'd like to read to you from your DC-Cam statement, E3/9029;
English, 01060657; Khmer, 00930422:
Question: "You did not hold any position during the Khmer Rouge
regime?"
Answer: "That's right."
Question: "You were not chief of a platoon or company."
Answer: "No, I was just a messenger."
Question: "A messenger?"
Answer: "Yes. I was Ta Roeun's messenger."
Question: "You were Ta Roeun's messenger?"
Answer: "Yes. I did not have any high-ranking position." Closed
quote.
Does that refresh your memory that you served as a messenger for
Ta Roeun, or is that an incorrect answer?
A. You can say so because sometimes I was used to go here and
there, so I acted as a messenger when there was no one else there
to do the job.
Q. And can you tell the Court what your work consisted of when
you acted as a messenger for Ta Roeun?
A. There were no major tasks. In fact, I cooked and I served him
water and meal.
Q. Did you carry any messages as a messenger?
A. Yes, I used to.
Q. Where were you and what year or years was it that you served
as a messenger for Ta Roeun?
A. I do not recall the year or the date.
Q. Do you recall what part of the country you were in when you
served as a messenger for Ta Roeun, what city?
A. It was in Tram Kak district.
Q. And do you know what the messengers -- messages that he would
ask you to carry for him concerned?
A. I was told to deliver messages from one unit to another.
Q. Were you involved in the attack on Phnom Penh in April 1975 as
part of the Southwest Zone forces?
A. Yes, I participated in the attack.
Q. And after Phnom Penh fell to the Khmer Rouge, did you stay in
Phnom Penh for some period of time?
A. No, I did not.
Q. When did you leave Phnom Penh?
A. It was in 1979.
Q. I'm going to try to clarify my question.
You just told us that you were involved in the attack on Phnom
Penh in 1975. Did you enter Phnom Penh during that attack?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And once Phnom Penh fell to the Khmer Rouge, did you stay in
Phnom Penh in April 1975 and afterwards for any period of time?
A. No, I left.
Q. Do I understand correctly that you're saying you left Phnom
Penh right away in April 1975?
A. Yes, that is correct because in 1975 I went to the Northwest
Zone.
Q. I'd like to read to you some answers that you've given on that
issue about how long you stayed in Phnom Penh, that diverged with
the answer that you've just given us.
The first is from your DC-Cam statement, E3/9029; English,
01060641; Khmer, 00930408:
Question: "How long did you stay in Phnom Penh? Did you stay
there for months or the whole period of three years?"
Answer: "I stayed there for more than a year before I left for
one last last combat in Svay Rieng."
Question: "So did you stay in Phnom Penh until the time you left
for combat in Vietnam or Svay Rieng?"
Answer: "Yes, I did."
In addition, in your Written Record of Interview, E3/9474, at
answer 2 you state that you remained in Phnom Penh until late
1975.
So can you tell us if that is incorrect, why you stated to both
DC-Cam and the Investigating Judges that, in fact, you remained
in Phnom Penh for various periods of time?
A. I remained there for a while then I was re-assigned and
transferred to the Northwest Zone.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel, you may proceed.
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, no objection, Mr. President, an observation. The Chamber and
all parties are in possession of an Investigation Report numbered
.9.
I apologize for interrupting the questions of the Prosecution,
but the answers of the witness are such that I'm starting to
wonder whether the witness is really the person that should be
here or whether something else might be happening in light of the
content of that Investigation Report from one of the
investigators.
I'm a bit vague on purpose, but I hope the Chamber understands
what I'm referring at.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. BOYLE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Since I don't hear any objection, I
don't hear any request, I just propose that I proceed?
MR. KOPPE:
Well, let me -- let me -- let me do something concrete with my
observation.
Maybe even in closed session, we might have to pursue whether
with this particular individual, a situation has arisen that is
being described in .9. Almost all of his answers really
do not make any sense in the light of earlier statements.
So that's -- I'm still a bit vague on purpose, but--
JUDGE FENZ:
Counsel, we have six minutes left. Why don't you let the
prosecutor go ahead for the six minutes and then we all have a
break where we can contemplate what you said?
BY MR. BOYLE:
Thank you, Judge.
Q. Mr. Witness, I heard you say that you left Phnom Penh and
headed to the Northwest Zone. Did you -- between being in Phnom
Penh after the fall of Phnom Penh to the Khmer Rouge and your
relocation to the Northwest Zone, were you based anywhere else?
2-TCW-976:
A. I was in Thma Puok.
Q. And can you tell the Court where Thma Puok is; in which zone
it's in?
A. It was in Sector 5 in the Northwest Zone. I am probably
correct only with the sector, that is Sector 5, but I'm not sure
about the zone.
Q. I'm asking about your -- any locations to which you were
ordered to go before you arrived in the Northwest Zone. You have
told us that you participated in the attack on Phnom Penh in
April 1975. You've told us that you then went to the Northwest
Zone.
I'm wondering if you travelled anywhere or were based anywhere
between those two locations in the intervening years or months
between when you took part in the fall of Phnom Penh and when you
became assigned to the Northwest Zone?
A. Thma Puok and Banteay Chhmar and Krala (phonetic) village <>
in the Northwest Zone.
Q. We'll come back to your locations, but before we break, I
would just like to confirm that you are stating that after the
fall of Phnom Penh, you never lived in Phnom Penh, that is, at
some point in April 1975 or the months following April 1975. I
believe you are saying now that you have not lived -- that you
did not live in Phnom Penh at that time; is that correct?
A. No, I did not live there after the coup d'état.
Q. Mr. Witness, do you recall telling individuals from DC-Cam
that you lived in Phnom Penh with various senior leaders of the
Khmer Rouge?
A. I only recall part of it.
Q. Allow me to you read a quote. This is E3/9029. This is your
DC-Cam statement; English, 01060642; Khmer, 00930409; and you
state:
"Only the senior leaders came such as Ieng Sary, Khieu Samphan,
Son Sen or Nuon Chea, that's it."
Question: "Did you ever meet them in Phnom Penh?"
Answer: "Actually, I lived with them."
Question: "Lived with them?"
Answer: "Ieng Sary and Khieu Samphan."
Question: "You lived with Ieng Sary?"
Answer: "I also lived with Pol Pot. I mean, I lived with all of
them. They were my leaders, so how could I not live with them."
Closed quote.
Was that an incorrect answer when you gave it?
A. That is correct because I was amongst the group who built the
houses for them.
Q. When you describe building houses for these individuals, are
you talking about Phnom Penh or are you talking about perhaps
other areas of the country in later years? Are you certain that
you built houses for these individuals in Phnom Penh in 1975?
A. I was amongst the house builders in Anlong <Veaeng>, that is,
along the Dang Rek mountain range, and not in Phnom Penh.
Q. So is it correct that you never lived with any of the senior
Khmer Rouge leaders in Phnom Penh during the period of Democratic
Kampuchea?
A. Yes, that is true.
MR. BOYLE:
Mr. President, I'm about to move on to another subject, so this
might be an appropriate time for a break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
It is now time for the lunch break. The Chamber will take a break
now and resume at 1.30 this afternoon to continue our
proceedings.
Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room
reserved for witnesses and experts during the lunch break, and
invite him back into the courtroom at 1.30 this afternoon.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him returned to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1129H to 1332H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
After reading <.9>, the Chamber notes the privacy and
confidentiality of the witness, 976, and the Chamber will proceed
to hear the hearings in camera session based on Rule <79.6(b)>
and <29.4(e)>.
The AV Unit is instructed to disconnect the sound and video to
the public gallery unless otherwise decided by the Chamber later
on.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The voice and video should also be disconnected to the pressroom.
(Court goes into closed session 1334H)
(Court resumes in public session 1349H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now resume your questioning, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.
BY MR. BOYLE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Witness, I would like to go back to what you were saying
about when you left Phnom Penh. You stated that you went to
Battambang.
Do you recall when it was that you were transferred to
Battambang?
2-TCW-976:
A. I do not recall the date.
Q. In your written record of interview, E3/9485, answer 17, you
were asked - quote:
"When did you leave the Southwest Zone for Battambang province?"
Answer: "I went there perhaps in 1978 in the raining season."
Closed quote.
Does that refresh your recollection that it might have been in
the raining season in 1978 that you went to Battambang?
A. Yes.
Q. And when you were transferred to Battambang, who was it that
made the decision that you and members of your division should go
to Battambang or who gave those orders?
A. It was Ta Mok, the chief.
Q. And at that time, did the rest of your division go with you to
Battambang?
A. Yes.
Q. Had other forces gone to Battambang before you with Ta Mok?
A. I do not know about this particular point. When we arrived, my
force arrived; the other forces had already been there.
Q. Those other forces that were already there, were those forces
under the command of Ta Mok?
A. Yes.
Q. When your unit and your division was transferred to
Battambang, do you know why you were transferred to Battambang?
What was the necessity that your division be based in Battambang?
A. They said that there <was> an incident, that is, <a>
demonstration <in> Battambang.
Q. Do you recall receiving any specific orders regarding
Northwest Zone cadres in relation to you being transferred to
Battambang?
A. I do not know about this point. I saw other forces <there> and
my force joined with other forces.
Q. I'd like to read to you from E3/9474. That's your Written
Record of Interview, answer 23. Question: "Back then, did you
ever hear of getting rid of the Northwest Zone people?"
Answer: "Yes, I did. Before my division was sent to Battambang,
we were ordered to get rid of the Northwest Zone people. However,
when we arrived, we did not find any traitors." Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory that you were ordered to get rid of
the Northwest Zone people when you were transferred there?
A. I heard other forces said this. They said that the Northwest
Zone people <were traitors> and they needed our forces to be
there. And I do not know what kind of treason they were engaged
in. I do not really understand at all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to remind all parties that this witness
cannot read and write or has limited education. So please put
short questions and simple ones so that you can receive best
responses.
BY MR. BOYLE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. In relation to what you heard about the Northwest Zone people
being traitors, do you remember if you were told to target
certain people in the Northwest Zone or was it all people in the
Northwest Zone?
A. They only said that the Northwest Zone people <were traitors>.
However, when my force had arrived, I did not see it was true.
<Their forces were like my force. I do not know who were traitors
and who were not.>
Q. You answered a question in E3/9474, answer 52, by stating
that, "It was only the high-ranking cadre from the district level
up that were to be eliminated."
Does that refresh your memory that you received instructions
regarding high-level cadre?
A. I heard that, but my force was not there to conduct the
purges. As I said, <their forces were like my force. I did not
know what to do>.
Q. Did Ta Mok ever give you any instructions about conducting
purges in the Northwest Zone?
A. No. I heard rumours. I was not personally instructed.
Q. You stated at your written record of interview, E3/9474,
answer 23 -- quote:
"Actually, Ta Mok was the one who issued the order. Ta Mok said
it is likely that the Northwest Zone people will betray us so we
must put our forces there." Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory about receiving such an order from
Ta Mok?
A. I can recall it now. There was an order from him. However,
after my force had arrived there, I did not see <those> people,
Northwest Zone people were <traitors>. <I do not know who exactly
were the traitors.>
Q. After you arrived in the Northwest Zone, were you aware of any
purges that took place?
A. I do not know about that. I did not see any purges conducted
at the time after my arrival. I heard just the rumours.
Q. Am I to understand that when you discussed in your written
record of interview at answer 52 and 53, and this is E3/9474
where you stated: "Only the high-ranking cadre from the district
level up, were eliminated. They disappeared. They did not return
to their families." That, that information came to you by rumour.
You don't have any direct knowledge of this information; is that
correct?
A. That is true. <People were> called and disappeared. I do not
know where they all <went>. I was just a rank and file soldier,
as I said.
Q. Just to clarify, are you saying that you now were aware of
people being called and disappeared when you were in the
Northwest Zone?
A. <> I do not know about that. People were called out and they
disappeared. I didn't know at the time where they had gone.
Q. Who was it that called them when they disappeared?
A. I have no idea. I heard people say that certain uncles had
been called to attend a meeting and after <that>, they
disappeared.
Q. Do you remember the names of those uncles?
A. I do not recall their names. I do not know them personally. I
was very young and simply a rank and file soldier. I was not
allowed to know their business.
Q. What was your work as a soldier when you were in the Northwest
Zone?
A. I was simply a rank and file soldier.
Q. Are you able to say or recall any assignments that you were
given while you were there as a rank and file soldier?
A. Sometimes I was assigned to deliver a letter to this person or
that person and on other occasions, I was asked to be based at my
headquarters.
Q. Who would assign you to deliver letters?
A. My superior. For example, Ta Mok said I needed to deliver a
letter to this person or that person.
Q. Can you tell us which people you delivered these letters from
Ta Mok to?
A. I would deliver the letters to commanders of divisions or
regiments.
Q. And would they provide you with letters to return to Ta Mok?
A. No.
Q. Do you know what the letters that Ta Mok gave you to deliver
consisted of, what the content of those letters was?
A. I do not know. I did not dare to look inside the envelope or
letter.
Q. Did you also act as a guard to Ta Mok?
A. No. I was not acting as a guard but a <> house <builder>.
Q. In your Written Record of Interview, E3/9474, at answer 7, you
are asked:
Question: "You have said that you worked in Ta Mok's office. So
were you his messenger?"
Answer: "I was not his messenger but he treated me like one. He
also took me along with him. He also treated me as his guard. Ta
Mok did not have a messenger. He used anyone he liked."
Does that refresh your recollection that he also used you as a
guard on occasion and that he took you along with him when he
travelled?
A. That is true.
Q. Can you tell the Court what were some of the places that you
travelled with Ta Mok?
A. Yes, I can tell you. Sometimes I was asked to go to certain
places, which I cannot recall them now. I was asked to go to Kouk
Sok (phonetic), Kouk Chan (phonetic) to build hospital buildings.
Q. I'd like to read to you from your Written Record of Interview,
E3/9474. You stated -- quote -- this is answer 39 - quote:
"I also followed him when he visited the villages in Battambang."
Question: "Did you ever go to field sites with him?"
Answer: "Yes, I did. I do not remember which sites he went to
because we went to many sites. Sometimes we visited the rice
fields. I also followed Ta Mok to Kamping Puoy Dam." Closed
quote.
Is that correct, that you would travel with Ta Mok to various
villages and fields and worksites in the Northwest Zone?
A. Yes, I can recall that. He was walking and looking at the
workers in the field and also those workers were building the
embankments. And I was following him at the time.
Q. Are you able to describe what else he would do when he would
go to villages or worksites? Would he have any meetings with
anyone?
A. I do not -- I never saw him convene other people to meetings
but <he> encouraged other people to try to work very hard in the
field building embankments and work the field.
Q. Did you ever travel to Ratanakiri with Ta Mok?
A. Concerning Ratanakiri, I did not go there. I heard that he had
gone to Ratanakiri with his own force.
Q. Mr. Witness, again, when you were speaking with the
Investigating Judges, E3/9474, answer 39 (sic) you stated -
quote: "I guarded Chinese delegates and Ta Mok when they visited
a mining area in Ratanakiri." Closed quote.
Is that incorrect?
A. Yes. I did go. At the time, he was doing his own business and
I was doing mine. I was not working with him.
Q. Mr. Witness, you told us that you acted as a guard and a
messenger. You first denied that you went to Ratanakiri and now
it's sounding like you just said that you did go to Ratanakiri.
Can you please tell the Court which answer is correct to the
question: Did you travel with Ta Mok to Ratanakiri during the
period of Democratic Kampuchea?
A. I accompanied him to that province.
Q. Are you able to recall what year and month you accompanied Ta
Mok to Ratanakiri?
A. I cannot recall the year since it happened a long time ago. I
cannot recall it.
Q. And what did Ta Mok do when he was in Ratanakiri?
A. He took the Chinese delegations to look at the gold mine
there. That was his task.
Q. Were you ever aware of Ta Mok conducting any meetings in the
Northwest Zone?
A. I did not see that. I saw him staying at his house most of the
time.
Q. In your Written Record of Interview, E3/9485, at answer 14,
you describe a meeting that Ta Mok -- where Ta Mok announced that
Ta Tit was the person who would replace him in the Northwest
Zone, and you say that you guarded that meeting and also attended
that meeting. Does that refresh your recollection about a meeting
that Ta Mok convened in the Northwest Zone?
A. He held the meeting inside his house and, yes, he did chair
the meeting. However, I did not know the content of the meeting
since no one else was allowed to go nearby and his bodyguards
were posting outside the meeting location.
Q. So is your testimony here today that you did not attend this
meeting; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Do you remember who the secretary of the Northwest Zone was
when you arrived there in 1978?
A. No. I do not recall their names. There were three, four, five
of them and I did not know who was who since I did not know them
or their positions.
Q. Does the name Ros Nhim mean anything to you?
A. Yes, I heard of that name but I did not see him in person. I
heard of the name Ros Nhim.
Q. And did you know what his position was in the Northwest Zone?
A. I heard people say he was chief of Sector
or maybe chief of 
           5   the zone. However, I only heard people talking about him but I
did not see him in person.
Q. Do you remember two individuals named Cheal and Ta Tom in the
Northwest Zone?
A. No. I only heard of their names but I did not see them in
person. <I also did not> know about their positions, whether they
were <the> chief of <a> sector or zone. Here, I referred to Tom
and Cheal. I only heard of their names.
Q. Do you know where Nhim and Cheal were living at the time or
where they worked?
A. No. Even today, I do not know.
Q. Do you recall where Ta Tom was based in the Northwest Zone?
A. No, I do not know of <his> location.
Q. Do you recall a point at which Nhim, Cheal and Tom were
removed from their positions in the Northwest Zone?
A. I knew that they were called for a meeting in Phnom Penh,
although I did not know the location of that meeting.
Q. How did you know that they were called for a meeting in Phnom
Penh?
A. Because I stood guard at the road; that's why I knew about
that. While I was still guarding at the road at the checkpoint,
they <left> and <their faces> looked familiar.
Q. Can you please explain a bit more what it is about guarding
the road that made you aware that they had been sent for a
meeting or say more exactly what it is that you saw?
A. I saw the two of them while I was watering garden at an office
and from where I stood I saw them. I did not know where they went
but I heard that they went for a meeting.
Q. When you are talking about "them", are you now saying that you
did see Ros Nhim?
A. I saw him in a vehicle while I was watering flowers at the
garden.
Q. Mr. Witness, over the course of your various interviews, you
have told different variations of how you became aware of the
removal of these individuals. In your DC-Cam interview, you
stated that it was your group that arrested Ta Nhim. That's at
English ERN 01060645; Khmer, 00930412.
When you were then asked about it in your first OCIJ interview,
you said that you were not involved but other team members of
your unit were involved. You then said that you heard Ta Mok tell
Nhim, Cheal and Tom to go to Phnom Penh.
And then you also stated that you saw a driver arrive with
letters for these individuals from Phnom Penh and that they then
left with them.
Can you please explain to the Court why you have had so many
different explanations as to how you became aware of the removal
of Nhim, Cheal and Tom from the Northwest Zone?
A. I could say from what I can recall, because at that time I was
watering the flowers along the road and they were in a vehicle.
And I did not know where they were going to, but I heard that
they were going for a meeting.
Q. Did you ever hear Ta Mok say anything about Ros Nhim, Cheal or
Ta Tom?
A. No, I did not hear him saying anything while I was guarding
the road.
Q. At any time that you were based in the Northwest Zone, did you
hear Ta Mok say anything about those three individuals?
A. I did not know who was who or who was in charge. I did not
hear him say anything about them. Since I was a minor soldier, he
never allowed me to know about all these affairs.
Q. Mr. Witness, am I to understand that your various statements
where you said, for example, in your E3/9474 Written Record of
Interview, answers 17 and 18 when you said:
Question: "How did you know that they were ordered to go to Phnom
Penh?"
Answer: "I knew it because I worked closely with Ta Mok. I always
knew who were ordered to go places because I was Ta Mok's guard."
Question: "Who ordered Ta Nhim, Ta Cheal and Ta Tom to go to
Phnom Penh?"
Answer: "I do not know. I only heard Ta Mok telling them to go to
Phnom Penh." Closed quote.
Are you saying that all of that was incorrect?
A. That is correct because that's what I heard him saying that
they were sent for a meeting in Phnom Penh.
Q. Am I to understand that you did hear Ta Mok say that Nhim,
Cheal and Tom were sent for a meeting in Phnom Penh?
A. Yes, that is true because at the time I was guarding the road
and I saw them leave. They were leaving in a vehicle.
Q. Was your group or your team involved in the taking away of
Nhim, Cheal and Tom?
A. No. My forces did not have any involvement with them.
Q. In your DC-Cam statement, English, 01060647; Khmer, 00930413;
you are asked a question:
"What happened to Ta Ros Nhim and Ta Cheal?"
Answer: "Cheal and Tom were arrested and sent to Phnom Penh but
we did not know where he was taken."
Question: "Was your team also involved?"
Answer: "Yes." Closed quote.
Was that an incorrect statement when you made it?
A. No, I did not make that statement. What I said was that they
were requested to go to work. They did not use the words actually
"go for a meeting" but I did not know what kind of work that they
were required to do or for how many days.
Q. When your division travelled to Battambang, how did your
division travel there?
A. We travelled by <GMC> vehicles.
Q. And are you able to say approximately how many people or
soldiers there were in your division?
A.I did not know the total number, but there <was> quite a large
number since there <was> a number of trucks.
Q. And you told DC-Cam at English, 01060647; Khmer, 00930413 to
14 - quote: "My team, my divisions was comprised of more than
1,000 persons." Closed quote.
Does that sound correct that your division had more than 1,000
people?
A. Yes, that is correct, and <> people were being transferred
while I was in Takeo and while I was in Battambang, I belonged to
a unit which had about 50 soldiers.
Q. And when you travelled to Battambang with your division, were
you armed? Were the soldiers in your division armed?
A. Yes. In fact, we all had our weapons, although we did not
carry them on our bodies but the weapons were loaded onto the
trucks.
Q. I would like to read to you an answer you gave in one of your
questions and ask you a couple -- I'm sorry, in one of your
interviews, and ask you a couple of questions about it. This is
E3/9474, Written Record of Interview, answers 21 to 22.
Mr. Witness, this is what you said -- quote:
"When my division had just come from Phnom Penh, Ta Nhim's forces
surrounded us but they disappeared when we got our weapons ready
to fire. And they surrounded us and later they disappeared. On
the next morning, I had no sight of Ta Nhim's forces. I think Ta
Nhim's forces came to check my division when my men equipped with
guns got off the trucks." Closed quote.
Do you recall saying that to the Investigating Judges and did
that event actually take place?
A. Yes, I did make that statement. I said that our forces arrived
in Battambang and then they were there, that is, the opposite
forces. However, the next morning they all disappeared and I did
not know what happened to them. And they were soldiers like us
and we did not engage in any argument with them.
Q. Were you personally present when this occurred or did you just
hear about it?
A. At which location are you referring to?
Q. I am referring to the location where the event that I just
quoted about took place where you claim to have encountered Ta
Nhim's forces. Were you present when that event took place?
A. At that time, our forces got off the trucks and those soldiers
came to see us and they did not come to surround us, but they all
came to see us getting off the trucks.
And next morning, they all disappeared and I did not know where
they went.
Q. Do I understand correctly then that you are describing forces
that were already in the Northwest Zone coming to see you get off
the trucks and that is the extent of that event?
A. Yes, that is correct. Upon arrival of our forces, they came to
see us. They were wondering what happened since they saw a large
number of soldiers arrive and, as I said, next morning they all
disappeared.
Q. Did you see any -- ever see any of the individuals from the
Northwest Zone who were called to meetings or disappeared or
taken away? Did you ever see any of them return?
A. While I was stationed in the Northwest Zone, I did not see any
of them again. They disappeared and never returned.
Q. Mr. Witness, did your group also participate in an attempt to
arrest So Phim?
A. No, I did not see any of these arrests. And as for his; no. I
only heard of his name. I did not know him in person.
Q. I just want to clarify that we are discussing the same person.
I am asking if your group was ever involved in an attempt to
arrest the Secretary of the East Zone, So Phim. Can you just
clarify whether that was the case or not?
A. No. Our forces were not involved. I only heard that forces
surrounded his house for his arrest. I only heard about that.
Q. Mr. Witness, can you explain. If you weren't involved in that
attempt to arrest So Phim, why is it that you told DC-Cam -- this
is at English, ERN 01060647; Khmer, 00930413: "I was directly
involved in surrounding him to capture him?" Closed quote.
A. I went along with other soldiers, but I <was> not involved in
his arrest. I went along and I returned. They were still
surrounding his house. And I was pretty young at the time.
Q. Who were the other soldiers you went along with?
A. I went with Regiment 14 forces.
Q. And how did you obtain knowledge about what happened to So
Phim?
A. I only heard soldiers talking to one another about going to
arrest So Phim, but since I was younger than them, I did not go
along.
Q. Do I understand correctly that you are claiming that you
travelled with these soldiers to the East Zone but then you
didn't participate in the actual attempt to arrest So Phim; is
that what you are saying?
A. Yes, that is correct, because I was young. So they did not let
me go along.
Q. Can you tell us the month and the year that you travelled with
these soldiers to the East
Zone?
A. I cannot recall the month or the year. I did not know in which
year that I went. I forgot about it since it happened a long time
ago.
Q. Mr. Witness, on the case file at E3/442, it's a written
statement of Kaing Guek Eav, Duch, at paragraph 52. He says -
quote: "The purge was conducted at the East Zone in June 1978."
Closed quote.
Does that refresh your memory that it may have been around May or
June 1978 that you travelled there or that you claim that you
travelled there?
A. I simply cannot recall the month or the year. I cannot recall
whether it happened in 1977 or '78.
MR. BOYLE:
Mr. President, I note that it's time that we typically take a
break. I believe that because of late starts on both of the
sessions that the civil parties and the Co-Prosecutors combined
have about half an hour remaining.
I certainly won't need that much time. I believe that I could
wrap up in about 10 or 15 more minutes. I am not sure how long
the civil parties need.
MR. KOPPE:
Of course I cannot speak for the--
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, defence counsel, you may proceed.
MR. KOPPE:
We will not have any questions for this witness. So we might as
well wrap it up. I think the same goes for the Khieu Samphan
team.
MS. GUISSE:
Yes, Mr. President, a priori, unless after the new questions that
the Co-Prosecutor there is a great change, we do not expect to
have any questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. Counsel?
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. The civil parties will not have any
questions.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since the Lead Co-Lawyers for civil parties and the defence teams
do not wish to question this witness, <> Deputy Co-Prosecutor,
you may resume so we can wrap up the session.
BY MR. BOYLE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I think I can be very brief.
Q. Mr. Witness, you stated that you travelled with Regiment 14 to
the East Zone. Wasn't this at the point that you were based in
Battambang that this event took place? Hadn't you already moved
with the rest of your division to Battambang at that time?
2-TCW-976:
A. No, I had not gone to Battambang <yet>. After I left Phnom
Penh, I was transferred straight to the East Zone. <I went to
Battambang after I was transferred from the East Zone.>
Q. Mr. Witness, I have one final question for you.
You stated in your Written Record of Interview, E3/9474, at
answer 68 in English; it's 67 in Khmer and French because the
English version skips number 46.
You stated -- quote -- you are talking about Ta Tit arresting
people and you stated - quote:
"He did not arrest people by himself. High-ranking leaders simply
ordered their subordinates to do that. For example, Pol Pot and
Ta Mok killed tens of thousands of people but they did not commit
it with their own hands." Closed quote.
Can you just tell the Court how it is that you knew that Pol Pot
and Ta Mok were responsible for killing tens of thousands of
people?
A. I did not see him killing anyone. I heard people saying that
people were killed and that's what I repeated, but I did not see
him killing anyone. I heard people who told one another about the
killings.
MR. BOYLE:
No further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Jean-Marc Lavergne, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Witness. I will have two small questions
to ask of you.
You indicated, unless I am mistaken, that the superior in the
division that you were in was Ta Roeun or Ta Saroeun or perhaps
Ta 05, if I understand correctly. Is that correct?
2-TCW-976:
A. No. Saroeun was the divisional commander where I <was>
attached and Ta 05 was a commander of a separate division and
they had similar code names.
Q. So then Ta Saroeun, the head of your division, is he still
alive?
A. I do not know. He went to his native village and I do not know
whether he <survived> because I was away from him for a very long
time.
Q. Did you hear at one point or another that Pol Pot had been
<tried>?
A. No, I did not hear anything about that.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you. I have no further questions for the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Co-Prosecutor.
And thank you, Witness.
The hearing or the testimony of the witness now concludes.
And the Chamber would like to thank you, Mr. Witness, for your
testimony before the Chamber today and your testimony may
contribute to the ascertainment of the truth in this case. It is
now concluded and you are no longer required to be present in the
courtroom.
For that reason, you may be excused and returned to your
residence or wherever you wish to go to.
The Chamber wishes you all the very best and bon voyage.
Court officer, please work with WESU to make necessary transport
arrangements for the witness to return to his residence or
wherever he wishes to go to.
And Court officer, please assist the witness and lead him to
leave the courtroom.
The Chamber also wishes to thank the duty counsel as well.
The Chamber will adjourn for 20 minutes and we will resume after
that, and we will hear testimony of another witness, that is,
2-TCW-1028.
Defence counsel, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, sorry, for standing up at this point. But it's no problem if
the next witness will be questioned about his personal details,
but we are leading and I hadn't expected this witness to come so
quickly. So the request is to start on the content with this
witness first thing tomorrow.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1450H to 1510H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
Court officer, please usher Witness 2-TCW-1028 into the
courtroom.
(Short pause)
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon, Witness.
Q. What is your name? And please observe the microphone. When you
see the red light on the tip of the microphone, you can respond.
MR. CHIN SAROEUN:
A. Good afternoon, Mr. President, my name is Chin Saroeun.
Q. When were you born?
A. I was born on 4 January 1959.
Q. What is your current occupation, Mr. Chin Saroeun?
A. At present, I am in the military region of Mondolkiri.
Q. What are the names of your parents?
A. My father is Chheum Cheun (phonetic) and my mother is Sor Kun
(phonetic).
Q. What is your wife's name and how many children do you have?
A. My wife is Sil Sokun (phonetic). We have seven children.
Q. Can you tell the Chamber, to your best knowledge, are you
related, by blood, by law, to any of the two accused, that is
Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan or to any of the civil parties
admitted in this case?
A. I am not related to any of them in this case.
Q. Thank you. And, Witness, have you taken an oath before you
appear before this Chamber?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Thank you. And the Chamber now would like to inform you of
your rights and obligations as a witness.
Regarding your rights: Mr. Saroeun, as a witness in the
proceedings before the Chamber, you may refuse to respond to any
question or to make any comment which my incriminate you. That is
your right against self-incrimination.
For your obligations: As a witness in the proceedings before the
Chamber, you must respond to any questions by the Bench or
relevant parties except where your response or comments to those
questions may incriminate you as the Chamber has just informed
you of your right as a witness.
You must tell the truth that you have known, heard, seen,
remembered, experienced or observed directly about an event or
occurrence relevant to the questions the Bench or parties pose to
you.
Do you understand that, Mr. Saroeun?
A. Yes, I do, and I will respond to questions posed to me and I
will respond based on my personal understanding.
Q. Thank you. And Mr. Chin Saroeun, have you been interviewed by
investigators from the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges? If
so, how many times, when and where?
A. I was interviewed once at the military region in Mondolkiri
and from my recollection, that happened in 2000, and that was the
only interview that I provided.
Q. Before you appear before the Chamber, have you read or
reviewed the written record of your previous statement with OCIJ
investigators in order to refresh your memory?
A. Yes, I have read my prior statement.
Q. To your best knowledge, can you tell the Chamber whether the
written record of your previous statement that you have read to
refresh your memory is consistent with your responses that you
provided to the OCIJ investigators?
A. From my review of the previous statement, it is consistent
with what I said during the interview.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
Since counsel for Nuon Chea would like to put question to this
witness tomorrow, that request is granted.
And, thank you, Witness, the hearing today is adjourned.
The Chamber will adjourn its proceedings for today and will
resume tomorrow, that is, 3 August 2016, commencing from 9
o'clock in the morning.
And for tomorrow proceedings, the Chamber continues to hear
testimony on Witness Chin Saroeun.
And, Mr. Witness, the hearing of your testimony is not yet
concluded. The Chamber will continue to hear your testimony
tomorrow commencing from 9 o'clock, and please return to the
Chamber tomorrow.
Court officer, please work with WESU to return the witness to his
current accommodation and invite him back into the courtroom
tomorrow before 9 o'clock in the morning.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take the two accused,
Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, back to the detention facility and
have them returned to attend the proceedings tomorrow before 9
o'clock.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1520H)
