PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0908H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber will hear testimony of a civil party,
2-TCCP-251, via a video link in relation to Regulation of
Marriage. And after that, we'll continue to hear the remaining
testimony of Civil Party Mom Vun.
Ms. Se Kolvuthy, please report the attendance of the parties and
other individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present.
Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell downstairs. He has
waived his right to be present in the courtroom. The waiver has
been delivered to the greffier.
The civil party who is to testify today, that is, 2-TCCP-251,
will testify via video link from Pailin province. And Madam Mom
Vun is also present to be called by the Chamber.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Ms. Se Kolvuthy. The Chamber now decides on the
request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 19
September 2016, which states that, due to his health, that is,
headache, back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long. And
in order to effectively participate in future hearings, he
requests to waive his right to be present at the 19 September
2016 hearing.
He advises that his counsel advised him about the consequence of
this waiver, that in no way it can be construed as a waiver of
his rights to be tried fairly or to challenge evidence presented
to or admitted by this Court at any time during this trial.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the accused at the ECCC, dated 19 September 2016, which notes
that Nuon Chea has a chronic back pain and feels numb on his
<right> hand and it becomes severe when he sits for long and
recommends that the Chamber shall grant him his request so that
he can follow the proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via an audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies for the whole day.
And the Chamber will now hear testimony of a civil party,
2-TCCP-251, via video link.
And Court officer, please confirm whether the link has been
established.
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Civil Party.
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Good morning, Your Honour. Good morning, everyone.
Q. What is your name?
A. My name is Sa Lai Heang.
Q. When were you born?
A. I was born on 3rd June 1950.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I was born in Kratie province in <Kratie> district.
Q. What is your current address?
A. I live in Pailin city.
Q. What is your current occupation?
A. My children are looking after me, and I stay at home.
Q. What are the names of your parents?
A. My father is Sa Chanheng, deceased; and my mother is Phan Nget
. She's an elderly woman.
Q. What is the name of your husband, and how many children do you
have?
A. My husband is Soeng Chay, and we have one child who passed
away.
Q. Thank you.
And Madam Heng Lai Heang, you are called to testify as a civil
party in the proceedings before this Chamber, and toward the end
of your testimony you will have an opportunity to make a victim's
impact statement in relation to harms and suffering that were
inflicted upon you during the period of Democratic Kampuchea, if
you intend to do so.
And Madam Civil Party, have you been interviewed by investigators
from the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges? If so, how many
times, when and where?
A. About seven or eight years ago, I was interviewed in
Mondolkiri province. And it happened for one time, and later on,
I was interviewed by teacher Chen Thou (phonetic). And on another
occasion, I was interviewed by a working group from the Court.
Q. Thank you. And before you appear before this Chamber, have you
read or reviewed the previous statement with the investigator in
order to refresh your memory?
A. I read it yesterday, and early this morning I also read it
again. But allow me to say that I cannot recall everything.
Q. Thank you.
And to your best knowledge and recollection, can you tell the
Chamber whether the written record of your interview that you
have read in order to refresh your memory is consistent with what
you told the investigator?
A. I reviewed it, and it is consistent.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And pursuant to Rule 91bis of the ECCC Internal Rules, the
Chamber gives the floor first to the Lead Co-Lawyers for civil
parties to question the civil party. And the combined time for
the Lead Co-Lawyers and the Co-Prosecutors are two sessions.
And you may proceed, Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties.
MR. PICH ANG:
Good morning, Mr. President. Good morning, Judges. I'd like to
seek your permission to allow Ty Srinna, lawyer for civil
parties, to question this civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you, Your Honour, and good morning, Mr. President, Judges,
and everyone in and around the courtroom.
Q. And good morning, Madam Sa Lai Heang. Can you see me on the
screen?
My name is Ty Srinna. I'm a lawyer for civil parties, and I will
put some questions to you.
First, I'd like to ask you about some backgrounds.
Can you tell the Chamber where you lived before 17 April 1975,
and what you did at that time?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Before 1975, I lived at home for a year, and then I joined the
revolutionary movement in 1971.
Q. You said that you lived at home, can you tell us where you
lived?
A. It was in Kantuot village, Kantuot commune in Kratie province.
It is now known as Cham Borei district (phonetic), not Kracheh
district any more.
Q. And what was the living condition of your family at the time?
A. We joined in the communal farming, and later on we were
integrated into cooperative. We ate communally and we worked
communally.
Q. And how many siblings do you have?
A. Two sisters and two brothers, and my siblings were young when
I left. And later on, they were gathered when my younger brothers
were instructed to herd cattles, and my younger sisters were to
collect cow dung.
Q. Allow me to clarify one point with you. Is what you said took
place before 1975?
A. Yes.
Q. A while ago, you mentioned that you joined the revolutionary
movement in 1971. And how old were you at the time?
A. <At that time,> I was 18 years old.
Q. Were you married at the time?
A. No. I just finished my schooling.
Q. And when you joined the revolutionary movement, can you tell
the Chamber as to which unit you joined or which division you
joined? Can you describe the circumstances?
A. I joined the revolutionary movement and, at that time, the
Khmer Rouge remained living in the jungle and there was no formal
division. At that time, they did not come to the villages yet, so
I joined the movement, and there was no proper organization.
<There were leaders.> Some of us worked as messengers, but there
was no particular unit that we belonged to.
Q. And who actually introduced you to the revolutionary movement?
A. There were those people who came down from the jungle to
appeal to us to join the movement in order to liberate the
country and the people. As I said, there were those people who
came to appeal to men and to appeal to us, but I do not recall
their names.
Q. Please, try to recall their names and their positions.
A. I only recall that Comrade Kong (phonetic) was the one who
stationed at the base, and he was a member of the sector
committee.
Q. And were you given any particular position or function?
A. Please, repeat your question.
Q. When you joined the revolutionary movement, were you given any
particular function or role and, if so, what was it?
A. At the beginning, I did not have any position. I was simply a
member in their group. No specific function was given to me at
that time.
Q. So what were your assignments when you joined that movement?
A. I was assigned to remain living in the village to encourage
the youth to love common work and to work communally, namely, to
grow vegetables in order to bring in the perception of living
together communally.
Q. And during the period that you joined the movement, did you
witness any particular event?
A. I do not understand your question.
Q. Allow me to rephrase it. When you joined the revolutionary
movement, did you come across any particular event?
A. No. At that time, there was no event of particular that I
recall.
(Technical problem)
[09.26.45
MR. PRESIDENT:
AV Unit personnel, please check the link. It seems that it's
frozen.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Lawyer for civil parties, you may resume your questioning since
the link has been established.
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you.
Q. And Madam Civil Party, do you recall my last question?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Please, respond, then, to my last question.
A. Please, repeat your last question.
Q. My question is this. When you joined the revolutionary
movement, did you come across any event of particular, and that
is, before
April 1975? 
          17   I'd like to ask for the period between the time you joined the
movement and until 17 April 1975. During this period, did you
come across any events of particular?
A. You want to ask about period between <1975> to <1970> (sic)?
Q. I refer to the time that you joined the revolutionary movement
in 1971 up to the period of 17 April 1975. During this period,
did you come across any particular event? If so, could you please
describe to the Chamber?
A. At that time, I did not know how to analyze or to follow the
situation since I was pretty young, and I just went along with
others who joined the revolutionary movement.
Q. Now I focus my question on the 17 April 1975. On that
particular day, where was your family?
A. In 1975, my -- are you referring to my parents' family or my
family?
Q. I refer to both your families and your parents' family. Did
you live together at that time?
A. No, we were separated. My parents lived in our native home
village. As for my siblings, they were assigned to do what is
tasked, for example, to herd cattles. And as for me, I went to a
distant place. I had already joined the movement, and it was far
from my native village.
Q. What about on the 17 April 1975? Where were you at that time?
When the Khmer Rouge entered the place, where were you? Did you
join with them, or what?
A. Can you clarify the date again? Can you clarify the date?
Q. I want to know that -- what happened on 17 April of 1975? Did
you know what happened?
A. Before the liberation day of Phnom Penh, are you referring to
that day?
Q. Yes, that is the day that Phnom Penh was liberated. That was
on 17 April 1975.
Where were you and what did you do?
A. Before the liberation day, I was in Kratie town. They
organized an event. It was an assembly to send soldiers to
reinforce with the soldiers already around Phnom Penh to liberate
Phnom Penh.
Q. After the soldiers had already liberated, and then what was
you assigned to do next?
A. After the liberation, I was based <> at the village and
commune. I participated in the productions of rice and engaged in
many agricultural works.
Q. Because you were a member in the revolutionary movement, I
want to know whether you were assigned to do something beside
your core responsibility.
A. At that time, I was assigned to be in charge of the base <> at
the village and commune level.
Q. So when were you arranged to get married?
A. It was in 1976.
Q. When you were arranged to get married in 1976, it was arranged
by your parents, or what? Can you elaborate on this?
A. At that time, my parents did not participate in
decision-making, but it was the supervisors who did that.
Q. You said that you were arranged to get married by other
people, so who were those people who arranged your marriage?
A. It was the committee of the sector.
Q. So what were the <> sectoral committees involved, and what
were the names of those people?
A. Those people were Yi.
Q. Can you repeat your answer? When you said that the committee
of the sector arranged your marriage, so what was the sector?
A. At that time, it was called Sector 505 in the Northeast Zone.
Q. What about Yi? Who was Yi, and what was his position?
A. Initially, he was -- he was in charge of the economy. And
before that, there was Yem. Yem was the chief. And after Yem was
removed <to the Korean Embassy>, Yi was put in charge of it.
Q. Now I would like to get your clarification that when you were
assigned to get married, was it your decision? Was it
voluntarily?
A. I had no rights to refuse. I had to follow the order or the
arrangement by them. Even though my supposed spouse was a blind
person or handicapped person, I had to follow.
Q. Before you were arranged to get married, were you informed
beforehand, for example, about which man you would be married to?
Was there any meeting to inform you beforehand?
A. At that time, they also asked me, but I refused. But later on,
they insistently asking me. They kept on -- they kept on asking
me and they said that I was a stubborn person. And after I heard
that word, I felt frightened. I felt concerned about my own
safety, and that's why I agreed to accept whatever they arranged.
Q. So who told you or asked you about the marriage, and what did
that person ask you about?
A. <> Please repeat your question.
Q. Who told you about the marriage? What was the name of that
person, and what was his or her position?
A. It was Comrade Kuon who was a member of the sector committee.
<He was in charge of military.>
Q. I would like you to clarify a little bit because earlier, you
mentioned that the sector committee include Yi and Kuon and other
members who collectively told you about your proposed marriage.
So could you tell us about the events or the process about their
telling you about your marriage, whether they told you at your
home or at a meeting?
A. At that time, they did not come directly to tell me. They
conveyed the message through the commune committee because, at
that time, I worked in the commune cooperatives and I was closer
to the commune committee.
Q. Can you tell us about the exact words that they used to tell
you?
A. They asked me to come to meet them, and they said, "Comrade,
now we arrange marriage for you. You would be arranged to get
married to this comrade or that comrade." And that was what they
said.
Q. When they first told you about your marriage, how did you
feel, and were you happy with what they told you?
A. No, I was not happy, but I did not know what to do because, at
that time, if we were stubborn, we would be accused of resisting
them and not follow the Party line or not follow the order of the
upper echelon. And that's why I had to follow their order.
Q. At that time, did you try to refuse or to oppose because it
was different from your heart? Did you try to refuse or oppose
the order at that time?
A. Yes, I refused several times when they came to ask me, but
finally, they used a phrase. They said that the sector committee
said that I was a stubborn person, so when I heard this sentence,
I was frightened and concerned about my safety.
Q. Before you received the information, did you know that in
other cases of marriage, were the people married had been
informed just like you?
A. At that time, I also knew about some other cases for other
comrades who were based in other units, whether they were
soldiers or civilians. In principle, they were also assigned to
get married. For example, this comrade <was> matched with that
comrade, so they were informed and then the marriage date was
fixed for them.
Q. Now, come back to your story. How many days was it between the
day that you were told about your marriage and your married day?
A. It was about <one> month.
Q. So during the one-month period, did they inform your parents
about your marriage? Did they seek permission from your parents?
A. Because I was in a distant place, they were not aware of this.
Q. Now, I focus my question on your marriage day.
On your marriage day, did they invite your parents or the parents
of your husband to participate in your wedding?
A. On my marriage day, I saw them participated in the event. I
mean both sides of our parents.
Q. How many couples were married on the same day with yours, and
did the wedding ceremony conducted according to the tradition and
custom of the Khmer?
A. The ceremony in that regime <> was not conducted according to
our <Khmer> tradition. People were simply marched in front of the
crowd and the couple had to make commitment to live together.
Q. After you had made the commitment, what else were you required
to do?
A. After we had made the commitment, the ceremony ended and then
there was a party.
Q. Now, I would like to clarify with you a little bit since you
were a member of the revolution related to the wedding ceremony.
Did they make the distinction between, for example, the cadre
were matched with cadre, New People were matched with New People,
Base People were matched with Base People? Were you informed or
aware of such cases?
A. I did not witness such cases. Based on my observations since
we were living in separate villages, we were not aware of what
happened in other places.
Q. Now I would like to jog your memory. Can you recall about the
conditions of marriage? Were there any conditions regarding
marriage, especially about the matchings of couples?
A. I did not know much about those conditions. What I knew was
that if people were matched to marry, they had to follow the
order, and that was it. I did not see any other conditions beside
that.
Q. After your marriage, did Angkar provide good conditions for
your newlywed couples?
A. No. No, it was just normal.
Q. After your marriage, were you required to consummate your
marriage and, if so, were you monitored by the militiamen?
A. For those who agreed with each other, they were not monitored.
But for those who did not get along with each other, they were
monitored and investigated. They were followed and they would be
called to reprimand or re-educated.
Q. What about your case? Were you monitored just like what you
said earlier?
A. For my own case, I was not monitored because I remained
silent, although I were not happy with my marriage, although I
did not get along well, but I remained silent.
Q. I would like you to clarify a bit about your marriage. You
said that you did not get along well, but you remained silent.
You chose to remain silent because it was related to your life.
And why did -- why <did you remain silent when you> didn't get
along well with each other?
A. I would like to tell you that, in that regime, we had to
follow the assignment. Whatever assigned to us, we had follow. If
we opposed, we would be accused of being a stubborn person, and
those were the kinds of accusation.
Q. You said that <> if you did not follow their order, you would
be in trouble. They would accuse you of this and that.
In that -- in that regime, were there cases of other people who
opposed the order, and what happened to those people?
A. Yes, there were such cases. For those who refused or did not
follow the order, they would be called to be reprimanded, but I
did not hear it myself about the exact words they used to
reprimand those people. But after they had been reprimanded,
there were some cases of people who committed suicide by taking
poisonous medicines or they drown themselves in water.
Q. Can you tell us about those people who committed suicide by
taking poisonous medicine or jumping into the water to drown
themselves?
A. The reasons that they committed suicide <were> because they
were forced to get married. The marriage did not follow their own
voluntary decision, and worse -- worse still, they were
threatened so, together, it forced them to commit suicide.
Q. Regarding the information about those who committed suicide,
how did you know it or who told you about that?
A. I did not witness the incident myself, but there were other
people who heard about such incidents, told those incident to me.
Q. Now my question is about you. After you got married, did they
treat your family well? Because it seems that Angkar was your
guardian because they were the one who arranged your marriage. So
after your marriage, were you supported and were other couples
also supported well?
A. After my marriage, during that regime, couples who got along
with each other or not, they lived together briefly and then they
were separated to work in their respective worksites. For
example, my husband went to the Public Work and Transport
Ministry, while I remained at my village and commune base.
Q. What was the name of your husband, and what was his position?
A. His name was Soeng Chay alias Chhay. He was in charge of
repairing bridges <> within the sector because all the bridges
after <Lon Nol regime from> 1970 to 1975 <> were cut off. So his
force was in charge of repairing those bridges, <no matter if
they were> short or long, <small or big>, they needed to be
repaired.
Q. Did you continue to live with him after you got married?
A. No, I did not. I only stayed with him for two days. Then he
went <back> to his unit and I remained living and working in my
own unit.
Q. And how long after you got married did you became pregnant?
A. It <was> about a year after I got married I became pregnant,
and later on I delivered my child. However, the child passed
away, as I indicated earlier.
Q. During your pregnancy, can you describe to the Chamber what
happened to you?
A. Which event are you referring to?
Q. During the period of your pregnancy, did anything or did any
event happen to you?
A. There was nothing happened to me during my pregnancy. I was
living in the same condition as other people, and nothing serious
happened to me during that period.
Q. So you said that nothing serious happened to you during your
pregnancy. And when actually something happened to you, and how
did it happen?
Please try to describe in details regarding this event.
A. Regarding events that were serious that happened to me was
when my husband was arrested. As a wife, I was accused of linking
to a traitor, that is, my husband. And for that reason, I was
gathered to stay at one place to isolate from others so nobody
came to visit me. And if people wanted to come and see me, they
had to secretly come <at night> to see me and without letting
other people know about it. And they only came briefly and then
they left.
And that was the difficult period that I experienced because at
that time, I was with my young baby. At that time, there were
other women, and for one meal we were given one can of rice <for
four people>. And when we had to work, then our children were
under the care of two elderly women. <They had to take care of 10
children.> The situation was very difficult.
And the two women did not only have to take care of our children,
they had to take care of their children, too. And for that
reason, they could not properly take care of our children.
Children cried and those elderly women had to pick one up while
the other cried.
And I, myself, had to pull weeds and clear the grass at the
plantation. And I could only return to see my child at 11
o'clock, and at that time, I saw my child was together with some
other children playing on the ground without any mat.
Q. In what year was your husband arrested, and do you know the
reason for his arrest?
A. He was arrested in 1978, and I did not know the reason for his
arrest because he worked at Ministry of Public Works, and he had
no connection with the military at all. His work was to carry
timber for building road and bridges, but he was accused of being
a traitor, of colluding with the Vietnamese, and he had to repair
bridges.
Sometimes the torrent was so powerful and it broke a bridge, and
because of the damage of the bridge, he was accused of being a
traitor. And he was accused of sabotaging the movement of the
military, as they could not cross the bridge. They used those
pretext to arrest him.
Q. <When you (sic) were arrested, did it happen in front of you?>
How did it happen?
A. His arrest did not happen before me. He was arrested at his
unit, that is, at his ministry while I was at the cooperative. A
messenger came with a letter to call him for a study session, and
he took off on his bicycle. And from that day onward, he
disappeared and never returned.
Only later on, after I tried to find out, I received information
that he had been arrested. But personally, I did not witness his
arrest.
Q. Upon learning that your husband had been arrested, how did you
feel?
A. I find it difficult to describe what happened. It was
speechless for me to lose him. Despite the fact that I did not
love him, we lived together and we provided warmth to one
another. So I was in shock upon hearing that.
And at that time, it was only two months after I delivered my
baby, and I became sick. I had fever, <my body kept trembling
without having> malaria.
I could not cry in public, so I had to weep quietly by myself. I
did not want them to see me weeping and that I was -- that I
still had feeling for a traitor.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, lawyer for civil party.
The Chamber will take a 20-minute break from now.
(Court recesses from 1010H to 1030H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
Before the hearing of the testimony of 2-TCCP-251, the Chamber
issue an oral ruling on the Nuon Chea defence <pursuant to>
Internal Rule 87.4 request to admit document related to Lemkin,
that is, document E416.
The Trial Chamber is seized of an Internal Rule 87.4 request
filed by the Nuon Chea defence on 22 June 2016 to admit four
documents into evidence, that is, document E416. The request
seeks to admit the following documents:
1). Transcripts of interviews with four anonymous witnesses
conducted by Mr. Robert Lemkin, that is, 2-TCW-877, and Mr. Thet
Sambath, 2-TCW-885, for their film, "Enemies of the People",
document F2/4/3/3/6.2.
2). Notes written by Mr. Lemkin related to these interviews,
document F2/4/3/3.1.
3). Mr. Lemkin's Written Record of Interview before the Supreme
Court Chamber, document F2/4/3/1.
4). An article published by the "Cambodian Daily Weekend" on 18
June 2016, document .2.
On 8 (sic) June 2016, the Co-Prosecutors filed a response to the
request, that is, document E416/1, and the Lead Co-Lawyers filed
a response on 4 July 2016, that is, document E416/2. The Nuon
Chea defence replied to the Co-Prosecutor's response on 5 July
2016, that is, document E416/3.
Having considered the submissions by the parties, the Trial
Chamber finds that Mr. Lemkin's Written Record of Interview,
document F2/4/3/1, has already been admitted into evidence in
Case 002/02  under document number E3/9620. The request in
relation to this document is, therefore, moot.
With respect to the transcript, that is, document F2/4/3/3/6.2,
the Chamber admits into evidence only the interview of witness
identified as W-2, who is believed to be Toat Thoeun, 2-TCW-829,
according to the Supreme Court Chamber decision, <document> F2/9.
The Chamber, therefore, admits this excerpt of the transcripts,
that is, document , and assigns it document number
E3/10665.
The Chamber denies the remainder of the Nuon Chea defence request
in its entirety, with written reasons to follow.
The Chamber now gives the floor to the civil party lawyer to
continue putting questions.
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good morning, Madam Lai Heang. Now I continue my questions
related to your husband.
After your husband was arrested, was there anything happened to
you or to your family?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes, there were. As I told you earlier, after the loss of my
husband,<> I did not know that my husband was sent to death
because we were told that he was sent to study. But we did not
see his return.
We waited for about 10 days, and still he did not return. Fifteen
days later, he still did not return, so we tried to seek for
information with a young -- with a young boy who worked with him.
And he told us that he had been arrested. We were shocked to hear
that. And because I had just been delivering the baby, I felt
shocked to hear that.
The food given to us at the cooperative was not sufficient, so
hearing such news was another burden on my health. I <had been>
sick <for a long time>. I became skinny, and I did not have
enough breast milk to feed my baby.
Q. My apology.
A little bit earlier, you said that your husband <> was accused
of being a traitor. Was that correct?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. What about you? Were you also accused of the same wrongdoing?
Were any of your relatives accused of being a traitor of the
revolution?
A. At that time when there was something happened to the family
member and then the rest of the family were also accused of being
connected to the tendency. And as a result, they withdrew the
confidence in us. For example, let's say three-fourths of the
confidence were <> withdrawn from us, <or they withdrew all
confidence in us and we were then only regarded as labour to
them>.
Q. Related to the case of your husband, did it affect you because
you were also a member of the Party? You also -- you were also a
member of the revolution.
A. As I told you earlier, if a member of the family were accused
of wrongdoing and then the rest of the family were also affected,
they withdrew confidence from us.
For example, I, myself, became the depositee at the cooperative,
so I no longer held any position. Everything that we contributed
earlier, for example, contributed to the revolution and
liberating the country, those contribution were <then> lost.
Q. When they withdrew confidence from you and you became just a
normal citizen, did they -- did they impose any specific or
special conditions to control you, for example, they monitored on
you, they investigated into you? Was that such thing happened to
you?
A. Yes, there were. They monitored us. They kept on looking at
our words, <our behaviour> and our everyday life. Later on, they
removed me and placed me at a worksite at Samrang village in
Snuol district.
It was a worksite specifically assigned for wives of those who
were accused of being traitors.
Q. So that meant the wives of those husbands who were accused of
being traitors, they were put together in one place; is that
correct?
A. Yes, that's correct. They were put in one place and they were
disconnected from others. They were not allowed to talk to any
others people. Although the other people may be people whom we
were familiar with, we were not allowed to talk to them.
Q. What about the condition of your work?
A. Are you referring to the time when we were collected to work
there?
Q. I referred to your work condition and your living condition of
you and of those women whose husband had been accused of being
traitors.
A. We were collected and put together at one place and regarding
the eating and living condition, there were many conditions.
<First,> we were not allowed to go out anywhere <besides our
assigned worksite> and regarding the eating, our food was also
limited; they gave us one tin of rice for four people. And we had
to work every day and for anyone of us who did not go out to
work, they had to have specific reasons; for example, they were
sick or their child was sick and in such cases, their food ration
would be reduced. They received only one tin <of rice for> six
people.
Q. You said that the woman whose husband were accused of being
traitors, so where were they sent to; I mean the name of the
worksite?
A. It was at Samrang village in Srae Neang (phonetic) commune,
Snuol district of Kratie province.
Q. What was that place?
A. I did not know. That place was located on a small hill; now,
it has been transformed as a pagoda. <The halls were already
built when we were taken there. The halls were old -->
Q. <I am sorry to interrupt you.> Was that place <> a security
centre or just an ordinary worksite?
A. No, it was not a security centre; it was simply a place where
the women were gathered up and I did not know whether they would
be sent somewhere else. We were not tortured, but the work
conditions were a bit tough because we were required to work both
day time and night time.
Q. Were you constantly under monitor by the Khmer Rouge cadres?
A. At that worksite, <there were> guards to monitor on us; let's
say three or four guards who kept on monitoring on us, especially
when we were working and then they told us that now is time for a
break and then we could return to our home.
Q. When you talk about those guards keeping monitoring you, what
was the purpose of their monitoring?
A. I did not know the reason why they monitored on us; probably
they felt afraid that we would flee. The place where we were
placed to work, it was close to a battlefield near the Vietnam
border.
Q. How many women were gathered up and placed to work there?
A. There were more than 30 women, including elderly women and
young women. Some of the women <> held the position of unit
chiefs. They were also placed to work there.
Q. Besides the arrest of your husband, were there any arrests of
other people?
A. Could you repeat your question?
Q. Besides the arrest of your husband, did other people were also
arrested?
A. I could not get your question.
Q. Beside your husband's arrest, did you know that there were
arrests of other people; for example, arrests of cadres or unit
chiefs or village chiefs? Were you aware of any arrests?
A. After the liberation of Phnom Penh in 1975, in 1976-1977, at
that time, the leaders of Sector 505 in Northeast Zone were all
arrested. They were all arrested from the senior level up down to
the commune level and their places were replaced by new people,
<handicapped people> and those new leaders, they were so
absolutist; they were so authoritarian.
Q. You said that those new people who were put to hold those
positions, were authoritarian, so how authoritarian were they?
A. At that time, I had already left, but I received information
from other people. They told me that this cadre and that cadre
were arrested and their positions were occupied by <handicapped
people from the Southwest Zone> and those new people who were put
in place spoke with accent <> like people from Takeo province.
The old cadres were all arrested and their positions were
occupied by new people.
Q. Did you know the reason why old people in positions from the
upper level down to the lower level were arrested?
A. Because I had already left the area, I did not know it in
detail. What I knew was that people in positions were removed <>
and new people were put to replace them and for those who had
been removed were accused of being -- colluding with the "Yuon"
or <> sabotaging the revolution. <The old cadres were accused of
not being absolute in destroying the enemy.>
Q. Did you ever attend any meeting or you, yourself, has ever
organized any meeting for members of your unit?
A. Are you referring to the worksite or <anywhere> else?
Q. Let me reformulate my question.
Did you ever attend a meeting or you, yourself, organized any
meeting for your unit members, especially during the time when
you were a member of the revolution?
A. At that time, there was not any important meeting. There was
not any important meeting at the sector because we were based at
our respective cooperatives.
Q. Did you ever participate in self-criticism meeting?
A. Yes, <> it was a normal meeting participated by both ordinary
people and cadres. <There was a secret meeting every three days.>
Q. Did you ever attend any important or big meetings; if you did,
can you elaborate a little bit; for example, how many times were
those meetings organized? Beside the criticism meetings, were
there any other meetings?
A. Besides the criticism meetings, there were also meetings about
the policy, for example, or the policy to target future work.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Civil Party Lawyer, have you consulted with the
Co-Prosecutor regarding the time allocated to both of your teams
<because you have only two sessions>?
MS. TY SRINNA:
Yes, I already consulted about the time. I will use another 10
minutes and then the rest will be given to the Co-Prosecutors.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Q. Thank you, Madam Civil Party.
Now, my question focus on your marriage; there is a point which I
would like to get your clarification. Based <> on what you told
me, you said that parents from both sides attended your wedding;
could you tell us that the reason that your parents were allowed
to participate in your wedding was because you were <> a member
of the revolution; is that correct?
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to inform parties that the internet
connection has been frozen.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Mr. President, I would like to make a request that since the
morning until now, there <have> been problems with the internet
connection, so can my team and the Co-Prosecutor request for
additional time?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil Party Lawyer, we would like to inform you that you have
used <more than 70> minutes already.
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil Party Lawyer, you may proceed with your question.
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Q. Madam Civil Party, do you still remember my last question?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. No, I cannot recall it.
Q. Due to time constraint, now, I change my question to a
different question; it's about the Vietnamese people.
Did you ever hear about the arrest of Vietnamese people?
A. Yes, I heard. My family <was> also victimized. We lost a lot
of our family members; for example, my uncle who was an ethnic
Khmer; his wife was an ethnic Vietnamese and when they had
children, their children could not speak Vietnamese; they spoke
Khmer, but at that time, because they had a policy that people
who were connected to the Vietnamese network or relationship,
whether they had Khmer spouse, they were all collected and taken
away. They were not spared because they said that because they
were in some way related to the Vietnamese, so more or less, they
would collude with the Vietnamese, so they would not be spared.
Q. Do you know the person by the name of Sa Kim Ny (phonetic)?
A. Sa Kim Ny (phonetic) is my cousin. I said that my uncle
married a Vietnamese woman and they <had children named> Sa Kim
Ny (phonetic) and Sa Kim Na (phonetic).
Q. And did you know what happened to Sa Kim Ny (phonetic)?
A. Nothing happened to Sa Kim Ny (phonetic) in 1975; however, all
of my relatives disappeared by 1977 since these relatives, who
were half-blood with the Vietnamese <even grandchildren>, had
been arrested or they had gone and from that family side, only
one survived.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you for your response to my questions and I'd like, now, to
hand the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to continue putting further
questions to you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, lawyer for civil parties.
And Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY MS. PATEL:
Good morning, my name is Nisha Patel. I'm here representing the
Office of the Co-Prosecutors along with my colleague, Seng Leang.
Ms. Sa Lai  Heang, we will ask you a few questions in the next 25
minutes that remains.
Q. My first question is: You mentioned that a person by the name
of Yi on the Sector 505 committee arranged your marriage. You
also mentioned that Yi was initially in charge of economy and
after Yen (phonetic) was removed as chair, Yi became the chair of
Sector 505; would you please confirm what position was Yi holding
on the Sector 505 Committee at the time your marriage was
arranged?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. During the period that I got married, Yi's position was chief
of the sector.
Q. You then mentioned that a message was communicated to you
through the commune committee with regards to the date you were
to be married. You said this message came from the sector; how
did you know this?
A. Regarding the information on marriage, it was the sector who
made their decision and instruction was relayed to the commune
and the commune, itself, informed me. They did not inform me in
person.
Q. To clarify, are you saying that you were verbally told by the
commune committee that it was the sector that was arranging your
marriage or did you receive a written notice, for example, from
the commune committee that had the sector's name or position
written on it?
A. No, I was told about the marriage.
Q. And when they told you about the marriage, did they say, in
particular, who in the sector or did they just say the Sector 505
Committee?
A. They did not use the code name of the sector; however, they
mentioned the name and they mentioned Angkar; that it was
instruction from the upper Angkar, and of course, at the sector
level, it means it's the sector committee.
Q. Was the sector responsible for arranging all marriages within
the sector at that time?
A. Sector committee did not fully involve in such arrangement
since they relayed instructions to the lower level; namely, to
the subordinate office chiefs or to the district level <to the
Ministry level, and to the head of the office and so on>.
Q. But do you know if the instructions or the orders for the
marriages to take place within the sector, did they come from
Sector 505 committee?
A. Please repeat your question.
Q. Did you know whether the orders or the instructions to arrange
the marriages within the sector always came from Sector 505
committee?
A. Not every couple who was arranged to get married came from
that level; however, it was the orders relayed to their
respective ministries for the marriage. For example, a particular
ministry would be responsible for the marriage within the
ministry; for an army unit, it would be organized by their
respective <sector chief>. And as I said, for <the ministry
level>, the office head would be responsible for such event.
Q. In your interview with the Office of the Co-Investigating
Judges, you stated at answer 28 - quote:
"For those who worked in the commune and in the district level,
the weddings were arranged by the sector level; while, for other
civilians, the weddings were arranged by the commune level."
Is this correct?
A. Yes.
Q. In your answers this morning to the civil party lawyer, you
mentioned that you initially refused to be married, but they
persisted; why did they persist?
A. There were those who refused to get married, but in the end,
they had to get married because when orders were issued for
particular people to get married, there was no escape from it;
they had to get married, even those people refused.
Q. You mentioned that you were in charge of the base at the
village and commune level; whilst you held that position, did you
ever come across "Revolutionary Flag" magazines?
A. At that time, yes, I did receive the "Revolutionary Youth
Flag" magazines or maybe that is not the proper names that I
<cannot> recall, but it was something revolutionary.
Q. Did you recall reading in those magazines or attending any
meetings concerning plans with regards to the marriage of people?
A. Please repeat your question.
Q. Do you recall reading in those magazines or attending any
meetings that discussed CPK policies or plans with regards to
forced marriages including the increasing of the population?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel for Khieu Samphan, you have the floor.
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. <Yes. I used to read it but -->
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil Party, please hold on.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I did not have any objections to the
first formulation of the question, but <in> the second phrasing
of the question <the Co-Prosecutor is> putting words in the mouth
of the civil party, so that is problematic for me. So I'm
objecting to the way the question was phrased.
BY MS. PATEL:
I was simply asking on the subject of the range of topics that
one could come across when reading such magazines or attending
such meetings. I will rephrase the question.
Q. Sa Lai Heang, do you recall reading in any of those magazines
or attending any meetings, whilst you were in charge of the base
at village and commune level, in regards to topics on marriages?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. I cannot recall what I read.
Q. What was your understanding of the purpose of such marriages
like the one you endured?
A. I do not know how to respond to that question. Of course, <if>
we look back, we knew that it was not held according to the
tradition; however, it was held according to their arrangement,
so for us, it became part of a pattern or a practice.
Q. Were you aware of any policies or plans to increase the
population or to have strict measures for how many couples are to
be married per month?
A. They spoke about a principle and the principle that they
referred to was to match people in a set of 5-couple events or 10
or 15-couple events.
Q. This morning, in your answers to the questions from the civil
party lawyer, you also mentioned that you were frightened,
concerned for your own safety; particularly, when you were told
that you were being stubborn. You said that being stubborn meant
that -- it would mean that you were resisting them following the
Party line or upper echelon; how did you know that this is what
stubborn would mean to the CPK cadres?
A. It is difficult to respond to that question. During the
regime, they spoke about the directions or instructions that we
had to follow and if the instruction was for us to do something,
we had to do it. Despite the facts that we liked it or not, we
consented to it or not; because <> in the end, we still had to do
it and that was done out of fear; for example, we were afraid
that we would be accused of opposing their instructional lines.
Q. What were the consequences if you resisted them or -- for --
or not following the Party line or upper echelon?
A. Of course, there could be consequences that first of all, we
would be called to be reminded; they would use strict words on us
to threaten us that we might be risking for opposing the Party's
line. And we were afraid of such consequence; that such
consequence could happened to us, and for that reason, we always
had to obey the instruction despite the fact that we liked it or
not.
Some, even after they got married, they could not go along well
together and sometimes, they committed suicide in order to end
the matter.
Q. In your interview with the Office of the Co-Investigating
Judges, you stated at answer 30, "I was scared to lose my own
life. If I had not followed the arrangement, my life and my
family lives would be in trouble"; is this correct?
A. Yes, because it <happened> to those who did not obey the
instructions.
Q. Were there any CPK officials present at your wedding; if yes,
who were they?
A. Regarding the event of my marriage, only district and commune
level <officials> were present, together with many civilians, and
the sector level did not participate since there was a letter
sent from the sector that they were busy at the battlefield.
Q. In your answers to the civil party lawyer this morning, you
also said, "Those who agreed to consummate were not monitored";
how did you know this?
A. I observed that those couples who went along <with one
another> and they could look each other in the face and as for
other couples who did not go along well, they would not dare to
look each other in the face and as a consequence, they were
subjected to be monitored.
Q. Do you know if you were monitored during the first two nights
that you spent with your husband after being married to him?
A. At that time, no because I had my position in the co-operative
or community, so no one came close to where I stayed.
Q. So did you feel forced to consummate your marriage?
A. They did not come to tell us in person and they had to monitor
us to see whether we agreed to live along with one another or
not; if not, then they would take measures.
Q. Did you consummate your marriage?
A. No, I did not because, at that time, we did not like one
another. Although we slept next to each other, we treated each
other as friends and there was no surprise or nothing happened at
all.
Q. In your interview with the Office of the Co-Investigating
Judges, at answers 31 and 32, you said that newlyweds were spied
upon and "Couples were secretly eavesdropped from under the
house"; is this correct?
A. It happened to other couples and not for my couple.
MS. PATEL:
Thank you. I will now give the floor to my colleague.
QUESTIONING BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Good morning, Your Honours. Good morning, everyone and good
morning, Madam Civil Party. My name is Seng Leang. I'm the
National Deputy Co-Prosecutor. Due to time constraint, allow me
to go straight to my question.
Q. This morning, you spoke about two individuals name Yi and Kuon
and that Yi was a member of the sector and in your subsequent
responses to lawyer for civil parties, you stated that <the>
cadres in Sector 505 were also arrested.
Can you tell the Chamber, in particular, Yi and Kuon were
arrested; if so, when and <> where were they sent to if they had
been arrested?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. From my recollection, Yi, the sector committee, was called by
Zone 304 and after that calling, he never returned.
As for Kuon, who was in charge of military affairs, was arrested
in <Tuol Kruos (phonetic) in> Snuol district. He was arrested
when he was travelling in a Jeep vehicle. At that time, I was
standing along the road and I was still pregnant. He was taken in
that Jeep and it happened at around 9.30 that morning, although I
cannot recall the month or the year.
Q. And did you know where they took the two individuals to after
their arrests?
A. No, I did not. Later on, I met with his messenger who was
wounded in the leg after he was shot and at that time, I was at
Samrang worksite. I asked that messenger. He was also a messenger
and a driver and he did not dare to say anything about that
event.
Q. Mr. President, I'd like to show a document to civil party,
which is a list of S-21 prisoners from OCP; it's E3/10604 and it
states about 171 prisoners who were arrested from Sector 505, and
at serial number 150 and 151, there are two names. The first name
is at number 150; it's Born Nan, who was 39 years old, and his
alias was Yi and the position was secretary of Sector 505 and was
arrested and sent to S-21 on 21 March 1978. And the second name
that appears is at number 8109; the name is Sann Bun Hy; the age
is 36 years old and the alias is Kuon, deputy secretary of Sector
505, who was also arrested and sent to S-21 on 21 March 1978.
What I read out is for the proper transcript of the arrest of
these two individuals.
And I'd like to ask you another question, Madam Civil Party,
about other cadres in Sector 505. Did you witness arrest of any
other cadres in that sector?
A. Besides that event, I did not witness any other arrests;
although, I only knew about the disappearance and I knew it
through people who were close to those people and they whispered
to one another about the arrests. The arrests took place
successively until those cadres had all been arrested and their
positions were filled by new cadres.
Q. Besides the arrest of all those cadres, what happened to their
family members, if you know it?
A. After the disappearance of the husbands, the wives and the
children were sent to the rear, that is, they were sent at night
time on motorboats to the upper part, that is, to Kampong Cham or
to <Phnom Penh> area and I did not know where they were sent to
<> actually. I only knew that they boarded motorboats heading
toward Phnom Penh direction.
Q. Thank you, Madam Civil Party. I'd like now to move on to
another topic.
This morning, you stated that after the disappearance of your
husband and after you were removed from your position, you were
taken to a worksite in Samrang and can you tell the Chamber who
else were at that worksite?
A. At that worksite, there were many other women who had
children; some had two, some had three or four children and in
total, there were about 20 women who had children and there were
also about 15 female youths. So in total, there were over 30 of
us.
Q. And did you know about the husbands of those women and why
were they gathered there?
A. Through my conversation with them, some of their husbands were
commune chiefs, some were unit chiefs, while others were chief at
the rubber plantation or supervisors at the rubber plantation and
some of those wives, their husbands were military commanders at
the front battlefield. So after their husbands, they had been
arrested; those wives had been gathered to be at one place.
MR. SENG LEANG:
Mr. President, due to technical glitch this morning, may I ask
for additional 10 minutes?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You have five minutes to conclude your question.
BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Madam Civil Party, when you arrived at Samrang, did you hear
about the security centre named Knong (phonetic) security centre?
A. Yes, I heard. The road leading to that centre was in front of
my worksite. It was called Knong (phonetic) security centre.
Q. What was that Knong (phonetic) security centre used for and
<as for> the prisoners there, what were their wrongdoings?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Civil Party, please hold on. The floor is given to the
defence counsel for Nuon Chea -- to the defence counsel for Khieu
Samphan.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I object here because I see that the
Co-Prosecutor is bringing up a security centre which is not in
the scope of the trial. And, he asked for extra minutes and I
don't know why we should give him extra minutes to talk about a
security centre that is not within the scope of the trial.
MR. SENG LEANG:
I recall that in the <previous> proceedings in this Chamber, we
could ask questions <> although, those questions may not be
within the scope of the security centre<> as long as the
questions did not go so deep into the matter.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber grants the Deputy Co-Prosecutor to continue putting
questions.
BY MS. SENG LEANG:
Q. Can you tell the Chamber what types of prisoners were put in
that security centre?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. I only knew that there was an existence of a security centre
called Knong (phonetic) security centre, but I did not know what
happened inside that centre.
Q. In document E3/436, at answer 18, you said that:
"At the security centre, I did not witness the prisoners with
heavy offence. For those with heavy offences, <they were sent to
another security centre in Samrang, which was called the Knong
(phonetic) security centre. There, prisoners were> killed
straightaway. And for the prisoners at the security centres, they
were <detained> and forced to work. <The prisoners were
interrogated and tortured. The prisoners, who were released, told
me that they saw gallbladder hanging and they told me that some
prison guards ate gallbladder."> Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. I want to clarify that I never went
there, but I heard it from other people who were released from
that <> centre and they told me that they could hear of such
incidents in which the prisoners were killed and their
gallbladder were removed and eaten by the Khmer Rouge cadres <in
order to make them more furious>. Yes, there were such incidents.
MR. SENG LEANG:
Mr. President, since my time run out, I would like to end my
question now.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now convenient time for the lunch break. The Chamber will
take a break now and resume this hearing at 1.30.
The Chamber would like to invite Madam Civil Party back to the
courtroom at 1.30.
Security officer, please send Mr. Khieu Samphan to the waiting
room downstairs and bring him back to the courtroom at 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1138H to 1329H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The floor is given to defence counsel for Nuon Chea.
QUESTIONING BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good afternoon, Your Honours and all
parties and Madam Civil Party. My name is Liv Sovanna, National
Defence Counsel for Nuon Chea.
Good afternoon, Madam Civil Party.
Q. Can you hear me?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes, good afternoon.
Q. Today I have a number of questions to put to you. My first
question is that in the morning, you told the Chamber that you
were born on the 3rd <of> June 1950; is that <really> your date
of birth?
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to inform parties that the internet
connection now is disconnected.
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence Counsel for Nuon Chea, you can resume your questions.
BY MR LIV SOVANNA:
Q. Madam Civil Party, now, let me repeat my question. In the
morning you said that you were born on the 3rd of June 1950; is
that your real date of birth?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes, it's my real date of birth.
Q. I want to know <> in what year was your commune liberated by
the Khmer Rouge?
A. It was since 1970.
Q. In the morning, you also said that you joined the <revolution>
in 1971; I want to know about your position when you served in
the revolution.
A. At that time, I was the local committee.
Q. What do you mean by the local committee in reference to the
hierarchy within the revolution?
A. It means that I was responsible for disseminating information
about the revolution to the Base People in all the villages
within the commune.
Q. The local committee that you mentioned, was it at the village,
commune <or district> level?
A. It was at the commune level.
Q. Because you were the one who disseminated information to the
local people, did you <hear or > were you ever taught about the
12 moral principles <of the revolution>?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you still recall the 12 principles of morality of the
revolution?
A. No, I cannot recall them.
Q. Because our topic is related to the Regulation of Marriage,
Mr. President, I would like to quote from document E3/765, with
ERN in Khmer, 00376493 to 94; in English, 00539994; in French,
00540024 to 25.
I would like to quote now. It's at the sixth principle of the
morality which stated that, "Do not commit any offence against
women, that is, do not touch women or men because this will
affect our dignity and the tradition and custom of our people."
End of quote.
Related to the marriage, there is no problem right now as long as
we base on the 12 principles of the morality. One is the consent
from the couples and second point is the consent from the
collective.
Madam Witness, do you still recall these principles?
A. No, I cannot recall it because it happened a long time ago.
Q. That's all right. In your capacity as the local committee of
the commune, from what year to what year was -- were you in that
position?
A. It was from -- it was from 1972 until 1976.
Q. When you were in that position, were you promoted to a higher
rank, for example, to chief of something?
A. No.
Q. In your position as the local committee of the commune, based
on your own observation and implementation, did you ever attend
the marriage of other people? I do not yet ask about your own
marriage, but I ask about the marriage of other people within
your locality.
A. I did not get your question.
Q. Now, let me repeat my question. In your capacity as the local
committee of the commune, did you ever participate or attend the
marriage of people in your locality?
A. Yes, I did. The selection of couples within the commune <was>
arranged or organized regularly.
Q. Could you tell us about your participation in that
arrangement?
A. After they were matched and then each of couple <was> asked<.
If> they agreed, then the marriage ceremony would take place and
during the ceremony, there <was> also a party <with other people
as witnesses>.
Q. If either side of the couple disagree or refuse, then what
would happen?
A. There would not be any serious problem <> at the base. If
people disagreed to get married, there would not be any serious
problem.
Q. Did parents of both sides participate in decision making?
A. We also asked their parents and -- and when we asked them,
their parents said it depended on Angkar's wisdom and if both
sides of the couple agreed and then it's okay to arrange marriage
for them.
Q. You said that there was also a party in this ceremony and
there were also other people participated in the wedding, so who
were they?
A. They were from the villages and communes. So any village or
commune where the wedding took place, people, including the elder
and the young in the whole village or commune, would take a day
off and participated in the wedding ceremony and they ate in the
wedding feast.
Q. What you said, was it happened in DK regime or before that?
A. They were the same. I mean before the regime and during the
regime, they were the same.
Q. Did you ever encounter that both sides loved each other and
they proposed to the local committee or to the local chiefs for
their marriage?
A. Yes, there were. Sometimes, parents on both sides had already
matched the couples since their <children were young> and when
the couple became mature and then the parents proposed to the
local chiefs for their marriage and the requests were granted.
Q. Regarding that particular marriage, was it also included <a>
party?
A. Yes, there <was>. <They made> cake and <killed> animals for
wedding feast.
Q. During that ceremony, was religious ritual <or prayer for
ancestors> allowed?
A. No, it was not, but people could secretly conduct it and if we
knew about their secret <> religious ritual, we pretended not to
know.
Q. In circumstances when the local chiefs were aware of the <>
religious ritual and then they chose to pretend not to know or to
be aware of, what -- what do you mean?
A. I meant that those people involved could do whatever they did.
We did not interrupt their -- their practice; we simply ignored
it. That's -- that was what I <> meant.
Q. Now, it comes to your story. In the morning, you said that you
were asked to get married, but you refused on several occasions.
My question to you is: How many times did you actually refuse?
A. I refused three times and during my third refusal, they
conveyed words to me that I was a stubborn person, that I did not
follow the order and when I heard such words, I agreed to accept
the marriage because I felt afraid I would be in trouble.
Q. What was the time interval between each of your refusal?
A. It was about five or six months in between, so after I refused
again and again and then they used such words to me.
Q. When they asked you about your marriage, were you informed the
name and the position of your husband?
A. Only when I asked them. I asked them who <> my husband <was>
and where was he from and then they told me.
Q. Related to the three times that they asked you for marriage,
was it the same man or different men?
A. Different men.
Q. I want to get clarification from you, that each time you were
asked to get married, it was different man and at each time that
you refused, the second time or the third time, it was a
different man who you would be matched with; is that correct?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. How old were you when you get married?
A. I was 25 years old.
Q. Mr. President, I would like to read the answer from Madam
Civil Party given to the Co-Investigating Judge. It's document
E3/436 at answer-question <30>. Madam, let me quote. You said
that, <> "I was only
years old and I did not want to get           18   married. <But because it was arranged, I was afraid that I would
be killed.>" So Madam Civil Party, can you tell us what age were
you <when you got married>?
A. I was 25 years old. <When> I was 18 years old, <> I joined the
revolution.
Q. How many couples were arranged to get married on the same day
with yours and whether it included the party aspect?
A. There was only <> my couple, only one, and there was party
celebration. They slaughtered <one> cow and <two> pigs <for the
wedding feast>.  And cakes were also made <in 10 large pans> so
the cakes would be distributed to the villagers. <The wedding
party was organised for people in two villages.> So, everyone who
participated in my wedding received a cake.
Q. Had you known your husband before your marriage?
A. Yes, I had known him.
Q. After your marriage, did your husband tell you <about> who
proposed the marriage? <Did> the proposal come from him or from
the Angkar?
A. No, he did not tell me.
Q. This morning, you said that those <couples> who did not get
along well with each other were monitored and for those who got
along well, they were not monitored; how did you know that they
got along well with each other or not?
A. It depended on the reality. <By> reality, I mean that when
they lived together, they got along with each other, but if they
did not get along with each other; <> they were uncomfortable
with each other.
Q. Did you know this by yourself or you heard about it from other
people?
A. For the couples whom I arranged marriage for them, such cases
did not happen, but it happened in other units and I received
this information from other people who were arranged to get
married.
Q. When you said that they were in other units, <> can you tell
us in more detail about this?
A. I meant that it happened in other communes, other units and
mostly it happened among some people within the revolution.
Q. So you -- you mean that this did not happen to the civilian,
it happened only to people who served in the revolution; is my
understanding correct?
A. Yes. <That's correct.>
Q. When you said that they were monitored, who monitored them?
A. The ones who monitored them were the people from <within>
their own units. They were assigned to monitor them. They wanted
to know such information as what were their reactions, what
happened between them. <After> they had received the information
and then the couples involved would be called to be reprimanded.
Q. You said that those who monitored were the ones from the same
respective units. Who were they? Were they the -- let's say if
the couple who got married was the cooperative chiefs and then
who would monitor their chief?
A. To conclude, the people who monitored were the people from
within the units. They were assigned to monitor <to collect
information.>
Q. So the method of monitoring was to collect information.
Besides collecting information, was there any other assignment
required from the monitors?
A. No. Only <collecting> information, reporting <it> to the more
superior chiefs and then the superior chiefs would take action.
Q. When you said about collecting information, was it collecting
information from the couples or from the neighbours?
A. I was not <sure> about this <because> I was also engaging with
my tasks <and> I did not pay attention or follow the case
closely.
Q. Who were the ones who had the authority to assign someone to
monitor?
A. In each unit there was a supervisor. So that supervisor was
the one who ordered the monitoring and it was the same person who
would order the couples to be reprimanded or educated. The first
time the couple would be educated, the second time would be
reprimanded.
Q. Did you know the reason why monitoring was carried out on
those who did not get along well with each other?
A. <I did not quite understand about that.> Because they wished
to make sure that those who arranged to get married they must get
along with each other and if they could not get along with each
other, actions would be taken in the forms of educating them and
so on and so forth.
Q. I would like you to clarify on one point regarding the
education and the reprimanding you mentioned happened in DK
regime. Based on your own experience, before DK regime or after
DK regime, if any couple did not get along with each other, who
had the authority or in the position to mediate or educate them?
A. Are you referring to my own experience?
Q. I would like to refer to your observation of the society
around you. That was before DK regime and after DK regime.
When there were cases of any couples who were arranged by the
elderly people and they did not get along well with each other,
whether you encountered such cases? And if you <> encountered
such cases, who were in a position to mediate or educate them?
A. If the women did not get along and then there was a female
Angkar <at the district level> or the supervisor of the female
<unit> who were the ones in the position to mediate them. But
there were no problems regarding that happened in the village and
commune.
Q. Please, I have one more question. Related to your own
experience, when people did not get along with each other, they
were either educated or reprimanded. Did you see any other
methods besides that?
A. No.
MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Thank you, Madam Civil Party.
And Mr. President, I would like to give the floor to my
colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
International Defence Counsel for Nuon Chea, you may have the
floor.
QUESTIONING BY MS. CHEN:
Thank you and good afternoon, Mr. President, judges, parties and
everyone watching.
Q. And good afternoon to you, Madam Civil Party. My name is
Doreen Chen and I have a few additional questions following on
from my colleague, Liv Sovanna, regarding a few different topics
that have been discussed today. I do not have very many, so
hopefully it won't be very long.
My first question is regarding your marriage, and I'm thinking
about something that you said earlier this morning and in answer
to a question from your civil party lawyer. And this was at about
9.46 in the morning. It was regarding the fact that you were told
that you were to be married and you said you were informed and
then the marriage date was fixed for you. You then said it was
about one month in advance.
Now, I understand that at the time that you were married you were
living in a different location to your parents. So my question is
how did it happen that your parents ended up attending your
wedding? For example, during the one month before your wedding
ceremony did you have a chance to invite your parents or what
happened? Can you tell us?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. During that one-month period, I did not visit my parents in
person. However, the commune committee went to see them and to
inform them about the event. For the wedding itself, the commune
committee invited them to attend.
Q. Thank you. That's all that I wanted to ask about your wedding
ceremony.
Now, I am going to move on to ask you just a few questions about
your time at the worksite at Samrang.
Now, this morning at about 10.45, answering a question from your
civil party lawyer, you told us that you were sent to a work site
at Samrang in Snuol in Kratie. You said that it was located on a
small hill and now it's been transformed into a pagoda. It was
not a security centre but it was a place where women were
gathered up. You also just told my colleague, Liv Sovanna, that
you were on the local committee until 1976.
So my question, Madam Civil Party, is when were you sent to the
work site at Samrang? It's not clear to me so far from your
answers.
A. I cannot recall it clearly. It could happen in 1978, mid-1978.
Q. Thank you, Madam Civil Party. My colleagues have just told me
that perhaps the name of the location was not clear in Khmer due
to my poor accent. I want to confirm that you are talking about
the work site at Samrang; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. And can you confirm for us how long you remained at that work
site?
A. I was there for about five to six months. That is, until the
time that the country almost fell. At that time there was an
advancement and the area was almost bombarded and then we were
relocated to Ou Ruessei and we were treated as depositees.
Q. Now, concerning the five to six months when you were at
Samrang work site, did you ever notice the arrival of troops of
the Revolutionary Army of Kampuchea to be stationed in the area?
A. Please repeat your question.
Q. Certainly. Regarding the five or six months when you were at
Samrang work site did you ever notice -- did you see the arrival
of troops of the revolutionary army of Kampuchea to be stationed
in the area?
A. I am not sure about that because when we were there we were
prohibited from going anywhere. We had to stay in during the
night and during the daytime we were let out to work. I heard
other comrades saying that there was a nearby hospital. And the
hospital was to -- for the treatment of the wounded soldiers who
were at the Snuol battlefield.
So the wounded and dead soldiers were sent to the hospital. The
hospital was located to the east side of the road while we were
on the west side. However, we did not have any contact with those
wounded soldiers <because we were the offenders.>
Q. Moving on to my last line of questions now, Madam Civil Party,
and I just want to refer to something that you said earlier this
morning, again to your civil party lawyer, and this was at about
9.37.
What you said was at the time your area was called Sector 505, in
the Northeast Zone. My question is did you know who the leader of
the Northeast Zone was?
A. At the beginning, that is, in 1970, Yem was the chief and Yi
was his deputy. Later on there was Kuon and later on Kong
(phonetic). They were leaders in Sector 505 in the Northeast
Zone.
And there was also another person named Chet.
Subsequently, Yem was assigned by the upper echelon to be an
ambassador in Korea and his position was replaced by Yi.
Subsequently, Chet was called by the upper echelon for a study
session and he disappeared and never returned. And there were
three other people. Kong (phonetic) was later sent for study
session and gone. So, there were only two remaining, Yi and Kuon,
at the sector level. And by 1978, the <last two people> also
disappeared.
Q. You mentioned the disappearance of someone named Chet and we
will come back to that in just a few minutes. But before that I
want to ask you one follow-up question about what you just said.
Now, I heard you describing various leaders at various times of
Sector 505. Did you know the name of any leaders above the sector
at the Northeast Zone level and, if so, can you tell us those
names?
A. I don't know any leader at the zone level. However, I saw one
person named Ya, who came down to the area and I saw him for one
time only. They said that he came from the zone level although I
did not know of his actual position.
Q. And in one -- in what context did you see this person named
Ya? Can you tell us a little bit more about that event?
A. I do not recall the year.
Q. Do you know where you saw him? Did he come to visit your
commune? Can you tell us anything more about this?
A. I saw him when he came down to visit the base where I lived,
that is at Thmei commune.
Q. Do you remember if Ya gave a speech or anything like this? Did
he give any instructions? Do you have any recollection in this
regard?
A. When I saw him he did not give any instruction or any
directions. He came to the base in order to understand the
current situation at the local level, to understand about the
productivity in the area and of course productivity here he
refers to farming. And he said that we were encouraged to
continue our leadership and for those who did not understand the
lines, should be educated so that they <could> probably
understand the line.
Q. Now, regarding your comments about Sector 505, do you know if
Sector 505 ever became an independent sector, independent of the
Northeast Zone and if so, do you remember when this happened?
A. I heard the sector committee who mentioned that Sector 505 was
an autonomous sector. So, everything was managed independently.
For example, food regime and everything else within the regime it
had to be managed independently.
Q. And do you recall when Sector 505 became autonomous?
A. It is likely that it happened from 1974.
Q. And now, we are going to return to a subject you briefly
mentioned a few minutes ago and that is regarding the
disappearance of a person named Chet from your sector. I am going
to read to you an answer from your written record of interview to
the Investigating Judges and then I just have a few questions for
you about your answer. And these are my final questions, Madam
Civil Party.
Mr. President, this is document E3/436, and I am going to be
referring to question and answer 22.
Madam Civil Party, I will now read to you the answer that I am
interested to know more about, and this is what you said. This is
regarding Chet.
"He was the sector committee member of the Communist Party of
Kampuchea. I worked with him. I did not witness the rape but my
friends told me. Chet was at the place where female units were
hosted. Young women stayed at that place in Sambour district. I
do not recall where the place was located in. After the rape case
was revealed, Chet was removed and executed. Thuch and Ya, who
were both zone chairmen from Zone 304, ordered the arrest of
Chet. Later on Thuch and Ya were arrested and killed by the order
from Son Sen and Ieng Sary and other leaders from the Communist
Party of Kampuchea."
Madam Civil Party, my first question after that long quote. You
mentioned two people, Thuch and Ya and you said that they were
zone chairmen from Zone 304. Was that a correct record of your
testimony?
A. I can recall that that is the case.
Q. Can you tell us anything more about this Zone 304? Do you
remember where it was, for example?
A. I only heard that it's reference to Zone 304, and I am not 100
percent certain about that. To my understanding, it was located
in the area of Kampong Cham or Kampong Thom province.
Q. And in your answer to the Investigating Judges, you talked
about this person, Ya. Is that the same person who we were just
speaking about earlier, the person who you met once and who spoke
about, among other things, production levels?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Now, in your answer to the Investigating Judges, as I
understood it, you said that these people, Thuch and Ya, ordered
the arrest of Chet and then subsequently they themselves were
arrested. Did you hear anything else about the circumstances in
which Thuch and Ya were arrested?
A. At that time I did not witness the arrest. I only heard people
whispering about it, that is, those people who were in the
leadership level they whispered about the arrest.
Q. And in their whispers did they mention anything about the
reasons why Thuch and Ya were arrested?
A. No, they did not. They did not mention anything specific. We
only heard that they disappeared.
Q. And my last question, did you ever hear of any other names by
which Thuch or Ya were called?
A. No, I did not.
MS. CHEN:
Madam Civil Party, thank you for your patience.
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, counsel for Nuon Chea.
And now I'd like to hand the floor to Judge Lavergne.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I have several questions to ask of the
civil party. Good afternoon, Madam Civil Party.
Q. This morning you were asked some questions about the treatment
of Vietnamese. Do you hear me?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes.
Q. Excellent. And you said this morning that there was a policy
that had been put into place regarding the Vietnamese and, if I
understood correctly, your family was a victim of this policy
because certain people in your family were arrested and
disappeared. Can you tell us exactly what this policy consisted
of when it was established? And if you know, who initiated this
policy?
A. The policy was initiated at the <sector> level and the
instruction was disseminated to the district level and further on
district levels disseminated them to the commune level and
village level. During the regime, Sector 505 was located near the
battlefront <with Vietnam. So> initially the fighting was <with>
the Lon Nol soldiers and later on the fighting was with the
Vietnamese side. <When Vietnam invaded,> they set up the
mechanism to counter the Vietnamese.
The measures that were meant to educate people at the rear was
that for those who were half-blood Vietnamese had to be smashed.
Otherwise, when Vietnamese made an entry then they would collude
with the Vietnamese side. That was the <set> principle <>.
Q. Do you remember as of which date this policy was put into
place? Was it from the beginning of the regime as of 17 April
1975 or did it start later?
A. It happened after the event in 1975. Before that there was no
such policy because those people could live as simply as other
Cambodian people, that is, living and earning and working in
fields but that measure or principle was set up later on.
Q. Do you know if there were orders that residents needed to
write their biographies and <if> there were lists of people who
<had Vietnamese origins>?
A. Yes, there was. At that time they called it "chumrouen"
(phonetic) <or census>.
Q. And what did this word "chumroeun" (phonetic) mean?
A. The word "chumrouen" (phonetic) means to do the screening or
<gathering>.
Q. Do you know if a distinction was made for people with mixed
blood who had one ethnic Khmer parent and one Vietnamese parent?
Was a distinction made if the mother was Vietnamese or if the
father was Vietnamese, or as long as one of the parents was
considered Vietnamese then <would> all of those people need to be
disappeared?
MR. PRESIDENT:
I would like to inform the Judge and the parties that the
Internet has been disconnected so we have to wait a few minutes.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, please repeat your last question.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Yes. Madam, was there a difference concerning the measures
taken towards those who had mixed blood, with one parent who is
Vietnamese and another parent who is Cambodian? Was there a
difference according to which, it mattered if the mother was
Vietnamese or the father was Vietnamese? Or were all of these
people, as long as they had one parent of Vietnamese origin,
targeted under the elimination measures?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. I do not understand your question.
Q. Looking at a case of a family where the mother was Vietnamese
and the father was Khmer, in the family who would have been
targeted to be eliminated? Would it be only the mother or would
it be the mother and the children? And I have the same question
if we look at a couple, but in this case it would be the mother
who is Khmer and the father Vietnamese.
A. During that period of time, only half-blood Vietnamese people
were smashed. For example, if the mother was Vietnamese the
mother would be arrested and smashed and later on the half-blood
children were arrested and then half-blood grandchildren were
also arrested.
Some other people who were half-blood survived. Let's say the
mother was Vietnamese and the father was Khmer. The children,
some of the children survived while others <were> smashed
including my uncle's family. <My uncle was also arrested perhaps
because he said something against the regime when he could not
control his emotion because his> children and <> grandchildren
were all gone <>.
Q. So if I understand you correctly, in some families, insofar as
there would be <one> grandparent who was of Vietnamese origin,
the rest of the lineage would be eliminated. Is that what you are
telling the Chamber?
A. Yes.
Q. In those families was the spouse who was <ethnically>
Cambodian also a victim of measures of elimination, or was the
spouse was of Khmer origin spared?
A. Yes.
Q. So you have told us that those measures were taken at <a>
local level and that these measures and instructions came from
the district level. Do you know whether the same measures existed
at the level of the sector?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Internet has been disconnected again. Please, parties be
informed and please wait for a few minutes.
Judge Lavergne, you continue your questions.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Yes, Madam, I was asking you whether to your knowledge the
same instructions existed at the level of the sector, not at the
level of the district but at the upper level, that is, the level
of the sector.
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes, it was the same.
Q. So you said that there was a <sorting> policy and <you said,
if I understood correctly,> that lists were established. Can you
tell us who established these lists and who <were they forwarded
to>?
A. Regarding the making of lists, it was done from the group to
the village and the village to the commune and commune to the
higher up.
Q. And how did you know that? Were you yourself asked to draw up
lists, or did you attend meetings at which that policy was
discussed, and how did you know that the same instructions
existed at the level of the sector?
A. It was the education from the upper echelon down to the lower
level. But at my base there were no ethnic Vietnamese. There were
only indigenous ethnic group like Phnong, Kouy, <or Khmer Loeu>.
Q. And did you yourself attend meetings at the level of the
sector or the district or any other level during which that
policy was discussed?***************
A. They came -- they came to show us the directions or the
policy. So they came <from> the district level.
Q. When you say "they came", who are those <people> who came?
A. I referred to the people in high authority, those from the
district. They came to the commune and those in the commune came
to the village, and the <village> were the ones who compiled the
statistics.
Q. So it was, therefore, a question of educating people. Who had
to be educated? Was it all the Base People who were the target
group? Was it something complicated to put in place?
A. They educated us at the commune. I don't know whether it was
difficult to be implemented but what I know is that at my base
there were no ethnic Vietnamese. There were only indigenous
minorities. At other bases or communes there were such cases but
not at my base.
Q. Do you know whether people were instigated to denounce persons
<they might know> who were of Vietnamese origin?
A. Could you please repeat your question?
Q. Were people instigated to report persons who could be of
Vietnamese origin?
A. As I told you earlier, in their policy they said so, but at my
base there were no ethnic Vietnamese and that's why I could not
say.
Q. Do you know whether those persons of Vietnamese origins were
grouped together? Do you know whether transportation was
organized and <whether> those persons were sent to specific sites
where they may have been executed?
A. Based on what I heard, that the first principle would be that
they would be sent <back> to <their country>. So at the beginning
they were loaded onto trucks and transported to <Vietnam>. But
later on when the Vietnamese intensified their attacks and then
the ethnic Vietnamese in Cambodia were smashed.
Q. And do you know where they were smashed? Were there any
particular sites or it was in all the communes? How was that
organized?
A. Based on the information I received from my relatives, it took
place at villages. Some were smashed at the villages; some were
smashed at the security centre. My aunt in-law who was an ethnic
Vietnamese who already changed her citizenship to Cambodian, she
did not hold Vietnamese I.D. card. <At that time, ethnic
Vietnamese held Vietnamese ID and they paid the ID fee every
year.> Because she believed that she had already changed her
citizenship, she did not want to go the district because she did
not want to be separated from her husband and children. Then she
was taken away to the security centre.
Q. And which was that security centre?
A. It was a security centre at Kaoh Sroka (phonetic). I cannot
recall what it was actually called. It was at Kaoh Sroka
(phonetic)<, Kantuot commune,> in Kracheh district.
Q. Did you also witness executions of persons of Vietnamese
origin?
A. No, I never witnessed such incidents.
Q. In your commune, in your district <or> sector, do you know
whether there were any persons of Cham origin?
A. No, there weren't. There were only ethnic Kouy and Phnong.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you very much, madam, for your answers. I have no further
questions for you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Judge Lavergne.
It's now a convenient time for a break. The Chamber will have a
20-minute break.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1444H to 1502H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
Counsel for Khieu Samphan, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good afternoon, Judges. Good afternoon,
parties and good afternoon, Madam Civil Party. My name is Kong
Sam Onn. I am Co-Counsel for Khieu Samphan and I have some
questions to put to you.
Q. First, I'd like to inquire about your position. You have
stated that you were a member of the commune-based committee and
I am unsure about that position because in your previous written
statement; that is, E3/436 at answer 22, you said that you worked
with the sector committee. So please clarify the matter whether
you were a member of the commune committee or you were a cadre at
the sector level.
Madam Civil Party, can you hear me?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Parties, please be informed that the internet on the civil
party's side has been disconnected. We have to wait.
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel for Khieu Samphan, please repeat your last question.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. Again good afternoon, Madam Civil Party. Can you hear me?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes.
Q. Thank you. I'd like to ask about your position. You have
testified that you were a member of the commune-based committee
and that your role was to spread propaganda for people to join
the revolution. However, in your previous statement, E3/436 at
answer 22, you stated that you worked with the sector committee.
So in order to clarify the matter, I'd like to ask about your
actual position.
Did you work at a sector level and came down to work at the base
level with the commune level or were you a member of the commune
committee?
A. I was a member of the commune committee and not at the sector
level. However, when I said that I worked with the sector it is
for the time that sector <committee> came down to work at the
commune.
Q. Thank you. You also stated that you worked at the
commune-based committee for two communes. Besides this position
did you hold any other positions?
A. No, I did not. My only role was to go and spread propaganda
among other people.
Q. Can you tell the Court about your immediate supervisor? Did
you report to a particular level or a particular office?
A. I had to report to the upper echelon, that is at the district
women's committee and usually they came down to work with us at
the commune level.
Q. Can you give us some names?
A. There was Comrade Leang (phonetic).
Q. Did you work as a subordinate to Leang (phonetic) for the two
communes or was there any change?
A. Initially I was at Changkrang commune and later on I worked at
the Thmei commune <permanently>.
Q. How long did you work for the two communes, that is, at
Changkrang and Thmei communes? I noticed some discrepancies in
your previous statement and what you stated this morning. You
stated that you stopped working in 1977. That is in answer 11 of
your previous statement. However, a while ago you said you
stopped working at the base in 1976. Can you tell the Chamber why
there was such a discrepancy?
A. Regarding the base committee, after we went on a propaganda
drive for people to understand and to join the revolution, and
that happened in around 1975 and '76, then that base committee
<was dissolved>. And they stopped referring to it as base
committee and they actually renamed it to commune branch.
Q. And what was your actual position in the so-called commune
branch?
A. I still carry out the same function, that is, to go on a
propaganda drive to educate the people, to remind them, to
encourage them to engage in agricultural production.
And, later on, in around 1976 to 1977, the activities decreased
and I was an ordinary member of the village and the commune since
the message understood about the movement and, by that time,
communal eating and cooperatives were placed -- were put in place
and that was administrative structure, that is unit chiefs
established at all village and commune level. So I did not engage
in that activity that often.
Q. Did you know if the work that you carried out was linked to
the work of the Front?
A. At the beginning -- at the beginning, I participate in the
activities of the Front, that is, when the people did not have
full knowledge about the movement, so we had to disseminate this
policy of the Front.
Q. Thank you. I'd like to get a clear timeline when you stopped
working, and you said that you -- your last work when you was a
member of the commune branch.
And can you tell the Chamber as to which year or which month <>
you stopped working for the commune branch?
A. I stopped working there in 1977, that is, I no longer had the
right to be working there. That is after I was considered as a
useless person <because> I became an ordinary member living in
the cooperative.
Q. Can you indicate the timeline that -- whether this event
happened in a particular month in 1977, that is early, mid- or
late '77, when you no longer worked for the commune branch?
A. It happened in early period of the year.
Q. A while ago, you made mention of a time period that you were
transferred to Samrang security centre and you said that you
<had> remained there for about six months, that is, between five
to six months. Am I correct in making that quote?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. In your same document in question/answer 12, and allow me to
quote, Mr. President, that, "I was detained in that security
centre for almost two years until the Vietnamese liberated the
country." End of quote. Can you tell the Chamber the difference?
A. Maybe the person who took note did not listen to me fully
because by that time the Vietnamese troop was advancing towards
Snuol and to Samrang, that is, the location where I lived. Then
we were relocated to Ou Ruessei commune near Kratie provincial
town.
Q. In early '77, until the time that you were sent to Samrang
security centre, what did you do and where was the location?
A. During that period, after I had lost my husband, I was sent to
Samrang village - rather to Tuol Samrang or Samrang Hill and I
was a member of a group which consisted over 30 women--
Q. Allow me to interrupt, Madam Civil Party. I'd like to ask for
a particular period, that is the period before you were sent to
Samrang security centre, that is, starting from early '77, until
the time that you were sent to Samrang. Where were you, that is,
after you stopped working at the commune branch?
A. I was sent from Thmei commune to Kantuot commune and Rouloit
(phonetic), that is, at Rouloit (phonetic) the cooperative. And I
lived there and my husband work at Preaek Thay (phonetic) office.
And, as I said, we were sent to live in that cooperative.
Q. In your response to Judge Lavergne's question, that is, on the
issue of the Vietnamese people, you said that in your sector,
that is, in your commune, there were no Vietnamese people living
there. Do you recall your response?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Can you then tell the Chamber about Thmei commune, Angkrang
(phonetic) commune and Kantuot commune that you just mentioned.
To your knowledge, did you know whether there were Vietnamese
living in these three communes?
A. I only know about the situation in Thmei commune but not about
other communes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Lawyer for Civil Parties, you have the floor.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President. Just a comment because I'm not
sure I understood the same thing, at least in the French
interpretation.
It seems that in answer to Judge Lavergne's question, <the Civil
Party> said there weren't any ethnic Vietnamese in her commune,
but I <did not hear> her say that there were no ethnic Vietnamese
living in the sector.
<I'm not sure what the other parties might have heard, but at
least, according to the French interpretation, she said that
there were no ethnic Vietnamese in her commune, and she said
there were just indigenous people, but she did not specifically
refer to the presence of ethnic Vietnamese in her sector>, at
least that's what I had written down and that's what I had
understood.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
The civil party made a very clear response. <I> spoke about three
communes where she lived and she also mentioned that in Thmei
Commune there were Vietnamese living there.
Q. And I'd like to ask you, Madam Civil Party, about your uncle.
Can you tell the Chamber as to which district or which commune he
lived and whether he lived in the same commune and district?
A. He lived in Krolop (phonetic) commune, Saen Monourom. And I
did not know the commune or the village clearly, although I knew
that he lived in Saen Monourom, that, is in Kratie district.
Q. Can you tell the Chamber the distance between where you lived
and where your uncle lived?
A. The distance was about 30 kilometres.
Q. Did you have contact with your uncle during the Democratic
Kampuchea regime or did you visit him that often?
A. I never made any visit to him during the regime. He was
evacuated to Saen Monourom to work in rice field and I never met
him since.
Q. Were you aware of your uncle's political tendency or, at
least, the political tendencies of his family members?
A. What do you mean by "political tendency"?
Q. That is his belief in politics.
A. I was not aware of that since he lived far away from me.
Q. You testified a while ago that you heard about your uncle. Can
you tell the Chamber who actually told you about your uncle's
situation?
A. I forget it. At that time, the person came from his area and I
asked the person about him and the person told me why I did not
know about my uncle's situation. And I was told that he
disappeared, that he had been arrested, and I was shocked upon
hearing that. My body shook and I tried to calm myself and to be
normal so I would not be noticed by others.
Q. Can you tell the Chamber as to when did you receive that
information?
A. I forget about it.
Q. Did you receive that information during the Democratic
Kampuchea or after that?
A. It was likely that I received that news after the period of
Democratic Kampuchea, that is, after the regime collapsed.
Q. You said that it was after the Democratic Kampuchea regime, so
that is after 1979. Am I correct?
A. It was after 1975.
Q. Please try to remember the period again because Democratic
Kampuchea regime fell on 7 January 1979, and, from what you said,
I gather that you heard of the news after 1979. Am I correct?
A. I do not understand your question.
Q. Madam Civil Party, could you please repeat your last response?
JUDGE FENZ:
She said she did not -- sorry, she said she didn't understand
your question.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. Madam Civil Party, a while ago you said that you learned of
the disappearance of your uncle after the period of Democratic
Kampuchea regime, and I'd like to clarify that point.
I'd like to ask you as to when or which year after the period of
Democratic Kampuchea regime that you learnt of the news; was it
after 1979, that is, after 7 January 1979? Am I right?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. It was after 1979, that is, he -- I lost him in 1976 or '77.
Q. Madam Civil Party, I do not get your response. You said that
it's after 1979, it means that it 1980 or 1981, but when you
refer to 1976, it means it was <after 1975>. Could you please
clarify?
A. For me it is difficult to understand. He disappeared in around
1976 or '77, but I am not sure whether it was actually '76 or
'77.
Q. What I want to ask you, Madam Civil Party, is as to when you
heard about the disappearance of your uncle and not the actual
date that your uncle disappeared. Do you understand my question?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. So please respond.
A. I learned of the news in 1977.
Q. So that meant that it was not after DK regime. Can you clarify
to us related to this point, that you learnt about his
disappearance during DK regime or after DK regime?
A. I do not understand.
JUDGE FENZ:
(Microphone not activated) - so it was '76 probably.
What else do you want her to say?
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
When she said that it was in 1976 or '77, she said about the
disappearance of her uncle, but here I ask about the information
she learnt about the disappearance. So they are different
questions.
In answering to my question, she said that she learnt about the
disappearance after DK regime, so that's why I want her to
clarify which year.
Mr. President, please inform the civil party to give a clear
answer.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil Party, please give a clear answer.
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
I cannot recall the exact year. As I told you, he disappeared in
the year -- around the years that I told you and I learnt about
his disappearance about two or three months later. It was not
years, but just a few months later after his disappearance.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. A while ago, you also said about the census of Vietnamese
people and they were sent back to Vietnam. Can you tell us about
the exact year when it happened, when the Vietnamese people were
sent back to their country?
A. No, I cannot recall the year.
Q. Was it before 1975 or after?
A. It was perhaps after 1975.
Q. Did you witness the transportation of those people yourself?
A. Yes, I witnessed they were being transported by vehicles
<during the day time and at night> and the remaining people were
the half-blooded people. <At first it was believed that as the
half-blooded Vietnamese, they would be> somehow forgiven and they
were not sent along. <However,>  those groups of people <were
killed later on>.
Q. Where did you see it?
A. At that time, I was at Kantuot village of Kantuot commune.
Q. At Kantuot, based on your answer, it was the third location
after you had been transferred from Thmei commune and it was -
you were there around 1977. Is that correct?
A. I do not understand.
Q. Did you get my question, Madam Civil Party?
A. No.
Q. My question is based on your answer. You said that you saw the
Vietnamese people being transported from your base and you saw
them at Kantuot commune. And based on your answer that you gave
to me earlier, Kantuot commune was the third location after you
had been transferred from Changkrang and Thmei communes. And you
said you were at Kantuot in 1977. <Is> it correct?
A. I'm not clear with what you said.
Q. When you said you are not clear, what do you mean?
JUDGE FENZ:
Everybody asking each other if they don't understand what they
means. Why don't you ask very short questions. I think the
witness is getting tired.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. My question that I posed to you were really short. I just want
to know whether it was true that she was in Kantuot in 1977. I
simply asked her to confirm what she had already answered.
Madam Civil Party, can you hear me?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Khieu Samphan Defence Counsel, you can continue your questions.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. Madam Civil Party, can you hear me now?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes.
Q. I want you to clarify about the time when you saw the
<deportation> of Vietnamese people.
You said that you saw them being transported when you were at -
in Kantuot commune, and you told me earlier that you were at
Kantuot commune in 1977. That was after the time when you stopped
working at Thmei commune.
I want to ask you that - to confirm with me whether it was in
1977 or not?
A. When I saw the <deportation> of the Vietnamese people, when I
said that it was at Kantuot village, Kantuot village was my
native village. And when I came to that village, I saw the
<deportation> of those people. It did not mean that I worked at
Kantuot commune when I saw the transportation.
Q. Can you tell me about the specific year when you saw the
<deportation> of Vietnamese people?
A. It was probably in 1973 or '74. It was perhaps in <1972 or>
1973. A large number of them had been <deported from Cambodia> by
that time.
Q. So it means that it was before the total liberation by the
Khmer Rouge regime. Is that correct?
A. (No interpretation)
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
President, I have no more question, but my colleague has some
question to put to the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence Counsel for Khieu Samphan, you may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President, good afternoon. Good afternoon, Madam
Civil Party. I am Anta Guisse. I am International Co-Counsel for
Mr. Khieu Samphan and in this capacity I will be putting some
follow-up questions to you.
Q. My first question is as follows. You stated that you stopped
all activities--
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Counsel, based on the information I received, internet
connection has been disconnected again. Please wait.
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence counsel for Khieu Samphan, <please> continue your
questions.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you.
Q. Madam Civil Party, as I pointed out, I have a few follow-up
questions to put you.
The first has to do with your duties at the level of the commune.
You stated that you <ceased to exercise your duties> in early
1977. Did I properly understand your testimony?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. Yes.
Q. So my first series of questions has to do with your work
before early 1977. You stated that as part of your propaganda
work you <communicated> with the districts, as well as the
sectors.
My first question has to do with your relationship with
districts. How often did you meet with district officials as part
of your duties?
A. I met them once in every three months, so they came once every
three months.
Q. I will ask the same question regarding the persons who worked
in the sector. How often did you meet them?
A. Because I was based at the distant commune, I did not meet
them often, only when they had important issue to convey they
came to meet us. As for us at the lower level, we had no rights
to go to meet them.
Q. Very well. So, if I understand you correctly, the meetings you
had with the people working at the level of the sector were such
that they came to see you in your commune. Is that correct?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. You stated that you didn't see them often. My question is
whether you recall whether between 1975 and early 1977, when you
<ceased> your duties, how many times you saw those people from
the sector?
A. Since the liberation in 1975, I never met them any more, and
because there were disappearances of people one after another
though we had no more connection or contacts.
Q. Should I therefore understand that when you saw people from
the sector it was between 1972 and 1975; 1972 being the time when
you started assuming responsibilities at the level of the
commune? Is that correct?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Can you therefore tell me as regards the officials from the
district level, you said that you saw them once every three
months. How many times, if you do recall, did you see them after
17 April 1975?
A. I cannot recall it.
Q. You stated that Sector 505 had functioned autonomously since
1974, and you stated that the sector was particularly autonomous
as regards food rations, for instance. Can you tell us how you
came by that information and who told you about that?
A. I received the information from the sector committee. They
told us that our sector was an autonomous one.
Q. Since you stated that you saw people from the sector only up
to 1975, I understand therefore that that information was given
to you before 1975. Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is before -- that was before 1975.
Q. You also stated a while ago that Sector 505 was not far from
the battlefields, to echo your own words, and you stated that
<first> there was fighting <against the> Lon Nol troops and,
subsequently, there was fighting against <the> Vietnamese. My
question is, when did the fighting against the Vietnamese
<begin>?
A. I cannot recall all of it, but what I remembered was that it
happened after the liberation of Phnom Penh.
Q. I know that the events occurred a long time ago. <So> I will
have to ask you to give us a timeframe, even though <I understand
that you cannot give us> exact <dates>.
<But, if we use> 1977, <the year you stopped your work, as a
point of reference,> can you <then tell us whether> the fighting
started <more in> 1975, <the same year as the> liberation, in
1976 or <more in> 1977, before or after you stopped working?
A. I cannot recall everything. What I can recall was that after
the liberation of Phnom Penh, there <was> no conflict yet. About
a year later, it was around 1976, in late 1976, there were
conflict and the attacks or clashes started to take place.
Q. You therefore situate the beginning of the fighting in late
1976.
A while ago, in answer to a question put to you by Judge
Lavergne, you stated that you had heard that there was a policy
vis--vis the Vietnamese, in any case, "mixed-blood persons", to
use your own words. Do you know when you received that
information?
I understood from your answer to Judge Lavergne's question that
you said it was people from the district level who gave you that
information, but do you recall during what period? You said the
fighting started in late 1976. Do you know whether it was before
or after that period?
A. I cannot recall it well because it happened a long time ago. I
was confused with the years.
Q. And since you are confused as regards the year, if I take as a
point of reference the time when you stopped work, would that
help you? Was it before or after you stopped work that you
received that information?
A. Yes, I can recall it now. It was before I was required to stop
working.
Q. Very well. So it was before early 1977. Do you recall, if we
take that as a point of reference, the beginning of the fighting
on the border, in any case in the zone, would you recall whether
it was before or after the beginning of the fighting?
A. I did not get your question clearly. Can you repeat it?
Q. I was again trying to jog your memory. Without recalling the
exact date, do you recall when the officials from the district
level told you of a policy vis--vis persons of Vietnamese origin
or "mixed-blood" persons to echo your own words, was it before
the fighting in that area or after the beginning of such
fighting?
A. Relating to the sending of Vietnamese people back to their
country, I learnt about this in 1972-'73, in 1973.
As for the elimination of the mixed-blood children, it was after
the liberation of Phnom Penh. The <deportation> of Vietnamese <to
their> country took place before the liberation of Phnom Penh.
For the elimination of the remaining mixed-blood Vietnamese
children took place after the liberation of Phnom Penh. That is
what I can recall. <I cannot recall the date.>
Q. I have indeed understood that, that "second policy" you are
referring to, was adopted after the liberation of Phnom Penh.
What I am trying to get you to do is to use as a point of
reference the time when you said the fighting started in Sector
505, in any case, around Sector 505. You have situated the
beginning of the fighting in late 1976.
Using that date as a point of reference, can you situate the time
when you heard people from the district level refer to the issue
of the elimination of persons of Vietnamese origin?
A. Regarding the elimination of the mixed-blood Vietnamese
people, we were informed about that since the early years, but it
was not implemented yet. It was only later on. They did not come
to repeat what they have already told us about the elimination of
the Vietnamese origin or mixed blood.
Q. You said in your answer at the beginning of the year. Which
year are you referring to?
A. The year that we conducted warfare with the Vietnamese. It was
perhaps in early 1976.
Q. I understood that after 1975, you did not meet people from the
sector. Is it correct to say that you therefore did not speak
with persons from the sector level regarding that policy, to
eliminate persons of Vietnamese origin?
A. Yes.
Q. You also stated that you did not go to the sector. I would
like to put a supplementary question to you.
During the entire period when you exercised your duties at the
level of the commune, did you go to other communes as part of
your <work>?
A. No.
Q. Is it correct to say under those circumstances that, if you
didn't go to the sectors and if you didn't go to other communes,
you <were> only aware of the situation in your own commune?
A. Normally, <I> did not go anywhere and, as a result, <> I could
not grasp the situation outside my area. I knew only what was
going around me in my place.
Q. As regards persons from the district level whom you met and
who talked to you about policy aimed at eliminating <the
Vietnamese> -- and you did say that heard about that from them --
if you do recall, can you give us the names of those district
officials who gave you the information regarding that policy?
A. It was from Comrade Ros (phonetic).
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, I see the time now is 4 p.m. Given the various
interruptions we had today, I would like to put 10 more minutes
of additional questions to the witness to the civil party, <which
I could try to shorten>.
Would the Chamber allow me to complete my questioning of this
witness?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, we allow you to have time to finish your questions.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Madam Civil Party, let me proceed then. You stated that it was
a certain Ros (phonetic), if I did understand you correctly, from
the level of the district who had talked to you about that
policy.
Do you know that person's full name and what was that person's
exact position at the district level?
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
A. I did not know the detail; however, <I knew that> he was at
the district level and he was in charge of a certain communes
within that district.
Q. So "<of> certain communes in this district", so <does> that
mean that there were other people who were responsible for other
communes? And do you know <those peoples' names, in that case>?
A. In the district, there were several communes and those
communes formed that particular district.
Q. If I understood correctly your previous response, Ros
(phonetic) was not responsible for all of the communes in the
same district, or did I misunderstand that?
A. No, that is not the case.
Q. So my question is, do you remember the other person or the
other people who were in charge of the other communes of the
district?
A. I do not recall their names. Later on, those people <> were
arrested and killed.
Q. Earlier, you responded to one of Judge Lavergne's questions,
and I would like to come back to that, because there were two
aspects of the question and you answered "Yes", but I wasn't sure
exactly to which part you were referring. You said that -- I'm
going to re-word my question. Let me start over.
When there was a question regarding the elimination of people
considered to be of Vietnamese origin, Judge Lavergne's question
was, if the Khmer spouses of those who were of Vietnamese origin
were spared. Could you answer "yes" or "no". Khmers who were
married to Vietnamese or those of Vietnamese origin, were they
spared?
A. <In some cases, both> Khmer people and the Vietnamese people
were all gone, however, in some <other> cases, only the
Vietnamese origins were taken away while the Khmer family members
remained. So in some circumstances, some family members remained.
Q. So my question now is, insofar as you indicated that in your
own commune, there were no people of Vietnamese origin, where did
you get this information from? Who gave you this information?
A. In the area, there were ethnic minorities, Kouy and Phnong and
then there were Khmer. And there were some people who were
half-blood Chinese.
Q. So there I understand that you're talking about these ethnic
minorities, my question was about the information you got
concerning people of Vietnamese origin. How did you get that
information since you, yourself, say that you didn't have any in
your community? Where did you get this information from; who gave
you this information?
A. <> When <I> came down to work at the <village> level, <I did
not see any of them>.
Q. I think we must really have a problem of interpretation
because it's just impossible. So I'm going to try to ask the
question in another way.
I'm sorry, Mr. President:  in Khmer, I don't know if it makes
sense, but in French it doesn't make any sense at all.
You, Madam Civil Party, you said you gave some information
concerning Vietnamese, you indicated to the Chamber that there
were no people of Vietnamese origin in your commune. So my
question is as follows. How did you obtain information about the
Vietnamese? Who gave you this information?
A. As I have stated, when I went to work at the village at the
commune and through that census there were no Vietnamese residing
in that commune.
Q. My colleague is telling me that my question has been clearly
interpreted into Khmer, so I will move on to another question
because otherwise -- I will finish on this even if I have other
questions.
In your WRI <-- and I will finish with this, despite having -
more questions, in your WRI> E3/436, you <were> asked the
following question -- question 55, and you were speaking about
ethnic minorities, the Phnong and Kouy in your <commune>, and you
were asked the question:
"What happened to these two groups of ethnic minorities? Why did
you speak about them?"
And your answer was as follows:
"Nothing in particular. The Khmer Rouge didn't make a distinction
between ethnicities or ethnic minorities, they killed everyone
who was a detractor of their regime." <End of quote.>
Can you confirm that, <Madam>?
A. What I meant is that anyone who was against the revolution
regardless of their ethnicity, Vietnamese or whatever, and this
only refers to individuals.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, thank you for the additional time that you have
given me. It's 4:10 pm so I will stop now.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
And Madam Heng Lai Heang, as a civil party before this Chamber
you may make a statement of harm and suffering in relation to the
crimes alleged against the two accused, that is Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan, and that happened during the period of Democratic
Kampuchea from 17 April 1975 to 6 January 1979, and the harms
that were inflicted upon you physically, mentally and materially
and that were the result of the crimes alleged and that happened
to you and that led you to become a civil party in this case to
request for collective and moral reparations.
If you wish to do so, you have the opportunity to do it now, or
you may put the question to the accused through the Chamber.
MS. HENG LAI HEANG:
Dear Judges, I would like to inform, Your Honours, that I
suffered beyond description during the regime of three years,
eight months and 20 days. I lost 37 family members and relatives
during the Khmer Rouge regime.
I was matched by Angkar to a man whom I did not like and that I
-- he was not my choice through every minute I lived in the
regime. I was forced to marry the man that was not my choice and
we had to agree with the assignment by Angkar for our own safety
and for our own life, and that we had to adopt ourselves to
whatever assignment was given to us by Angkar otherwise we risked
having problems with our safety.
Personally, I constantly suffered. The husband whom was matched
by Angkar was later on arrested and disappeared and I was accused
of having linked to a traitor. And for that reason, my right was
removed and I became a civilian and, later on, a depositee.
I was forced to do all kinds of work since I just delivered my
baby, and I was not given sufficient food to eat and I was under
constant monitoring by Angkar with as many eyes as pineapples. I
had to force myself to work to reach the work plan imposed by
Angkar.
I did not have any rights and I did not given any proper time to
rest. I could not provide comfort to my beloved child. As a
result, my child's health became weak and his body was emaciated,
and my child was constantly sick and the treatment was very
scarce and the nutrition was also scarce.
As a result, later on my child died. My child died after 1979 as
a result of malaria and due to his poor health since after the
delivery.
And I hoped, Your Honours, would find me justice, that is,
justice for me and justice for my family members who lost their
lives during the regime. As well as justice for other victims who
suffered under the regime of three years, eight months and 20
days.
And may the Court expedite the proceedings in finding the justice
for us. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Madam Civil Party.
And the hearing of testimony of Civil Party Heng Lai Heang is now
concluded, and the Chamber would like to thank you, Madam Heng
Lai Heang, for your testimony as a civil party.
Court officer, please liaise with WESU to make an arrangement for
the civil party to return to her residence.
The Chamber will adjourn now and resume tomorrow, that is,
Tuesday, 20 September 2016, commencing from 9 o'clock in the
morning.
For tomorrow, the Chamber will hear testimony of a civil party,
Mom Vun, and after that we begin hearing testimony of a witness,
2-TCW-1031, in relation to security centres and internal purges.
Please be informed.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan back to the ECCC detention facility and have them
returned to attend the proceedings tomorrow, that is, Tuesday, 20
September 2016, before 9 o'clock.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1617H)
