P R O C E E D I N G S
(Court opens at 0906H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber continues to hear testimony of witness Bun
Loeng Chauy and to begin hearing testimony of another witness
that is 2-TCW-1012, via a video link in relation to Phnom Kraol
Security Centre.
Ms. Chea Sivhoang, please report the attendance of the parties
and other individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present. Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell
downstairs. He has waived his right to be present in the
courtroom. The waiver has been delivered to the greffier.
The witness who is to conclude his testimony today, that is, Mr.
Bun Loeng Chauy and Madam Socheata, his duty counsel, are present
in the courtroom.
The next witness, that is, 2-TCW-1012, will be testifying from
Oddar Meanchey province via a video link. The witness confirms
that to his best knowledge, he has no relationship by blood or by
law to any of the two Accused, that is, Nuon Chea, Khieu Samphan,
or any of the civil parties admitted in this case.
The witness will take an oath before he testifies. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Chamber now decides on the request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea dated 29 March
2016, which states that due to his health, headache, back pain,
he cannot sit or concentrate for long and in order to effectively
participate in future hearings, he requests to waive his rights
to be present at the 29 March 2016 hearing.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the accused at the ECCC dated 29 March 2016, which notes that
today Nuon Chea has a chronic back pain and cannot sit for long
and recommends that the Chamber should grant him his request so
that he can follow the proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow the proceedings remotely from the holding cell downstairs
via an audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies for the whole day.
The Chamber now hands the floor to the defense team for Nuon Chea
to continue putting further questions to the witness. You may
proceed, Counsel.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE RESUMES:
Thank you, Mr. President. And good morning, Your Honours,
Counsel. Good morning, Mr. Witness. I have a few additional
questions that I would like to put to you this morning.
Q. Yesterday you gave evidence implying that you were not the
deputy chief of the district. That as a matter of fact you were
not a member of the district committee at all, but that you were
deputy chief of the district office. What exactly were your tasks
as the deputy chief of the district office? What were you doing
on a day-to-day basis?
JUDGE FENZ:
Could you -- just a second, Counsel. Just a second.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We would like to note on the translation of document E3/5177
(sic), at Khmer, 00197860; the Witness states in the record that:
"I was in Kaoh Nheak district, before that, I was the deputy
chief of Kaev Seima district office <because> my uncle, <Kasy,>
was the district chief and I was his <messenger> between '71 to
'75. And I was the deputy chief of the office from '75 through
'77."
However, in the English translation it is rather different from
the original Khmer text. In English it's on 00274099. So it is
clear in the original Khmer text that he was the deputy chief of
the district's office.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. What were your tasks, Mr. Witness, as the deputy chief of the
district office? What did you do on a day-to-day basis?
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. I'd like to respond to that question regarding the works at
the office included taking the staff to work in the rice fields.
However, we were assigned to a different task.
Sometimes the chief of the office led the people to build a dam
while I was assigned to lead the people to work in the rice
fields.
However, sometimes we rotated ourselves. That means sometimes I
led people to work at the dam, while he led people to work in the
rice field.
Q. Did the district office and you as its deputy chief have any
other tasks? If yes, what were they?
A. We did not have other tasks. Our task was assigned -- was
dependent on the assignment from the district secretary. If we
were either assigned to perform a particular task, that is what
we would do. And usually it would deal with the agricultural
production.
Q. Was the district office or rather you personally were you ever
involved -- or were you ever involved in the arrest of anyone?
A. We did not have such authority.
Q. Did you see ever any communication passing through the
district office regarding the arrest of anyone?
A. Yes, there were some. Namely, in 1974, when I was still his
messenger. The Kratie province informed the district office about
the pursuit and arrest of those who were called the Khmer Sar.
Q. How about after 17 April '75? Did you ever see any
communication whatsoever in relation to arrests of anyone within
your district?
A. There were not such incidents after 1975, and that continued
until we were arrested.
Q. Did you ever see, in your capacity as deputy chief of the
district office, communication in relation to statements or
confessions of prisoners?
A. No, I was not aware of that. I never interrogate anyone, nor
did I have such authority to do so.
Q. Were you or was the district office in any manner whatsoever
involved in the execution of anyone?
A. During the time that I was <at> the district, nothing happened
in such a way.
Q. So is it fair to say that you yourself, nor the district
office, was ever involved in the ordering or planning of any
execution?
A. Yes, that is correct. Prior to February '77, the situation
there was normal and there was no action of killing and only
after a group of us, that is about 80 people, were arrested and
after that, <the> killings started.
Q. While being a deputy chief of the district office, did you
ever see any military communication; communication from Division
920 to the general staff and back?
A. Yes, there was a one or two instances of such communication,
but nothing happened after that.
Q. And what was it that you saw or that you remember seeing?
Those one or two instances, in terms of military communication,
what was it?
A. <> Ta Sin (sic) and Ta Soy had a brigade in the Kaev Seima
district, there were Hun (phonetic), Ta Sau and Ta Peou who were
in that <brigade>, and they cooperated with Ta Ham, <> Ta Laing
<>. And they actually received their work assignments from the
sector.
Later on, I <frequently> saw Ta Peou, who was the deputy
commander. He came to communicate with the office about the
logistics for the troops in that brigade. And I did not
participate in any meeting that they held with the district
office -- with the district committee due to my lower rank.
Q. Yesterday, I read to you some excerpts from telegrams
containing military communications about Vietnamese incursions in
DK territory. Do you remember ever seeing such telegrams at the
time in your capacity as deputy of the district office?
A. I never heard anything about telegrams.
Q. Have you ever heard of something called Group 7 or The Sevens
or Seven Group? Any referral to the word "seven" in relation to
enemy activity?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Yesterday, you gave testimony to the Chamber about the alleged
fate of former Lon Nol military. Before I ask you some more
details about that, if you were not involved at all in arrests,
interrogations, reading confessions or statements, not having
seen any executions or even ordered, how are you in a position to
say what the fate was in relation to certain ranks within the
former Lon Nol army? What was your knowledge at the time that
makes you say that you knew what policy there was?
A. I was involved in that task since the previous <regime>. In
addition, those soldiers used to come by my house. There were
those low level soldiers and there were ranking officials,
including a colonel, and they were killed in 1973, by the Pol Pot
group. And I knew some of them very well.
There was a meeting in Kaoh Nheaek, <in Srae Sangkom, Ou Buon
Leu,> and actually they fired a doucet (phonetic) gun from the
vehicle to threaten the people, and about 30 <people> were
arrested and killed. And this event was known to everyone,
including the children.
Q. I understand what you're saying, but there was a war going on
up until '75, so combatants on both sides were killing each
other.
My question is after 17 April '75, you seem to have no knowledge
whatsoever about arrests, interrogations, executions, et cetera.
Is your answer only limited to pre '75, or are you also able to
say something about what happened after 1975 with ranking former
Lon Nol military?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on.
And Deputy Co Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. LYSAK:
Yes, just an observation. I think Counsel is again
mischaracterizing the evidence. This witness has indicated that
this province was liberated in 1970, so the war there was over.
This witness isn't talking about -- wasn't talking about soldiers
or officials who were killed in combat, so Counsel shouldn't be
suggesting that to the witness.
MR. KOPPE:
I'm not sure what the Prosecution means. There was still fierce
fighting going on. As a matter of fact, this witness talks about
massive US bombing in Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri. It might be
liberated but it doesn't mean that there weren't -- there wasn't
any fighting going on.
JUDGE FENZ:
Why instead of testifying, not simply ask your last question? Did
what you said also pertain to 1977?
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Fine. Mr. Witness, what you were saying about the fate of
ranking military, did that apply only to pre '75 or also to post
'75? And if it applies to post '75, please tell me how you know
that?
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. It happened before 1975.
Q. Yesterday, around 10 -- 4 minutes past 10, you were talking
about the alleged fate of Lon Nol military, and at one point in
time, in the same answer, you switched into talking about purges
and cadres.
Let me read to you exactly what you said so that we are clear on
this. At 10.04, you say:
"And the arrests and killing took place only for cadres in '75,
including those military commanders at various positions. In this
way, the purge was conducted through the lines or chains of
command."
Now, that's the last part of your answer in relation to what the
alleged fate was of former Lon Nol ranking military.
You do, it seems, the same thing in your DC Cam statement,
E3/5636; English ERN, 00711207; Khmer, 00042471; and French,
00727128.
In this answer, you talk about Ta Sin (sic), Ta Ya, Ta Soy, Hu
Nim, Ta Peou, Ta Sau, and then you say:
"Compared to the presence -- to the present, the soldiers whose
rank started from major lieutenant or lieutenant were all
murdered. Ta Sin (sic) and Ta Soy were taken and killed in Phnom
Penh for sure. Ta Sin (sic) was the commander of Division 920."
It's a bit complicated question, but are you sometimes referring
to similar ranks of members of the Revolutionary Army trying to
explain that also senior cadres from the Divisions 920 and 810
were arrested?
A. Regarding Division 920, Ta Sin (sic) was the top commander of
that division and Soy was his deputy. They were the two that I
knew and I saw them for one time only when they came to meet with
Ta Ham, the sector committee.
At that time, I was cooking food for their meeting at Ou Buon Leu
Dam construction worksite. They had a few messengers and some
people to help them cook the food, and I was involved in the
cooking of the food. And I saw Ta Sin (sic) and Ta Soy, who came
from Phnom Penh to meet with Ta Ham regarding work cooperation.
And that was the only occasion that I saw them.
And later on, in early '77 or later '76, I heard that they were
arrested during a wave of a purge, including Khun, Sau, Peou and
several others.
So those people in Division 920, to my knowledge, many of <the>
senior people in that division died, though I cannot tell you the
exact figure. At Ou Buon Leu Dam worksite, every day 10 or 20 of
those soldiers from the division were taken away, and that is the
fact. However, I cannot tell you exactly how the killing amongst
themselves took place or how many were killed.
Q. I understand, but it seems that in this DC Cam statement you
are trying to make a comparison in terms of ranks, what the ranks
were of Ta Sin (sic) and Ta Soy, and then you compared them to
major lieutenant or lieutenant.
Now, yesterday, I believe, you were talking about purges of
cadres. Is that what you were trying to do, make a comparison of
the 920 and 810 division members in terms of ranks?
A. I know that in Mondolkiri at that time, there were no more
former Lon Nol soldiers. There were people, villagers, but they
did not have any issue. And during that period, the killing did
happen in relation to Khmer Rouge cadres. Khmer Rouge killed
Khmer Rouge themselves. <The issue of Lon Nol soldiers already
ended because it happened since '70 until '75. So, it was quite
far. It had been five, six years already. Therefore, most of them
were purged.>
If you want to ask me about the former Lon Nol soldiers, whether
or not they were killed, I don't think that they were killed
because there were no more former Lon Nol soldiers at that time,
but during the period, Khmer Rouge soldiers killed themselves --
killed each other, rather.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. My very last subject, that is
something also in relation to events pre 1975. It was about the
bombing of Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri by the United States.
Let me read to you an excerpt from your DC Cam statement and then
I will ask you for some clarification. E3/5636; English ERN,
00711231; Khmer, 00042489 to 90; and French, 00727146.
"Q. Were soldiers the targets for bombardments or?" and then the
question is not finished. And you say the following:
"They were the targets for bombardments; however, villagers also
suffered. Sometimes bombardment was spotted on the village. In
Kati village, B 52s were dropped on the middle of the village and
several families were killed. All holes were dug by B 52s, and
the size was double that of a house. In short, millions of bombs
were bombarded along the border. Each B 52 consisted of 200
bombs. Each time, two or three or four bombs of B 52s were
dropped." End of quote.
Do you remember saying to the investigator of DC Cam?
A. In relation to the US bombing, I can recall that the US
bombings started from 1969 up to 1973. In that period, there were
B 52 bombings, <gasoline,> rocket shellings, Napalm, that is to
say, and <cluster> bomb<s>.
And I would like to tell the Court that locations which were
bombed were at Kaoh Nheaek and Peam Chi Miet, <Koh Ma Yoeul,
along Srae Pok river,> Ou Leav, Ou Tang (phonetic), Ou Phlay, and
it -- the bombing was dropped up to Pech Chenda <along the
border, which included Ou Phlay, Ou Pul,> Ou Tam (phonetic),
Phnum Dam Lea (phonetic), and then the Kaev Seima and Dak Dam
were also bombed.
The purges in 1970 did not happen <> close to the location near
the border. It happened in Mondolkiri, <Ratanakiri> Stung Treng
and Kratie. So US bombing occurred <all over the place>. <In
1970,> Tieng (phonetic) village was completely destroyed by the
aerial bombing.
The US bombing did not target the Vietcong soldiers <or the Khmer
Rouge soldiers>, but it -- the bombing dropped on the villagers'
houses. That village, as I said, was completely destroyed. <There
were only several families left> and no one go back -- no one
went back to reside in that village which was destroyed, and as
of now, no one is living in that village. <That's what I remember
about the bombings.>
And in relation to <the bombings during> the war between Vietnam
soldiers and former Lon Nol soldiers happened on Daoh Kramom
Mountain, but not many <civilians> killed at that time. <Only
some> Vietcong soldiers and Khmer soldiers were killed during the
war.
<In general, for the> US bombing, when the bomb<, for instance,
B-52,> was dropped, it would cause trouble to everyone without
any discrimination.
Q. My last question is, a little further down in that DC Cam
interview the question is asked:
"Did the bombardments kill civilians or soldiers?"
And then you answer and I quote: "Only civilians were killed.
None of the soldiers were killed." End of quote.
Is that what you said to DC Cam that only civilians were killed
by the US bombing?
A. Khmer Rouge soldiers were not wounded by the US bombing, but
Vietnamese soldiers, most of them were killed by the aerial
bombing. Rarely <the> soldiers, <including the Khmer Rouge
soldiers, my group or other groups,> were <> killed or wounded by
that aerial bombing. <But for the civilians, many were affected.
This is frankly speaking.>
Q. Then my very last question.
In your WRIs, you gave statistics as to how many people lived in
Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri. You were asked a question about that
yesterday as well. Are you in a position to tell how many
civilians in Ratanakiri and Mondolkiri were killed by the bombs
thrown out by the US military?
A. That was the report of the Khmer Rouge. In Ratanakiri, 3,000
were killed and in Mondolkiri, only 600 were killed. That was the
announcement and report at the time.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. Witness. Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And now the floor is given to the defence team for Mr.
Khieu Samphan, to put questions to this witness.
You have the floor now.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning everyone. Good morning,
Witness.
My name is Anta Guissé. I am International Co Counsel for Mr.
Khieu Samphan, and it is in this capacity that I will put a few
follow up questions to you.
Q. My first series of questions has to do with your role as a
messenger, that is, the role you played before 1975. I have
understood that you were a messenger at a point in time.
My question is as follows. Did you start working as a messenger
before 1975?
BY MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. Frankly speaking, I was his messenger in 1973, actually, from
1973 up to 1975. I was not a messenger <in '71>, and later on,
<after> 1975, I was appointed to be the deputy chief <and I did
not follow him around anymore>. <I worked in the office instead.>
Q. I heard in <the French answer,> "I was his messenger from 1973
to 1975". Who were you referring to when you said "his"?
A. I was Kasy's messenger.
Q. You were born in Mondolkiri. Is it correct to say that you had
always lived in Mondolkiri?
A. That is true.
Q. As part of <choosing> a messenger, <> was knowing the <area
and the> forest something that was important when the Khmer Rouge
were operating <in the bush>?
A. On this particular issue, he was satisfied with my performance
and he requested the upper echelon to have me as his messenger.
It was not an easy job.
My father had trouble with the Khmer Rouge and as a result he was
killed. <They did not trust me.> So it was not easy to have me as
a messenger. He was my uncle and it was a difficult task that he
went to the upper echelon to ask me to be his messenger. <I knew
the maquis well> and I was familiar with all the geographical
locations in Mondolkiri, so that was the -- his desire to have me
as his messenger.
Q. Witness, may I request you to make an effort to carefully
listen to the questions I put to you. I'm trying to be as clear
and as concise as possible.
Did I properly understand from your answer that knowing the
<area> was one of the criteria's for the choice of messenger?
A. That is not correct. He selected me to be a messenger because
I was related to him.
Q. Did you know the Mondolkiri region very well? To refresh your
memory, in your interview with DC Cam, document E3/5636, and the
ERN in French is, 00727140; ERN in English, 00711225; and ERN in
Khmer, <00042483>.
And you explained that you travelled a lot, and this is what you
stated:
"At the time, I was someone who was strong and courageous. I was
very strong when it came to do <> trips in the forest. I knew the
road to Vietnam very well. That is what people were saying
because I went back and forth. So I knew all the places by
heart." End of quote.
My question, to be more specific, is as follows. Is it correct to
say that you knew the region very well and that you could find
your way very well in the forest, and is it correct to say that
you knew all the places by heart?
A. That is true. I know very well all locations in that province.
Q. Did you also know Kaoh Nheaek in that province very well?
A. Kaoh Nheaek district was my birth district.
Q. Very well. Yesterday, the Co Prosecutor put a question to you
regarding a <stream>. My -- the document is, E3/6760, <the first
point,> the ERN is <01213545 in French>; and the ERN in English
is, 01194793; and the ERN in Khmer is, <00586074>.
And this is the document that the Co Prosecutor showed you
yesterday when you said that you did not know of a <> stream
known as O Lpov.
For the interpreters, who don't have the document before them, in
French it is written as follows: <O L P O V>, O Lpov.
So you, who knew Kaoh Nheaek district very well, stated that you
did not know that stream. Do you know whether that stream is
located somewhere else in another district <or> in another
province?
A. I have a doubt. There is no O Lpov stream in Mondolkiri, not
to mention in Kaoh Nheaek district. There is no such name or
stream in Mondolkiri.
Q. Still with regard to Mondolkiri, we know that there were many
different ethnic minorities in that province, so my first
question to you is as follows. Do you speak any other language
apart from Khmer?
A. I know Phnong, Lao and Jarai languages, and I know how to
speak other languages but not very well.
Q. And during the Democratic Kampuchea period, did you speak
those different languages?
A. During Khmer Rouge time, I could speak any other languages as
I wanted. No such ban on languages -- language use.
Q. Among the Khmer Rouge cadres during the Democratic Kampuchea
regime, do you remember whether there were cadres from the
different ethnic minorities, and if you do know any, can you give
us their names and <specify> their ethnic origins, if you do
recall that?
A. In the entire province, there were different ethnicities, <and
most of the cadres were ethnic minorities. There were only one or
two Khmer. In Mondolkiri,> there were Laotian, Tumpoun, Phnong,
and Jarai -- and some Jarai.
Q. And my question is whether you do recall if there were cadres
from the different ethnic groups, and if yes, who were they?
A. Ham<'s alias was> Laing. The father was Lao and mother was
Jarai. <Kham Phoun was a mix race of Lao and> Tumpoun, and Kasy
was ethnically Phnong, <not Lao>; <> Svay was ethnically Jarai;
Leng was ethnically Jarai as well; and Lang was a mixed race of
Jarai and Phnong. So I cannot describe all the detail in relation
to their family background.
Q. How about Bou Li, do you know <her> ethnic origins<>?
A. She was in Peam Chi Miet village, <Peam Chi Miet> commune,
<Kaoh Nheaek> district, Mondolkiri province. <She> was <an
ethnic> Lao.
Q. Another point I would like us to talk about is the following:
At a point in time you referred to Ta Sarun. Can you tell us
about him? What was his position, his specific position, and what
authority did he exercise?
A. At first, Ta Sarun was the Secretary of Pech Chenda district,
and perhaps from <1970> up to <'73, '74,> '75, he was promoted to
be member of Mondolkiri committee. And after the deceased, or the
killing each of other of Laing <and> Kham Phoun, he came to
replace Laing.
At that time, there were killings, many killings, and perhaps it
was after one or two months that he was promoted to replace
Laing. And he was in that position less than a year, then the
liberation of 7th January happened.
Q. I would like you to clarify something, perhaps in French and
English. You said that he was district secretary for a start. Can
you give us the name of that district?
A. He was Secretary of Pech Chenda district.
Q. At what time did he come to replace Laing? Can you recall the
date?
A. It was in late 1977, probably, or early 1978.
Q. Is it correct to say that on that date you were working on the
Roya worksite?
A. Yes, I was at Roya.
Q. Did you have any direct interactions with Ta Sarun?
A. To my observation, when I fell ill I requested to be
hospitalized. Ta Ka Loy (phonetic), <the office chief,> went to
pick me up. He had a letter with him at the time. I was asked to
fill in my name and other information, and the seal or the stamp
was -- the stamp was sealed and <his> name was put on that
letter. <So I thought maybe he was promoted, but I did not know
how high he was promoted.>
So at the worksite, I had to focus on my work at the field, I
could not walk to any other places freely, because there was a
request from <Roya> office chief to send me to a hospital, that's
why I was allowed to go back to the hospital. But the content of
the letter was to set me free, so I thought that I was allowed to
be freed.
But at the time, the letter was handed over to me and I was asked
to fill in my name. That letter was <typewritten and there were
some columns left to be filled>. So I realized at the time that
<Ta Sarun> had <become> a secretary of a district already, and
that <seal> was <his. The name on the letter was his.> The
purpose of that letter was to ask permission so that I could be
sent to the hospital.
Q. In your statement, E3/8749, at French ERN, 00727661; English,
00715750; and at Khmer ERN, 00711942, this is what you say
regarding Ta Sarun:
"After Ta Sarun <succeeded> Ta Laing, there were many more
arrests than under Ta Laing's authority because they <took>
revenge <on> each other by arresting the cadres who were close to
the former sector secretary. So as a secretary of the sector, Ta
Sarun could decide on whom to arrest." End of quote.
So my question is what are your sources for you to state that Ta
Sarun could decide on the arrests and what do you mean by "they
<took> revenge <on> each other"?
A. I would like to clarify this point for the Court. After Ta
Kham Phoun had killed Ta Laing, at the time, Ta Chhun (phonetic)
was the younger in law -- brother in law of Laing and he went
around to inform everyone in worksites and cooperatives <in the
area>. And later, it was said that he replaced his elder brother
in law. A few days later, he was arrested.
During the fighting between Kham Phoun and Ham, the network of Ta
Ham <included Ta Lok (phonetic), Ta> Ansi <>. <They were all at
district level.> And at the time, <they were rushing to fill the
seats of those who disappeared, and> I did not know whether <they
were> assigned by the upper echelon to replace or to get other
tasks to perform.
After that fighting, the situation was chaotic. Kham Phoun
network was arrested. There were many cadres from the network of
Kham Phoun, <including> Ta Chhun (phonetic), <Ta Chan Than, Ta
Tha> (phonetic), Ta Van Kham (phonetic), Ta Arar (phonetic), Bou
Li, Bou Lai, these individuals were in the network of Kham Phoun.
So many of them had been arrested, hundreds of them, I could say.
But some of them survived the arrests. Perhaps 80 <> individuals
in Kham Phoun's network disappeared. <There were only a few of
them who survived. For instance,> Ta Sarat (phonetic), Ta Kong
(phonetic), Kang (phonetic) were also arrested, but later on they
were freed.
In the previous interview, <Tauy's (phonetic) father> was
mentioned by me in that document and he was also killed. All of
them were cadres; namely, they were chiefs of offices or they
were part of a battalion, regiment. And as for Ra, he was the
deputy secretary of a district. Ra <was arrested and then>, Bou
Lai, who was the chief of the hospital in the sector, <was>
arrested. Bou Li was also in charge of the sector hospital. Later
on, she was assigned to be in charge of Kaoh Nheaek district
hospital. <She was Ta Svay's wife.>
So allow me to tell the Court that the revenge between the two
groups of individuals <was not strange. Everyone might know about
it because> Kham Phoun <> smashed Ta Ham because his child was
killed by Ta Ham. <> His <child's> name was Kham. Kasy was first
arrested. Nhun was the chief of the Office of Kham Phoun. Nhun
was <> introduced into the party by Kasy, <not Kham Phoun>.
So <when Kasy was arrested, so was he>. And as I said, usually
<in> the network, <if the leader was> arrested, <he> could not
<stay, so he fled>. And at the time, <if I was at the office,
they could have taken me too, not just Nhun, because Nhun told
Bun Noeun to take me from Roya. But Bun Noeun did not do that. He
said, "No need to go that far. We can go just, us." Nhun said
that, "Take Chauy because he knows the forest, he knows the
ways." But Bun Noeun said that, "No need." -->
Q. Witness, please, please. I apologize, but I must interrupt
you, but your answers are very lengthy, and it's a bit hard to
follow. So please, once again, <pay very close attention to my
questions and> answer <them> as briefly <> as possible. You
provided us with a very <large> volume of <important>
information, so I'm going to try to <break it down>.
You spoke about the arrest of 80 people, and when these 80 people
were arrested, where were you and what function did you have?
Were you already at <> Roya or were you still in your -- in your
previous position?
A. I was still at Roya. They actually came to arrest us at Roya
because of the Kham Phoun's network, Chan Than's families and
relatives were also arrested, including the children. <There were
about 30 of them transferred by truck. His children were thrown
into the truck and so their legs and arms were broken.>
So for <all the> people at <> Ou Buon Krom, they were also
arrested.
Q. Please, please, I'm sorry. Once again, I don't have much time,
so please answer my question specifically. My original question
was: were you still at Roya? You answered, so I don't need more
information. Then I will put extra questions to you, but I would
like us to move step-by step so that everything is clear for <the
Chamber and> all the parties.
So you were at the Roya worksite when these arrests took place.
Did you know who decided these arrests, and if that is the case,
who was this person? So first, do you know who, and who was this
person? Give me a name and then I will put extra questions to you
after that.
A. The arrest happened after Ham and Kham Phoun, since senior
people had been arrested, <the ones left with the authority were>
Sarun and Sophea, who <was part of the army>; however, <Leng and>
Sophea at the time had not yet been arrested. So, I did not know
who actually <ordered the arrests, I did not know> whether <it
was> Ta Sarun or <Ta Lok (phonetic)>. From what I heard, there
<were> meetings among the committee, because such a decision
could not be made by an individual. It means it takes a combined
decision of all members of the committee. And <> you can pinpoint
to the most senior<> persons within the committee.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, you are reminded once again to respond precisely to
the point raised in the question, as advised by counsel, and
please don't provide any hypothetical response. You should only
say what you knew, and if you don't know, please state so, that
is also a kind of response, rather than to make a predictive or
lengthy response.
And Counsel, you may continue.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. Before the break, Mr. President, I would like -- I have a last
question of clarification regarding this point.
You spoke about Ta Sarun and about Sophea, but you also confirmed
that, back then, you were at Roya. So may we say that you do not
know exactly who took that decision? It is that -- and you,
therefore, made your conclusions based on rumors <or hearsay>?
BY MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. Yes, that is correct.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, if you wish to take the break now, we may do so.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, counsel.
It is now convenient for our short break. We'll take a break now
and resume at 10.30.
Court officer, please assist the witness during the break time
and invite him as well as his duty counsel back into the
courtroom at 10.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1011H to 1032H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
And the floor is given to the defence team for Mr. Khieu Samphan,
to resume the questioning.
You may have the floor now.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Witness, I would like us to now talk about the different
offices you referred to in your testimony, and I would like you
to clarify something regarding <K-16>.
You stated that before going to <> the Roya worksite, you were
detained for some time at <> K 16. Can you tell us what K 16 was?
Was it an office that had <> functions other than those of a
security centre, <which had been turned into one,> or it had
always been a security centre?
BY MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. K 16 was not a security centre. It was an economics office or
office for agricultural products. That office was belonged to the
deputy head of the province. He was in charge of economics for Ta
Kham Phoun.
Q. In your statement, E3/5636, the ERN in French is 00727141; ERN
in English, 00711226; ERN in Khmer, 00042485; you talk of Ta
<Mann's> office. Was Ta <Mann> the person in charge of
agricultural produce?
A. I could not hear the name clearly. Ta Mann or Ta <Maing>?
Q. I'm sorry about my accent. In French it is written as follows,
M A N N, that is, Ta Mann, <at the ERN's I mentioned earlier.
And> the ERN is <0042485> (sic)<, to get the spelling> in Khmer.
A. There is no Ta Mann but Ta <Maing>.
Q. And who is Ta <Mann>, therefore?
A. He was a soldier. He was a soldier and he was part of the
battalion. He was the deputy of the battalion.
Q. In the statement I quoted, that is, E3/5636, same ERNs, this
is what you stated:
"They started to carry out arrests at K 16 and they locked <them>
up in the security centre of the region, which was close to K 16,
which was Ta <Mann's> office for one night. The next day, in the
morning, they took <them> away and I do not know where they took
<them> too, precisely." End of quote.
MR. LYSAK:
Yes, there may be a translation issue. In the English translation
it reads differently. It states:
"The first arrests were at K 16 and placed at the sectoral
security next to <Ta Mann's> office of K 11 for one night."
So in the English, the arrests were people from K 16, but Ta
<Mann's> office was at K 11. So I thought -- I don't know what
the Khmer original says.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. It is perhaps better to have the witness clarify this point.
Witness, can you tell us where Ta <Mann's> office was located?
Was that in K 16 or in K 11?
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. <Ta Maing was stationed> close to the prison, <because K-11,
Ta Maing and Sophea were there together>. The <offices were>
about 100 or 200 metres apart. So again, <Ta Maing> not Ta Mann,
was located close to the prison. In fact, his name was Maing.
Q. In that case, perhaps you should start by clarifying the
prison you're referring to. Can you give us the name of that
prison?
A. That prison was known as Phnom Kraol Prison. There was no
other official name.
Q. Under these circumstances, can you, therefore, tell us if I
understood correctly when you said that Ta <Mann's> office was
next to the prison?<>
A. It was adjacent to that prison.
Q. And did that office have a specific name?
A. I do not know it well because it was belonged to the soldiers.
Q. So if I understand you correctly, the Phnom Kraol Prison was
managed by soldiers; is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. I understood from your previous answer that Ta <Mann> is the
other name of Maing, that is, Sarun's brother. Did I properly
understand your testimony or I am wrong?
A. That is not correct. Ta Maing (phonetic) was the younger
brother of Sarun. Ta Leng was another individual. He was -- Ta
Leng was not related to that individual -- the former, I mean.
Q. To be absolutely sure that it is not merely a translation
problem, we have this on record and you mentioned it. It's
document E3/5178, and the ERN in French is 004034486 (sic), and
it continues on the next page; and the English ERN is, 00274100;
and the ERN in Khmer, in principle, is 00197862.
And you referred to several persons and at a point in time you
state as follows, and I quote:
"The Mondolkiri Region or Region 105, was divided into political
sections headed by Mey, <M-E-Y> <region> deputy <chief>, and
security and military sections are governed by Sophea from 1970
through late 1978. The Military security office, known as K 11,
was the <place> where Sophea worked. <Chief> of Battalion, Maing,
a brother of Sarun, who was in charge of the prison<>." End of
quote.
You agree that we're talking of the same Maing, who was Sarun's
brother and who was in charge of the prison? Was that the person
whose office was adjacent to Phnom Kraol Prison?
A. That is correct.
Q. Since you said that he was in charge of the prison, do you
know who were the other persons working at that prison, and can
you also specify how you knew that they were working at the
prison?
A. I am not quite sure about this issue. To my knowledge, he was
part of the army and Phai was in charge of the prison. And as I
said, his office was next to the prison, and I do not know
whether he held any position within the prison.
Q. Following that initial quote, this is what you stated. Same
document, E3/5178, and the same <ERN's. You> say that:
"Phai" -- P H A I -- "was <subordinate to> Maing<>. He was the
chief of Phnom Kraol Prison." End of quote.
So you referred to Maing, Sarun's brother, was in charge of the
prison, and you also talked of Phai, and you said that he was
Maing's subordinate.
Here again, can you tell us what is the source of your
information, and what <exactly> were Phai's duties?
A. To my knowledge, Phai was a prison chief, and Ta Maing was the
direct perpetrator to arrest all other prisoners and then sent to
Ta Phai's prison to be in charge of.
Q. And my question is the same: Can you tell us how you got <>
that information?
A. It is from my observation. No one came to tell me about this.
I used to see that Maing had the function to go and cleanse any
people; and he had <his> subordinates, who were soldiers, <coming
to arrest people, but for the man, himself, he was present only
on some occasions of the arrests>. He was in charge of <many>
soldiers.
Q. If I properly understood your testimony, you said that you
were detained for some time at K 16, and you subsequently went to
Roya.
My question to you is as follows: When did you see Maing was in
charge of the arrests, and at what time did you see Phai <as> the
person in charge of Phnom Kraol Prison?
A. I did not witness with my own eyes about this issue. Those who
could get out of the prison told me about that issue, so I learnt
the information from those former inmates.
Q. That is important, Mr. Witness, when I <ask> you to give us
the source of your information, <> I <need> to know whether you
saw this with your own eyes or if someone else talked to you
about this. Now I understand that you personally didn't know how
Phnom Kraol was organized, and you stated that it was prisoners
who talked to you about it.
Did I properly understand your testimony?
A. That is correct.
Q. Since there are things which you got to know by hearsay, I
would like you to tell us what you know personally about the
Phnom Kraol Detention Centre. Do you know when it was
established?
A. I am not quite sure. I was at Kaev Seima. I do not know when
it was established, and I said that I saw the trees in the forest
were cleared and <later on, I saw people building houses, but I
did not know it was a prison.> When I was transferred to K 16, I
used to walk past that location, and sometimes I was on the
vehicle passing by that location and the prison was there. <There
were prisoners in there already.> I did not know when the prison
was established, <I did not know whether it was built in '74 or
'75,> but <it was a long time ago>.
Q. Without knowing the exact date <> the <> prison <was
constructed>, were you -- was that prison already in existence
when you were deputy chief of office -- deputy head of the
office, or it was set up thereafter?
A. When I was a deputy chief of the office at Kaev Seima, I had
no idea about that prison. Later on, when large groups of people
were arrested, <when I was at K-16,> I learned about the prison.
Perhaps it was in February or March that I learned about the
existence of the prison.
Q. When you say February or March, are you talking of the year
1977?
A. That is correct.
Q. I understand from your testimony that you, yourself, never
visited the Phnom Kraol Detention Centre but you saw it from a
distance from the road.
Can you give us a brief description of that centre and what you
were able to see from the road?
A. I saw the roof of the building but not clearly, since it was
-- that prison was located to the dam. <The front area was
cleared.> I saw the bamboo fence surrounding that prison, so this
is what I saw at the time.
Q. You state that the prison was situated close to the dam. Which
dam are you referring to?
A. The dam was known as Sot. That was the dam in Phnom Kraol
location, and the dam is still standing.
Q. I would like us to agree on what you consider as a dam. Is it
a big dam on which people worked to build a dyke and a <large>
wall, or is it a small dam<>?
A. It was not too small and the vehicles could run on the road.
There were gates, water gates in that dam.
Q. And do you know when that dam was built?
A. It was built between 1975 and 1977 -- it was built in 1974 and
1975 and it was ready in 1976.
Q. I know it's complicated to talk about the size. Can you tell
us where the water around that dam came from?
A. The water flew <down> from the mountain. There was a small
stream from the mountain, and when the gate was closed the water
was around the mountain <called Phnom Kraol>. And the villagers
in the location used the water to drink.
Q. You have stated that the dam was called the Sot Dam or Phnom
Kraol Dam. Is Sot the name of the waterway that brought water to
the dam, or <did the waterway have another name>?
A. In fact, Sot the one who led the workers at the time.
Q. And do you know the name that was given to the <waterway>
flowing down from the mountain and that passed next to that dam?
A. That was a small stream. No name was given to that small
stream, and perhaps, villagers living close to that stream gave a
specific name to that small stream, but for me, I do not know the
name specifically.
Q. But you'd agree with me that you're a native of Kaoh Nheaek;
is that correct?
A. Yes, I was a native of Kaoh Nheaek district.
Q. And you knew the village in which the Phnom Kraol Security
Centre was located. Now, between 1975 and 1979, as you passed by
on the road, did you hear the villagers give any particular name
to that <waterway>?
A. Villagers called that stream Ou Phnom Kraol, and the stream
was so small at that location and the water was <blocked at the
waist of the mountain>.
Q. You talked of the roof of Phnom Kraol. From the road, could
you see any other characteristics of the building? Can you
specify what Phnom Kraol looked like, what kind of structure it
had, and in what material was it built?
A. Now, today, villagers are living in that location and most of
houses are built from wood.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The question asked you -- referred to the period back in the
regime. Counsel wanted to know about the characteristic of the
building in 1977 or 1978, not about the present time.
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. Back then, there were no concrete houses or big houses. Houses
-- the <rooves> of houses were built from thatch and there were 4
by 5-metre small houses or huts in the area surrounding K 11 or
16, but as for Ta Ham's house, the house was built from a wood
plank and on the ground floor, the concrete was laid.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. I believe you said Ta <Hong's> (sic) house. Is that how you
would call the Phnom Kraol Security Centre?
A. Ta Ham's house was not far, and within the vicinity, that is,
around 300 x 400 metres, there was a prison, there was K 11,
there was K 17, and they were close by one another. And <they
made> that <location> the provincial town and there was a plan to
move the K 16 to that area as well, <but it was not yet done.
They put it in Ou Chbar Chas area>. <That location was just
built.>
And as I said, there were smaller houses which were built for
provisional stay.
Q. You spoke about the small houses around K 11 and K 16. So I
understand from your answer that K 11 and K 16 were <> close to
the building of Phnom Kraol, which you described. <You> said they
were about 300 metres away, so were they within the same
perimeter as K 11 and K 16?
And I'm putting this question to you because yesterday I
understood from your testimony that the Phnom Kraol Security
Centre was surrounded by a fence.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on.
And Deputy Co Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. LYSAK:
Yeah, sorry to interrupt. I think there might have been a
translation issue because in English what the witness said was
that it was K 11 and K 17, not K 16, K 17 that were close to the
prison.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Well, maybe I'll be a bit more specific with my question.
Q. So must I understand from your answer that not far from the
Phnom Kraol building you described, K 11 and K 16 were situated
or was it K 11 and K 17?
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. Security centre was close to K 11 and about 500 metres
further, there was K 17. To the north -- to the <southwest,>
there were quarters for workers. They worked in a workshop or in
a sawmill. So, around Phnom Kraol areas, these buildings were
located, and the prison itself was located in the centre near the
stream.
As for <K 11>, it was far away. It was at Ou Chbar, which was
about 2.5 kilometres away and that you had to cross the stream in
order to access that area.
Q. So this brings me back to my previous question. Yesterday, you
spoke about a fence surrounding Phnom Kraol, the building of
Phnom Kraol, so my question is: were K 11 and K 17, therefore,
outside of the perimeter or within the perimeter of Phnom Kraol?
A. They were outside.
Q. So I believe I understood that you said that Ta Sophea was the
head of K 11. So did I understand your testimony properly?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And here again, what is the source of your information
regarding that point?
A. There was no need for a source of information as Sophea was
also related to me, <and generally, I could know> what <my
neighbors> did <>. And he was very close to my mother.
Q. Now, in terms of K 17, do you know who was in charge of K 17?
A. K 17, which was the Sector 105 Office, it was Ham and the
chief of the office was Tin (phonetic) and his deputy was Ka Loy
(phonetic).
Q. And you're speaking about which period regarding K 17? Do you
know if things changed later on?
A. Initially, K 17 was close to K 16 at Ou Buon Krom and after
1975, it was relocated to Phnom Kraol. However, K 16 had not yet
been relocated and K 17 was relocated to Phnom Kraol, together
with K 11 and the security centre. These buildings were erected
after one another after 1975.
Q. But my question was different. My question was do you know if
at K 17 there were different people in charge between '75 and '79
or were the people in charge always the same between the moment
when K 17 was created and the end of the <> regime?
A. K
or Ta Ham's office was established and Ta Tin (phonetic) 
          17   was the head of that office and Tin (phonetic) was my elder
brother in law. He passed away last year. As for Ka Loy
(phonetic), he was accused of a moral offense in 1970 and later
on, after Svay and Ta Sy (phonetic) were killed, he was arrested
but later on, he was released.
And Ka Loy (phonetic) actually replaced that position in 1978,
and not long after, he was taken away and killed as well. And
later on, I didn't know about what happened to that office, since
<I> was hospitalized.
Q. So I said -- I heard that you said that Ta <Tin> (phonetic)
was your elder brother in law. So what position did he have at K
17? What exact position did he have?
A. I knew he was a chief of the office or head of the office.
INTERPRETER FRENCH-ENGLISH:
Interpreter corrects it was Ta Tin (phonetic).
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. <So, Ta Pin (phonetic) and not Ta Tin (phonetic), I'm being
corrected.> Now, an additional question: You said that you were
hospitalized, at one point in time, and that is how you got to
know that Ta Sarun had become district secretary, if I understood
your testimony properly; do you know what Ta Sarun's role was <>
in relation to the Phnom Kraol Security Centre?
MR. PRESIDENT:
I think there could be a mistake in the interpretation. He was
not district secretary, but he was sector secretary, so please
try to refresh or reframe your question.
BY MS. GUISSE:
No problem. That was my mistake.
Q. So you said that you learnt that Ta Sarun was sector
secretary, when you were <taken to be> hospitalized, so can you
tell us, if you know, what Ta Sarun's duties were with regard to
the Phnom Kraol Security Centre; if you don't know, simply say
so?
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. I did not know his duties.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, I am done with my questions. I will give the floor
to my colleague Kong Sam Onn.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel. And Kong Sam Onn, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, Mr. Witness.
Q. I'd like to put questions to you in relation to the fighting
between the forces of Democratic Kampuchea and the Vietnamese
troops. You have testified, rather extensively, on this point;
however, I'd like to get clarification from you.
Before 1975; that is, before the victory on
April 1975, were 
          17   there any clashes between the liberated force and the Vietnamese
force?
MR. CHAN BUN LEATH:
A. To my knowledge, there were three clashes; two times at Kaev
Seima and one time at Dak Dam.
Q. My question to you is about any possible clashes before 1975;
were there any?
A. My response was about what happened after 1975.
Q. Mr. Witness, my question to you was about any clashes before
1975, for example, between 1970 and '75, were there any clashes
between the liberation forces and the Vietnamese force?
A. Between 1970 to 1975, to my knowledge, there was no clash
between the two forces.
Q. You just stated about three clashes that took place after
1975, and you stated earlier that they happened in 1977; can you
tell the Court how you're so sure that these clashes took place
in 1977?
A. That was based on the information and the announcement that we
attacked the Vietnamese because they refused to leave our
territory after we made such an announcement and this
announcement was made throughout the sector.
Q. Can you tell us a bit more about that announcement; was the
announcement made over a radio or through a meeting or through
any other means?
A. The announcement was made through units meetings. The units
chief received the information and relayed such information to
his subordinates.
Q. And did you know the reasons that led to the clashes?
A. I did not fully grasp the situation.
Q. Can you tell the Chamber about the clashes; were the -- which
troops on the Vietnamese side they belong to?
A. Those soldiers were communist soldiers, not A Tiv (phonetic)
soldiers.
Q. Earlier you also stated that the clashes happened on the
territory of Kampuchea; how did you know that the clashes
occurred on the Kampuchean territory? Who told you about that,
for example, that those clashes took place on the territory of
the Democratic Kampuchea?
A. I learnt that information from a handicapped soldier; the
soldier stepped on a mine and, as a result, he lost a leg and he
was in the same hospital that I was in and he told me about that.
He said that we chased the Vietnamese troops on several
occasions, but they did not fully retreat from the territory;
they were still within about 1 kilometre inside the territory
and, as a result, they attacked the Vietnamese troops. And the
same situation applied for the second clash. <It happened in the
east and the division soldiers were attacking them near Ou Huch
(phonetic).>
As for the third clash, it happened at the top of the mountain.
We -- actually, they came to <station> on this side, on the other
side of the road that belonged to Cambodia. <They built their
quarter in that area, which was 50 metres square,> and, as a
result, soldiers were sent to attack them and he was amongst
those who attacked the Vietnamese troops there and he stepped on
a mine<> and lost his leg. <He then stayed at the hospital that I
was at and I learnt that from him.>
Q. Can you tell the Chamber the name of that soldier and which
military unit he was attached to, for example, which battalion or
division?
A. He was initially a soldier in Kaev Seima district together
with me. Later on, he was transfer to the sector military.
Q. You said that that soldier was wounded by stepping on a mine;
can you tell the Chamber who actually laid that mine and at which
battlefield he stepped on that mine?
A. It is likely that the mines had been laid from the previous
regime. It could be mines laid by the American side or by the
Viet Cong side or by us, so it was very difficult to conclude who
actually laid those mines.
And the Thieu Ky military troops actually stationed in that area
and later on, Viet Cong troops came to also station<> in that
area and on the -- on the Khmer side, they didn't want them to
station in that area, <because it was at the border,> but they
refused to retreat; that's why they were attacked.
And as I was asked yesterday whether we were attacked or we
attacked them and, in fact, we did attack them.
Q. In relation to FULRO, yesterday, you testified about it, as
well, and did you know the mission of FULRO?
A. FULRO was a Vietnamese ethnic group and I did not know of
their real mission. I heard that they wanted to reclaim their
Champa territory which was invaded and taken by Vietnam.
Q. And do you know who was the top leader of FULRO or a sector
chief of FULRO in Mondolkiri or Ratanakiri provinces?
A. Previously, I knew one or two. He passed away. He was chief of
a regiment in around '67 or '70 -- '68 and he was stationed at
Daoh Kramom mountain <in Mondolkiri province> and he was an
ethnic person.
Q. Did you know the activities of the FULRO, for example, during
the 1970s, or from the period of 1970 to '75 and to '79?
A. I was not that familiar with the activities of FULRO, as we
did not interact with them, nor did we have to oppose them.
Q. Can you tell the Chamber in what year did you first learned
about FULRO?
A. To my knowledge, as people spoke about it or that they came to
see us, and I learned about it in 1966, and before that, I did
not know of the existence of FULRO at all.
Q. Did you know if FULRO had any contact or communication with
Democratic Kampuchea cadres in the area that you lived; that is,
in Mondolkiri province?
A. I was not aware of any.
Q. I'd like now to ask you about your roles or positions, in
particular, when you <were> a deputy of the district's office.
You already have testified that your two main tasks were to build
a dam or -- to lead people <to dig canals, to build dams, and> to
work in the rice field and that sometimes you rotated the work
with the chief of the office.
Can you tell the Chamber how many workers or people were under
your supervision in your capacity as the deputy of the district
office?
A. To my recollection, my role was only to lead the people in my
respective unit, as people living in the base were under the
leadership of their respective communes or cooperatives chiefs,
although we actually cooperated in certain work. The chief of
those communes or cooperatives would liaise with us how to build
a particular dam, for example.
Q. My question to you is in relation to a -- a number of workers
under your supervision, that they were in you unit; how many of
those?
A. There were not many in my unit. There were over 30 workers in
my unit and they were divided into two groups; 15 to work on one
particular worksite and another group of 15 worked on another
worksite.
And there were also children of those workers, so a total number
of the adult and the children were about 50, though there were
<fewer in terms of labor>.
And <> in my <commune, Khtum commune, there> were only about 200
<people>; that is, they were part of about 30 or 40 families.
Q. You have also stated about Kasy and that Kasy had contact with
Vietcong, so my question to you is: How did you learn of that
contact?
A. Let me talk about what happened at the beginning so that you
have a fuller picture, as it was related to Ta Laing and Ta Kham
Phoun.
He contacted with Ta Tung (phonetic), the Vietnamese <sector>
committee, and, in fact, Ta Ham held a meeting there and I was
outside cooking food for them and there were two Vietnamese
messengers who were assisted me in cooking; in fact, a pig was
slaughtered to make food <like steaks and other dishes> for them.
And they said a plan that they would return on a -- a specific
day but, on that day, only Kham Phoun was sent and Kham Phoun
went to meet the Vietnamese side while we, the combatants, waited
outside. So the meeting was held inside with the Vietnamese
counterpart.
Then I was asked to get a vehicle from Kratie province to
transport the materials or equipment, so <we> came <with two
motorbikes>, then we put the motorbikes on the truck and went via
Snuol route. We were given weapons, medicines, cloth <by the
Vietnamese>; that is, to my recollection, and there were shoes
and a tent. They were meant for military uses. <Afterwards, they
did not come again.>
And later on, Kasy was assigned to continue the cooperation with
the Vietnamese side. Although he did not have any authority to
make decision<s>, he was there to receive information and pass on
to the upper level and that was the time that I became his
messenger.
Q. Can you tell the Court the date of those series of meetings?
A. To my recollection, it happened at the beginning of 1975, and
continued until the day of the liberation; that is, 17 April
1975.
Actually, on that day, I was still in Vietnam in order to -- to
gather the people to return to Cambodia; that is, those who fled
to Vietnam. So Kasy, his deputy, <Chenda,> and Loy (phonetic),
who was in charge of the district military, were there and Kham
Phoun was there initially, but he hurried back.
So we met with the people and they said that they didn't leave
anything behind when they <went> to Vietnam and they didn't wish
to return to Cambodia. So we actually went back to Cambodia
empty-handed without those people.
So allow me to say again, on the liberation day of 17 April 1975,
I was in Vietnam.
Q. Can you tell us how the arrangement was made for you to go
into Vietnam in order to persuade those people to return to
Cambodia?
A. It was the Vietnamese counterpart who said that Cambodian
people actually went inside their territory and resided there and
if we wanted to <take> them back, we could go and <take> them,
but <> we could not force them to return and if they were willing
to return, then the Vietnamese would -- the Vietnamese side would
assist with transportation.
So we actually went to Vietnam and asked those people <whether or
not they wanted to return>, but they said that they didn't leave
anything behind and it was sufficient for them to <remain> living
in Vietnam. <So, they did not come back at that time.>
So around the 13 or 14 April of 1975, we were <at Buyamab
(phonetic)> meeting with the <people>.
Q. Did you learn<> of any other communications or other
activities that Kasy made with the Vietnamese side at a later
stage?
A. Of course, I remember; he never went to meet the Vietnamese
side again after that time until the day of his arrest.
So when we returned from Vietnam, we knew that Cambodia, as a
whole, was liberated and by June of that year, the district
chiefs, throughout the country, were called for a meeting in
Phnom Penh. At that time, I did not accompany him as I was
assigned -- promoted to be a deputy of the district office and he
actually went to Phnom Penh with his messenger.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. Witness.
And Mr. President, I conclude my session now.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Bun Loeung Chauy. The hearing of your
testimony, as a witness, is now concluded and your testimony may
contribute to the ascertainment of the truth in this case.
You are no longer required to be present in courtroom and you may
return to your residence or wherever you wish to go to and we
wish you all the very best.
And the Chamber would like to thank Madam Sok Socheata, the duty
counsel, and you may so be excused.
Court officer, in collaboration with WESU, please make
transportation arrangement for Bun Loeung Chauy to return to his
residence or wherever he wishes to go.
This afternoon the Chamber will hear testimony of 2-TCW-1012, by
a video link from Oddar Meanchey province.
The Chamber will recess for lunch break and resume at 1.30 this
afternoon.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him returned to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1135H to 1332H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
This afternoon, the Chamber will start to hear a witness,
2-TCW-1012, via video link from Oddar Meanchey province.
Before we proceed to hear this witness, the Chamber wishes to
inform all parties to the proceedings that this afternoon and
perhaps tomorrow and the following days, Judge You Ottara has
personal duties -- has had his personal duties to perform, so I
-- the Chamber has decided to appoint Judge Thou Mony, <the
National Reserve Judge>, in his replacement until Judge You
Ottara is able to be on the Bench. This decision is based on
Internal Rule 79.4 of the ECCC.
Good afternoon, Mr. Nhem Samnang. Is the video and audio system
ready?
MR. NHEM SAMNANG:
The system is ready and here the witness and the duty counsel,
Moeurn Sovann, are now before the Chamber and they are ready.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Samnang.
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Witness.
THE INTERPRETER KHMER-ENGLISH:
The interpreter could not hear the answer from the witness.
BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Are you ready, Mr. Witness.
MR. SAO SARUN:
A.    Yes, I'm ready, Mr. President.
Q. Thank you. Now, I am asking about your background and
identity. You were once questioned by the Chamber, but it
happened long time ago and now, what is your name, Mr. Witness?
A. My name is Sao Sarun.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Sao Sarun. Do you have any other names besides
Sao Sarun?
A. No.
Q. When were you born, Mr. Sao Sarun?
A. No. I -- I do not recall when I was born.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I <am> maybe 90 something, <> 92 years old, <rather>.
Q. What is your birthplace, Mr. Sao Sarun?
A. I was born in Kaoh Mayeul village, Peam Chi Miet commune, Kaoh
Nheaek district, Mondolkiri province.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Sao Sarun. Please give a little bit pause
before you answer so that your answer can be interpreted fully.
Where is -- where are you living now?
A. I am living in Thnorl Keng <village>, Ph'av commune, Trapeang
Prasat district, Oddar Meanchey province.
Q. What is your current occupation; are you a retired civil
servant?
A. I am retired, Mr. President.
Q. What are your parents' names?
A. My father's name is Sao Nou and my mother's name is Plong
(phonetic) -- Prang, rather.
Q. What is your wife's name and how many children do you have?
A. I have all together 10 children.
Q. What is your wife's name?
A. My wife's name is <> Yun - Phak Yun (phonetic).
Q. Mr. Sao Sarun, based on the report of the greffier this
morning, you have no relationship by blood or by law -- by law to
any of the two Accused, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any of
the civil parties admitted in this case; is this report correct?
A. It is correct, Mr. President, I have no relationship by blood
or by law to any of them.
Q. You have already taken an oath before the deity and the
spirits already before you sitting here before the Chamber; is
that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
BY THE PRESIDENT:
I am now <informing> you of your rights and obligation as a
witness.
As a witness in the proceedings before the Chamber, Mr. Sao
Sarun, again, in relation to your rights as a witness, you may
refuse to respond to any question or to make any comments which
may incriminate you; that is your right against
self-incrimination.
Your obligations as a witness in the proceedings before the
Chamber, you must respond to any questions by the Bench or
relevant parties except when your response or comments to those
questions may incriminate you, as the Chamber has just informed
you of your rights as a witness.
You are a witness so you must tell the truth that you have known,
heard, seen, remembered, experienced, or observed directly about
an event or occurrence relevant to the questions that the Bench
or parties pose to you.
Q. Do you understand your rights and obligations, Mr. Witness.
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. I do not really understand it, Mr. President.
Q. I am informing you of your rights. You have -- you have the
right not to respond to any questions which may incriminate you;
that is your right against self-incrimination.
As for your obligations, you must answer the questions that put
to you except where your response or comments to those questions
may incriminate you. For that reason, you can -- you may say you
don't want to answer.
And the WESU has provided you with a duty counsel so that you can
consult with him in case that there are possible questions which
may incriminate you.
And, as I told you, you must tell -- you must answer the
question that put to you by the Bench or party.
In addition to that, you must tell the truth that you have known,
heard, seen, remembered, experienced, or observed directly about
any event or occurrence relevant to the questions that the Bench
or parties pose to you; do you understand that, Mr. Witness?
A. Yes, I understand it. I will tell only the truth what I have
seen. Besides that, I will not give any responses so the same
case when I answered the questions of the OCIJ.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. Sao Sarun. Have you ever provided
testimonies before the investigators of the OCIJ?
A. I gave my statement once, at my house, and on another
occasion, before the Chamber.
Q. Before your appearance in front of the Chamber, have you read
and reviewed the written records of the interviews that you have
provided previously <in order to refresh your memory>?
A. I cannot recall.<> I stand by what is in the document <that
was given to the Supreme Court Chamber (sic)>. My memory is not
well, so I may have forgotten facts.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. You are assisted by a duty counsel after you requested
the duty counsel to the WESU.
And Mr. Moeurn Sovann, may I inform you that if there are
questions which may incriminate the witness, you, as the duty
counsel, can discuss with your witness in a confidential manner.
You -- please do not discuss with your client openly during the
time that the mic is on. <It is up to the witness to decide to
respond or not. It is not the duty counsel who responds to the
question instead of the witness>. So please be clear on your
duties as counsel to assist the witness.
In accordance with the <> Rule <96> bis of the ECCC Internal
Rules, the floor is given, first, to the Co-Prosecutors before
other parties. The combined time for Co-Prosecutors and Lead
Co-Lawyers for civil parties is two sessions.
You now proceed -- you now can -- you can now proceed, Counsel.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Sao Sarun. Thank you for appearing. I
would like to inform you that we have the record of your prior
testimony from 2012. We all have the written transcripts and the
videos. I will try not to repeat the same questions, but we'll
seek clarification from you about other facts; do you understand?
(Short pause)
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. I do not really get your question.
Q. Let me just -- that was just an introduction. I'll go right
into my questions.
Sir, you told us that you were born in Mondolkiri; did you
continue to live in Mondolkiri until the fall of the DK regime
and the arrival of the Vietnamese?
A. That is correct. I remained living in Mondolkiri until the
invasion of the Vietnamese.
Q. Thank you. So perhaps, sir, you could help us a bit with some
basic facts about Mondolkiri. Is it correct, sir, that the
majority of the population are not Khmer or they are Khmer Loeu,
they speak a different language and are tribal minorities?
A. In the entire Mondolkiri, mostly they were a tribal minority
and most of them were Phnong ethnicity.
Q. Thank you. And is it correct the Phnong live on both sides of
the border; they live in Cambodia, Vietnam, perhaps Laos; can you
explain where the Phnong live?
A. They were living in the entire Mondolkiri province.
Q. Did Phnong also live in Vietnam?
A. Yes, there were Phnong in Vietnam.
Q. Sir, in 1968, did you go to the forest and join an armed
group?
A. Yes, I did join the group in the forest to participate in the
resistant to fight against the imperialist - the US imperialist.
Q. Okay, can you explain in 1968, when you were fighting against
the US imperialists, what group were you a member of; what was
the name of your group?
A. At that time in 1970, I joined the Khmer Rouge to fight
American imperialists.
Q. Okay, thank you. But is it correct that you joined in 1968,
the Khmer Rouge?
A. That is correct.
Q. And who were you fighting against in 1968? Did your opponents
include the Sihanouk government of Cambodia?
A. Upon the appeal of the late King Sihanouk, I joined the group
to fight against the American imperialists. <He appealed that,
"All ethnic> minorities <in Mondolkiri, please rise up and fight>
against <the American imperialists who are invading our
territory." We joined it>.
Q. Sir, let me read something to you from your first interview
with the Co-Investigating Judges. That's E3/367, and the Khmer
ERN is, 00251436; in French, 00486009; and in English, 00278693.
You told the Investigating Judges in your first interview that,
"In 1968, the villagers from two villages, Koh Mayeul and Peam
Chi Miet, entered into the forest for resistance. At that time my
immediate commander was Laing."
Is that correct what I just read, sir?
A. <Yes, that was> Laing. <Those villagers, who were Phnong
people, fought> against the American imperialists in the forest.
Q. Sorry, in 1968 this was before the Lon Nol coup, two years
before; correct?
(Short pause)
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. I could not hear your question well. Could you repeat it?
Q. Yes, I will.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
And Your Honour, could I request that the video-link show the
witness after I ask my question so we see what's going on while
it's being translated?
Sir, this is my question -- actually, I am going to ask you
another question.
Laing, was he -- did he become a member of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Kampuchea?
A. To my knowledge he was <a> member of the <Central> committee.
Q. Did he become the sector secretary for Sector 105 in the DK
regime?
A. That is correct.
Q. Sir, did you join the Communist Party of Kampuchea and when
did you join?
A. From 1968.
MR. PRESIDENT:
International Co-Prosecutor, do you see the witness on your
screen?
MR. KOUMJIAN:
I'm seeing him, but it seems like the picture shows him after he
is finished the answer. I am not seeing him while he is hearing
the question and while he begins his answer. So I would ask that
after I finish my question in English if the camera could shift
to the witness, please?
MR. PRESIDENT:
AV technician, please arrange the system in accordance with the
request of the International Co-Prosecutor. And this also applies
to the times when other parties are questioning the witness. So
please show the video of the witness while he is answering and
after the question of the International Co-Prosecutor.
There seems to be discussion after the questions by the
International Co-Prosecutor. Once again, I would like to remind
the witness and others who are sitting close to the witness <and
the duty counsel as well>, you cannot discuss at your location
unless there are possible questions which may incriminate the
witness. This interferes <with> the proceedings of the Chamber if
you are continuing to discuss with the witness.
You can resume your questioning, Co-Prosecutor.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Sir, when did you first meet Pol Pot?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. I cannot recall when I met Pol Pot. It happened a long time
ago.
Q. Do you recall where it was that you met him?
A. I met him in Phnom Penh.
Q. Did either Pol Pot or Nuon Chea or Khieu Samphan ever visit
Mondolkiri when you were in Mondolkiri?
A. I never saw them in the province.
Q. Okay. I want to move to a meeting that you have discussed with
OCIJ and in your testimony you told the investigators and you
testified that in 1972, you attended a meeting in Kampong Thom
and Nuon Chea was a presenter. Do you recall what Nuon Chea spoke
about?
A. The content of his speech was to mobilize forces to fight
against the US and to build the economy.
Q. Okay. I would like to ask you about the answer you gave to
OCIJ about that. And this is in Khmer -- it's again the same
statement E3/367. In Khmer the ERN is, 00251437; in French,
00486010; and in English, 00278694.
You said that at that meeting where Pol Pot and Khieu Samphan
were also present, you said, quote:
"Nuon Chea was the presenter for a political session on fighting
against the American emperor, national liberation and the
eradication of oppressive classes."
So the question I have for you, sir, is to explain the word you
used. You said Nuon Chea talked about the eradication of
oppressive classes.
Who were the oppressive classes?
A. <I don't understand about that.> The oppressive classes refer
to the late King<> and <regarding the oppressor>, I do not really
understand who they are referring to.
Q. I am sorry. I don't think I understood the interpreter. They
said oppressive classes referred to the laking (phonetic). I
didn't understand the word.
Can you repeat your answer? You said oppressive classes refer to
perhaps what?
A. They refer to those who oppress the people. That's the meaning
of oppressive classes. Oppressive classes refer to those who were
in leadership <>.
Q. And the country being Kampuchea; correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Now, sir, you have testified that you held various positions
during the Democratic Kampuchea Regime including district
secretary and then sector secretary for Sector 105. Can you tell
me, during that period of time did you follow policies of your
superiors or were you allowed to make your own policies?
A. By the time I was the chief of Pech Chenda district, that is,
when I was first appointed in 1971.
Q. Sir, we know that and you have also testified previously that
after the death of a disappearance of Chuon -- excuse me -- of
Laing, after the death of Laing, you became the sector secretary.
So my question is, in those positions; district secretary, sector
secretary, could you make up the policies or were you required to
follow the Party's policies, policies from the Centre?
A. No, I could not. The policies <were> set out by the Party
Centre and individual persons could not make or create a policy.
Q. Let me just ask you: During those times, those years, was it
possible for you to object to a policy to tell the Centre you
don't think this is right and you don't want -- you think a
different policy should exist?
A. At that time, whether a policy was good or not, <whether we
were satisfied or not,> we had to follow it. We could not refuse
to implement the policy. <If we refused, we might not survive; so
we had to follow it. >
Q. Thank you. Now, I would like to ask you about one of those
policies now and that is the policy about marriage. Do you recall
what the policy was during the DK Regime about marriages?
A. I did not know well about such a policy. However, one or two
couples were arranged to marry one <> another during that
communist regime. It would not be possible to marry those people
according to the old traditions, <they said -->.
Q. Perhaps it might refresh your recollection to hear what Nuon
Chea has said about the policy. So I would like to read to you
from a document, a book that he wrote with Thet Sambath, E3/4202,
and in Khmer this is at, 00858253; in French, 00849377; and in
English, 00757496.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Koppe, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Just an observation, in the form of a correction. It's a book
written by Gina Chon and Thet Sambath and it's not written by
Nuon Chea. He gave interviews to Thet Sambath and Lemkin, that is
correct, but it's not his book.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Well, I don't want to argue about this. I think the evidence will
show that he fully authorized this book but, okay, let's go on.
Q. Sir, in the book that Thet Sambath and Gina Chon wrote, they
say the following about the marriage policy:
"Because they wanted to double the population, the Khmer Rouge
wanted to increase the number of marriages but because the war
killed so many men, there were more women in society. The Khmer
Rouge took matters into their own hands."
And then they quote Nuon Chea, quote:
"The man" -- Nuon Chea said, "The man always wants to choose a
beautiful girl so that's why we forced them to get married and
Angkar chose the wife."
They say Nuon Chea told them that. And then the authors go on to
say:
"Young women were forced to marry men who were twice their age
and vice-versa. The opinions of the prospective groom and bride
did not matter. Marriage became government policy and an
institution that served the revolutionary cause."
Sir, in your experience is this a correct statement of the
marriage policy?
MR. KOPPE:
I object to this question, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on.
Counsel Koppe, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Actually, my observation in the form of a correction now turns
into an objection.
The text is written by Gina Chon mainly. Thet Sambath did the
interviews but she was the one who was compiling certain texts
together, heavily relying on secondary sources. I know exactly
where the quote comes from. I also know it's out of context, but
it doesn't matter.
However, presenting this whole excerpt as something reflecting a
policy, that is completely incorrect. It reflects what Gina Chon
believes the marriage policy to be. That is something completely
different.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honours, the book itself and Nuon Chea, in his own
testimony, said he authorized work with Thet Sambath on this
book. I believe he even told the Court he was wondering where the
royalties were for the book.
Thet Sambath and others have testified that they interviewed Nuon
Chea for I believe hundreds of hours, and what I have just read
had a quote. The quotation marks start with, "The man always
wants to choose a beautiful girl" and ended with Nuon Chea saying
"That's why we forced them to get married and Angkar chose the
wife."
So I understand why there is the objection because it's basically
a confession to a forced marriage policy. But this is in fact a
secondary source direct interview with Nuon Chea.
MR. KOPPE:
That's incorrect.
That is really incorrect. That book came out in 2010, I believe.
I am quoting it by heart now. He was already detained for three
years. He never authorized the final version and if he would have
been able to read it he surely would never have authorized the
parts that are clearly not his quotes.
And I know for a fact that this quote is completely out of
context.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
I don't know if Counsel was there to say that but this is what
it's written in the book. The defence has relied on this book.
They asked for the book to be admitted. We've asked for Thet
Sambath to testify and I think the Defence has also.
So, I think it's absolutely as fair as any quote the Defence or
any party has put to a witness. This is a quote from Nuon Chea by
his authorized biographer.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber overrules the objection by counsel for Nuon Chea, as
the Chamber needs to hear the response of the witness to the
question put to him by the International Co-Prosecutor.
Since the witness is of senior age, <in fact, he is now 94 years
old according to his year of birth, 1932, but he has said that he
is> 92 years old, he might have forgotten the last question put
to him. So International Co-Prosecutor, you may need to put the
last question to him again.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Certainly. Sir, the book quotes Nuon Chea as saying, "The man
always wants to choose a beautiful girl, so that's why we forced
them to get married and Angkar chose the wife."
Is that correct as to the policy of the Centre of the Khmer Rouge
from what you learned during the DK Regime?
(Short pause)
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Sir, we are waiting for your answer. I will repeat the
question one more time.
The question was when Nuon Chea said this was it correct? He said
about the marriage policy, quote: "The man always wants to choose
a beautiful girl, so that's why we forced them to get married and
Angkar chose the wife."
Is that correct, sir?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, if you cannot hear the question, you should ask the
question to be repeated. There is no need for you to consult with
your duty counsel seeing as it is not an incriminating question.
And duty counsel, you should advise your client that your client
should consult with you only on those questions that may
incriminate him. And if that is the case then he can consult with
you. But if the witness cannot hear the question then you should
say so, so that a question can be repeated again.
International Co-Prosecutor, please try to make your questions
short since this witness is very old. <As told to you earlier, he
was born in 1932.> He is over 90 years old, <94 -- 84 years old
rather,> so his memory and concentration is not that great. And
it seems that he may have a problem with his memory <> from <the
look of> his appearance.
International Co-Prosecutor, please repeat your last question.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Sir, I read you a quote from Nuon Chea, that said that Angkar
would force men to get married and choose the wife. Is that
correct? Is that what happened?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. I didn't understand much about that policy. As I said, I saw a
couple of people at a time got married.
Q. Did you -- were you informed at study sessions or in written
documents or in meetings that Angkar wanted to increase the
population?
A. Yes, I heard about that<.> They wanted to increase the
population since the population <of our country> was rather
small. For that reason, <male and female combatants> were
encouraged to <get married>. <That's what I heard.>
Q. Okay. I am going to move on to another subject. Sir, on the
5th of June 2012, you testified that Sector 105 was referred to
as an independent sector. Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. So it's correct, isn't it, that the sector reported directly
to the Centre, not through a zone; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Now sir, there is a document E3/12, dated the 30th of March
1976. It's a decision of the Central Committee regarding a number
of matters and the first point is the right to smash inside and
outside the ranks. It states:
"One: that there was a framework in absolute implement of our
revolution; Two: to strengthen our socialist democracy; all this
to strengthen our state authority. If in the base framework, to
be decided by the Zone Standing Committee; Surrounding the Centre
Office to be decided by the Central Office Committee."
And then it says, "Independent sectors to be decided by the
Standing Committee."
So, let me summarize it a little bit and make it a bit simpler.
It's a decision of the Central Committee of 30th of March 1976,
and it says, "Regarding the right to smash inside and outside the
ranks." That this would be for independent sectors, decided by
the Standing Committee.
Is that correct based on what you learned as a district and
sector secretary, that regarding matters of "smashing inside or
outside the ranks" the sectors -- Sector 105 is an independent
sector -- had to go abide by the decision of the Standing
Committee? Is that what happened?
A. <Regarding> this matter <of Sector 105, before,> I did not
understand very well <because> I <worked> at the district. <I did
not quite understand what the Central Committee had decided>.
Q. Well, sir, let me quote something else that you said in your
testimony from 2012. This is on the 7th of June at about 9.27 in
the morning. You were being questioned about Chuon being called
for re-education in Phnom Penh and the fact that he entered S-21
in November 1977.
You were asked about -- there was questions about who ordered the
arrest. This is how you answered, you said, "I did not understand
the situation. People disappeared and everybody was afraid."
Was that the situation when you were in charge of the sector that
people disappeared and everybody was afraid?
A. Yes, that's what happened at the time. Everybody was scared
when he was called to Phnom Penh because when the person went to
Phnom Penh, the person never returned. That also happened to my
younger in-law who was called and never returned.
Q. Are you referring now to Sophea or who are you talking about?
A. My younger in-law, <Sophea>, was <called to go along with the
others, but when they returned, they said> for those who worked
in military affairs were allowed to continue <to work there,> and
my younger brother-in-law <has> never returned.
Q. Just so I am clear who you are talking about, what is the name
of your brother-in-law?
A. Yes, that is Sophea.
Q. Sir, you also talked in your testimony the 6th of June at
14.33 about the disappearance of Mala. You also talked about the
disappearance of Chuon. Do you know who ordered these
disappearances or who ordered these people to be sent away?
A. The order must come from Pol Pot.<> Those people were <called
to work, and they disappeared>.
Q. Now, did the orders come by telephone call, by a messenger or
by telegram? Can you explain how the orders that called people to
study were delivered?
A. Mostly, the orders came through telegrams for those people to
go and attend study sessions and the names were <provided from
Phnom Penh. If we did not go, they came to call us. When they
went to study, they disappeared and never returned>.
Q. You previously testified that Nuon Chea sent telegrams calling
on people to study. Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Now, those people that Nuon Chea called to study, did some of
them disappear?
A. My -- only my younger brother-in-law disappeared. As the rest
they did not.
Q. Well, sir we have -- to summarize briefly, records of hundreds
of individuals from Sector 105 appearing in S-21. Do you know how
they were brought to S-21? Who ordered them taken there?
A. I didn't understand about that. I didn't know how Laing did
that, since I was at Pech Chenda district at the time.
Q. Well, let's clarify one thing very quickly. You have testified
previously that after Laing's death, Chuon contacted you and you
went to Phnom Penh within days. And in Phnom Penh, Pol Pot
appointed you to the sector. Is that correct?
A. Yes. When Laing died, Chuon came to the district to call me.
But he actually did not go to my house. It seems that he was
scared and he whispered to me that Laing had died. And I asked
for the reason and he said that Kham Phoun beat him. <They went
to work there, but they did not work yet.> That happened at a
guesthouse in Phnom Penh and that <Phoun and Laing> slept on
separate beds, <and Chuon was also nearby. There was a metal bar
of a car>. Somehow they fought and Laing died. And that Laing had
a pistol --
Q. Thank you. You explained that four years ago in 2012, so I
don't want to go over it again. But I just wanted to make the
point quickly with you that, since Chuon was the one who went
with you to Phnom Penh and Chuon went into S-21 in November 1977,
you were appointed by Pol Pot in late 1977, to replace Laing.
Correct? Laing, correct?
A. Yes, <that is correct>. When Ta Laing died, <I> was <
appointed> by Pol Pot, <but I refused>, and then there was a
<meeting> in 1978, when the majority approved that I should be
appointed the chief. <I could not refuse it>, and I was in that
position for two months.
Q. Okay, thank you. We are going to come back to some of this.
So sir, when you replace Laing working in the sector office in
late 1977, and during the time that you were district secretary,
did you ever see any trials or court proceedings for these people
that disappeared never to return?
A. No. I did not hear about any judgment that somebody was
accused of this or that; no. There was no such system. What I saw
is that people were called for study sessions and disappeared
without any reasons provided.
Q. To your knowledge were there any courts, any judicial
proceedings for anyone accused of wrongdoing during the DK
regime?
A. I do not know what kind of mistakes they committed and what
offences they were accused of. After they were called, they
disappeared. I do not know what kind of mistakes, infractions or
offences they committed.
Q. When people disappeared did their families also disappear?
A. No.
Q. Mr. Witness, let me read to you from a statement of the son of
Laing, Kham Phan and this is E3/57. At English it is 002905 --
let me summarize it this way. This was read to you during your
testimony by Nuon Chea's counsel at 14.35, on the last day of
your testimony the 12th of June.
And he read to you from this document E3/57, where Laing's son
said:
"During the Ta Sarun era the arrests of the whole families were
made but I don't know where those families were taken to be
killed."
And sir, frankly, we have had other witnesses that have testified
here that talk about -- including this morning and yesterday,
talk about wives and children being arrested.
Were wives and children arrested?
MR. KOPPE:
I object to this selective use of evidence, Mr. President. Ta Val
was arrested but his wife wasn't arrested. The husband of Prak
Yut was arrested, but Prak Yut wasn't arrested.
We contend that it had something to do with the role of the wife
as a cadre itself. Wives were not arrested simply because they
were wives. So there is other evidence to suggest the opposite.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
I should have been clear. I am talking about the evidence about
Sector 105 where this witness was responsible.
Q. And sir, the evidence we have on that is that wives were
arrested, children were arrested. Chan Toi for example, Neth
Savat testified, both of them, that there were children arrested
along with them. Isn't that correct that children were arrested
when a cadre was arrested?
A. It did not happen at Sector 105. When the husband was arrested
then the wife never -- was never arrested. That was what
<happened> when Laing was the chief of the sector. I did not side
with anyone but <I said that because I have never seen it, nor
have I heard about the arrest of the entire family>.
I do not know whether such implementation happened in other
provinces but in Mondolkiri, no such thing occurred.
Q. Sir, let me read from a statement of another witness and this
is a DC-Cam interview at, E3/8651. In English it's 01156504, and
in Khmer it's 00042269.
Before I read that let me just ask you, sir, when is the last
time you returned to Mondolkiri, the place where you grew up?
A. Could you repeat your question?
Q. When was the last time you went to Mondolkiri?
A. <I came> back to Mondolkiri after <I had worked for> a few
days<>.
Q. Let me try my question again. I am asking about you, sir. I am
asking you when was the last time that you went to Mondolkiri.
Was it last month, last year? Was it 1979? When was the last time
you were in Mondolkiri?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Sao Sarun, now I am repeating the question. <Since> you
<have> left Mondolkiri province <until now> and the question is
when <was the> last <time you> visited Mondolkiri after your
departure. Have you visited Mondolkiri province recently and what
was the last time you visited that province?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. <>After I came back from Thailand, that's what you meant? In
fact, I cannot recall when I last visited Mondolkiri province. I
do not remember it. I visited Mondolkiri province two or three
times.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Thank you, sir. Perhaps there may be an explanation why you
don't remember from this statement where the witness said about
you, Sao Sarun, "He does not dare to go to Mondolkiri because his
hands are stained with the blood of many people."
Do you have any explanation why people in Mondolkiri would think
that so many people died when you were in charge of the sector?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do not respond to the question yet, Sao Sarun.
You have the floor first, Anta Guisse.
MS. GUISSE:
Yes. May I request the Co-Prosecutor to give us the reference and
also give us the name of the person who says that <to> the
witness? Perhaps it will enable <him> to react in more concrete
terms<>.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
I'll look up the name. It's not in my notes. I also would just
indicate that there is no French translation yet of this OCIJ --
of DC-Cam interview 8651 -- E3/8651.
The name of the witness was Sal Ra. S-A-L -- S-O-V. Excuse me.
I'm spelling it again. S-A-L one word, R-A, second word.
Sir, do you have any explanation why people from Mondolkiri would
think that so many people died during the time when you were the
sector secretary?
A. That is not true. The one who made the report overstated. I
went to Mondolkiri province a few times. The first time I stayed
there for three months and I stayed in the provincial town
location for one week. The governor of Mondolkiri and the
commander of soldiers celebrated and threw a party when I was
there, <and some took a flight from Phnom Penh to attend the
party, and they danced from morning to evening>. I often visited
Mondolkiri.
<I> was not <stained with blood, and> I <have never> killed
<people from Mondolkiri>. Killings did happen in Pol Pot's time.
Individuals would accuse one another and kill one another.
<> The ones who <made> the report has no good intentions and they
wanted to kill Khmer people. <They wanted to be recognized and
well-known> by saying that in the report.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please stop elaborating that point, witness.
MR. SAO SARUN:
They overstated. They wanted to exterminate their own people. So
the report is not correct so the Court can make <an> analysis on
this issue.
I often visited Mondolkiri province and I spent one week in the
provincial town of Mondolkiri and I stayed at my birth <village>
for three months.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please remit your response to the questions asked and put to you,
Witness.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Sir, I am happy that your memory has been refreshed so
quickly. Let me ask you then about your answer. You said they
wanted to kill their own people. Who was it that wanted to kill
their own people?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. My point is that the one who made such a report wanted to kill
their own people. They want to be famous. So it is not proper to
report such things that my hands were with blood and I was the
one who killed people.
I went to Mondolkiri and spent time there for three months in my
birth <village> and I spent one week in the provincial town of
Mondolkiri. Nothing happened to me. <No one> hated me.
I went to Ou Reang <district> to join the wedding party and they
-- I spent time there in the wedding and they celebrated. They
were happy when they saw me at the time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
So, please limit your response to the question.
MR. SAO SARUN:
<This individual reported that I did not dare go back to
Mondolkiri. There is no reason for me to be afraid> to go back to
my <birth village in> Mondolkiri.
MR. PRESIDENT:
That's enough, Mr. Sao Sarun.
It is now break time. The Chamber will take a short break and we
will resume at 3 p.m.
Mr. Sao Sarun, and Mr. Samnang together with the duty counsel, we
are taking a short break up to 3 p.m. So please come back to your
seats before 3 p.m.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1445H to 1503H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
And good afternoon again, Mr. Sao Sarun. Are you ready?
MR. SAO SARUN:
Yes, I am ready.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And again, I would like to hand the floor to the
International Co-Prosecutor to put further questions to the
witness. You may proceed.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Sir, Mr. Sao Sarun, after the death of Laing and you took over
his duties, were you ever criticized by the Centre, by Pol Pot or
Nuon Chea or any of the Centre about how you did the job?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. I would like to respond to your question.
After the death of Ta Laing I was appointed to <be in charge of
the sector>. I was instructed to manage the people well and to
manage their living conditions well so that they would not have
any starvation or shortage of food and that we had to engage in
the progress of the agricultural production since our country had
peace so that people should not face any starvation or lack of
food at all.
Q. Okay. Sir, thank you. You didn't answer my question. Now, let
me ask you to try to listen to it because I am sure you want to
finish tomorrow and we want to finish with you if possible. So
please answer the question.
So the question again is, did Pol Pot, Nuon Chea, ever criticize
you for how you did your job after you took over from Liang?
A. Please repeat your question and please make your question
short as I cannot recall a longer question.
Q. Sir, did Pol Pot ever criticize you?
A. No, I was not criticized. <> I <only> received advice and
instructions <because> I was in that position for only two
months.
Q. Thank you, sir. But the evidence shows clearly you were in
that position for over a year because you told us you were
appointed when Chuon was still alive.
So let me move on. I don't want to argue with you about that.
Sir, did -- sorry, I have forgotten my question. Let me move on.
Let me go to the 1975, when you were asked by Pol Pot to take
over that position. You testified previously that you told him
you were not qualified. You asked him not to appoint you. Was
there any reason you didn't want to take that position?
A. After the death of Ta Laing, I didn't want to take that
position because of my limited education and I didn't want to
take the responsibility of working at the sector and that
somebody else should take that place.
Then I still refused to get that position until the time the
<meeting> was held that when a majority opinion adopted a
decision that I was to be appointed and I was there for two
months, <and then "Yuon" came to liberate the country>.
Q. So the fact that Pol Pot asked you to take the position in
1977, after the death of Laing and your position was confirmed in
September 1978, did you understand that to mean that the Centre,
the Party Centre was happy with how you were doing your job up
until that time, up until September?
A. Yes, I discussed the matter that I didn't want to be in that
position due to my limited knowledge and capability. Only later
on when I was appointed after the end of the <meeting> that was
held in September <in 1978>, I was in that position for two
months, that is, from October of that year. So <I was in that
position in> October, November, December, and then <in January,>
the country was liberated.
Q. Sir, going back to that first meeting in -- with Pol Pot,
after the death of Laing when you went there with Chuon, you said
that when you told Pol Pot you weren't qualified, he said you
would be assisted by Ta San, the Commander of Division 920.
That's what you have testified to previously. Did Pol Pot explain
how the Commander of Division 920 would help you do the job in
the sector?
A. Yes, that is correct. Pol Pot instructed Division 920 to
assist me due to my limited knowledge and ability. As I said, I
refused to take up that position until the <meeting> adopted its
decision.
Q. Sir, how did the military, Division 920, help you do your job?
A. It's to deal with education and the opening of the schools for
all the cadres within the sector.
Q. The military opened the schools? My question is, sir, how did
the military, Ta San, Commander of Division 920, help you do your
job? Are you saying he taught school?
A. The education was to equip the <> people to <reach the
standards to> lead -- or those cadres to lead the people in
working, that is, to work in the rice fields and plantation, for
example, and for them to have sufficient food.
So the main focus was on their economics and welfare.
Q. Was the military involved in that?
A. Please, I don't get your question. Please repeat it.
Q. Let me move on because of time. Sir, what did Pol Pot tell you
and Nuon Chea -- what did they tell you about the Vietnamese?
A. They said that, "Vietnamese has the intention to invade and
swallow Kampuchean territory". That's what was specifically
stated by them.
Q. Did they talk about that in the meeting that you went to three
or four months after the death of Laing? You said you went to a
meeting and in that meeting Khieu Samphan was also present.
Did they discuss the Vietnamese intention to invade at that
meeting?
A. Yes. He -- they told me about that and I, myself, witnessed
the invasions along the border as well. <They were continuously
attacking us.>
Q. Did they also discuss with you at this meeting with Khieu
Samphan, Nuon Chea, Son Sen and Pol Pot, Khmer Rouge incursions
into Vietnam; attacks by the Khmer Rouge into Vietnam?
A. Yes, they did, and that we had to prepare ourselves to counter
them.
Q. Did they explain about Khmer Rouge forces committing
atrocities inside Vietnam against civilians?
A. No, I did not understand about the nature of that event. I did
not know about the troops incurring or making an invasion into
Vietnam.
Q. Let me see if I can refresh your recollection if I read to you
from a book authored by Khieu Samphan. That's E3/18. In Khmer the
ERN is, 001038849 (sic); in French, 00595446; in English it's on
.
And Khieu Samphan writes: "This is how I learned of the Cambodian
attacks on Tinh Bien village in An Giang province at the end of
April 1977. The Vietnamese responded to these attacks using A-37
strike aircraft left by the Americans after the war. These
counterattacks were followed by even bloodier Cambodian
incursions at the end of September, in Vietnamese villages in Tay
Ninh and Ha Tien provinces. Of course, any act of barbarism, from
whatever side it comes, is loathsome and must be strongly
condemned. And the events recounted are irrefutable. There is no
doubt that the Khmer Rouge made forays into Vietnamese villages
along the border, committing appalling crimes against Vietnamese
civilians."
So here Khieu Samphan is talking about attacks in April -- excuse
me, in September -- in April and in September 1977. You were
called to Phnom Penh, you said, after the death of Laing in late
1977.
Did they talk about these attacks? Do you remember anything about
it?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on.
Counsel Koppe, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I object to this question First of all, Mr. Khieu Samphan is
citing Nayan Chanda and he is not citing something from
contemporaneous DK documents.
Secondly, the question is outside the scope of not only the
closing order but also this trial.
And thirdly, and maybe even more importantly, the provinces
mentioned; Ha Tien and the provinces mentioned there by Chanda,
are very far away from Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri. This witness
has most likely a geographical limit in his knowledge and the
provinces discussed there by Chanda are provinces which are very
far away from Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Once again this is a book by Khieu Samphan --
MR. PRESIDENT:
International Co-Prosecutor, please hold on. I would like to give
the floor now to Khieu Samphan's defence.
MS. GUISSE:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President. And to add to my colleague's
objection, it's not because there is a book written by Khieu
Samphan that we have to remove the quote from its context. As I
did during the document hearing, I reminded you under which
circumstances certain events were recalled. And here again when a
posteriori Khieu Samphan makes quotes or speaks about events he
received explanations afterwards, we cannot present this as
events <contemporaneous to> Democratic Kampuchea.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honours, this is a book by Khieu Samphan who was the head of
the state of Democratic Kampuchea who remained loyal to the Khmer
Rouge for many, many years afterwards and he is writing about the
events that happened. He was, as this witness testified, in a
meeting discussing the Vietnamese and the situation.
So it's clearly relevant, and I understand why the Defence is
objecting because Khieu Samphan here says it's irrefutable that
the Khmer Rouge committed atrocities against civilians. But
that's relevant to their policies towards Vietnamese and to the
Vietnamese they found within the borders of Cambodia.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, so that I may be complete about this, the question
is not what Khieu Samphan said when he wrote his book. The
question is to know what he would have said when these events
took place. The witness indicated that he was not made aware of
the alleged incursions into Vietnam by the DK forces.
So the fact of saying that Khieu Samphan wrote a book <x>-amount
of years after the fact does not correspond to the reality
between '75 and 1979.
And presenting these events as statements by Khieu Samphan, as
head of state, does not correspond at all to the reality. Here we
are speaking about Khieu Samphan, <x>-years after the events,
who, having conducted <> research, speaks about <a> certain
<number of> events <a posteriori> and not when these events
occurred.
This is an erroneous way of presenting the facts to the witness
and<, in fact,> this could lead or induce the witness into error
<by> presenting <a document about events> that <was written well
after the events> as contemporaneous <statements about the
events>.
The question is not whether Khieu Samphan wrote the book or not.
The question is when he made the statement and based on the
information <> that he received <afterwards>.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
I would like to hand the floor to Judge Lavergne, to issue an
oral ruling to the objection raised by the defence teams to the
last question put by the International Co-Prosecutor to witness
Sao Sarun.
Judge Lavergne, you have the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.
The Chamber would like the Co-Prosecutor to rephrase his
question. Insofar that Khieu Samphan's book was written years
after the <period> of DK, it's not possible to conclude from this
book right now that Khieu Samphan was aware of the DK <army's>
incursions into Vietnam.
So if you could please rephrase that question that might be
helpful.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Sir, my question was I read from this book where Khieu Samphan
talked about attacks into Vietnamese villages in April and
September 1977.
I'm simply asking if that refreshes your recollection? Do you
recall any discussion of Khmer Rouge incursions into Vietnam in
1977?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, had you heard the question put to you?
MR. SAO SARUN:
No. And I'd like to request that the questions <> be short.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Sao Sarun, please listen to the question carefully.
And International Co-Prosecutor, please repeat the last question.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Sir, I am going to ask you another question.
Q. Did Pol Pot ever talk about hating Vietnamese?
A. He didn't hate the Vietnamese people but he hated the invading
Vietnamese or Vietnamese invaders into Kampuchean territory.
Q. And sir, let me read from, again, this book by Thet Sambath
and Gina Chon, E3/4202, and there is a quote in Khmer, it's on
ERN 00858265; in French, 00849385; and in English it's on
at the bottom. It says, quote, "'I hated Vietnamese youths from
the time I was young,' Pol Pot told Nuon Chea. 'I did not like
them because the Vietnamese were rude and too clever at playing
unfair tricks while playing football against me and other
Cambodian children."
Do you recall after hearing that Pol Pot ever discuss the fact
that he thought Vietnamese were tricky and he hated them for
that?
A. No, I did not hear that. <However, I only heard-->
Q. By the way, you told us you joined -- you told us you joined
the Khmer Rouge in 1968. From 1968 through the early 1970s, did
you work with communist Vietnamese troops inside Cambodia? Were
they your allies?
A. <No, I did not, because> I was at the district. <The sector
had worked with them>.
Q. My question is, in your fight against Lon Nol forces, were you
allied with Vietnamese communist forces inside Mondulkiri?
A. Yes, we worked together with the Vietnamese troops to fight
against the American troops.
Q. Did Nuon Chea ever discuss with you his years in Vietnam?
A. I do not know whether such discussion did happen.
Q. Let me move on, sir, and ask you about the September, 1978
meeting that you attended in Phnom Penh. You said that at that
meeting, Pol Pot asked you to read a confession that implicated
you, Ta Un (phonetic) and Neang (phonetic). Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Did Pol Pot indicate where this person was when they
confessed?
A. We do not know where the confessions were from. We saw the
confession in the books and those confessions were handed over to
us.
Q. Was the confession true; what it said about you?
A. I do not know whether it was true or not, but that confession
implicated me as well. Pol Pot handed over the confession or the
book to me as well. My name was implicated. Those who confessed
said whatever they wanted to say.
Q. When you say you were implicated, do you mean that you were
named as part of a group or a string that was opposed to the
party?
A. The confession included almost all the cadres, but we had to
come to clarify about the accusation. <There were no reasons
that> we betrayed or we committed <> treason against the nation
<or that we were involved with Vietnamese>, so the confession in
the document was not true; <they just answered whatever they
wanted>.
Q. Had anyone ever tried to recruit you to a plot against the
leadership of the CPK?
A. No, I never heard that.
Q. Did Pol Pot explain why he was showing this to you?
A. <No, I didn't see nor did I hear that.> In fact, <I saw only
the book with> confessions <and the mentioned names>.
Q. Is that because Pol Pot told you that confessions were not
reliable and that he didn't believe them?
A. To my observation, Pol Pot did not believe in those
confessions. Those who confessed overstated the facts. The
confessions were unsubstantiated and unreliable when we read the
confessions, or we were handed over those confessions and we were
asked to read and examine what was in it.
Q. So did Pol Pot indicate that he knew that people were being
implicated, arrested and killed who were not guilty because
they'd been implicated in confessions?
A. I do not know about this issue.
Q. Well, let me read to you from what someone else said about Pol
Pot, what he said about confessions.
Again, this is from E3/4202, the book by Gina Chon and Thet
Sambath. French the ERN is, 00849450; in Khmer, 00858362; and
English it's on .
The book says that:
"Mom Nim, a division commander under the control of defence
minister Son Sen and Pol Pot, said in an interview that when
Khmer Rouge commander Heng Samrin fled to Vietnam, he was ordered
to kill more than 670 soldiers from Heng Samrin's division, but
he refused to obey the order by Ke Pauk who asked why they should
be kept.
Later, Pol Pot invited top cadre and military commanders to a
meeting. He asked that the people not be split between the Old
and the New, those who were living in the cities and in the
countryside, which surprised Mom Nim. Pol Pot also accused
leaders of betraying the movement and killing too many people. He
blamed Son Sen and Ke Pauk for what happened in the crackdown on
the Eastern Zone. 'Comrade Son Sen and Ke Pauk killed many people
and buried them with a bulldozer. I knew this information through
my spies,' Pol Pot said. 'You betrayed people and made people
leave the country to join with Vietnam. You have to correct
yourself from now on.' Pol Pot went on to say that some people
accused of being part of the CIA or KGB were actually innocent
and only confessed because they were tortured. 'Some confessed to
being part of the CIA before they were born', he said."
Did Pol Pot ever indicate to you that he knew that confessions
were unreliable because people had been tortured in order to
obtain them?
A. I was not told about this issue.
Q. Did Pol Pot ever acknowledge in your presence that too many
people had been killed by the Khmer Rouge?
A. I have never heard that.
Q. Sir, I just want to go real quickly to Sot. You talked about
the labour, the importance in your job of organizing labour.
Do you recall Sot, who was in charge of organizing labour and for
things like building the dam?
A. What is the name again? I could not get it.
Q. Sot. Sot, younger brother of Sophea.
A. I know this person, Sot not Sok (phonetic).
Q. Thank you. Now, we discussed four years ago when you
testified, a telegram. It's E3/156, from 1 January -- excuse me,
from April -- 23 April 1978.
Do you remember in that telegram you asked Pol Pot what to do
with Sot who'd been implicated in the confession of Chuon? You
remember sending that telegram to Pol Pot?
A. I could recall that. During Ta Laing's control, Sot was
accused of committing immoral acts with a lady and he was also
accused of treason.
And, later on, when I met Sot, <I checked, and> it was not true,
so I sent a telegram to Pol Pot <stating that it was not true,
and as he> was implicated, <> I asked Pol Pot to give pardons to
Sot. He was accused of having <a> relationship with a lady. In
fact, Sot was already married, so I sought pardon from Pol Pot.
Q. Sir, a witness testified yesterday and this morning, named Bun
Loeng Chauy. He said he came from the same village as Sot and
knew him well. He said that after Sot was accused of this immoral
affair with the woman, he was arrested and never seen again.
Is that correct? Did you receive an order from Pol Pot about what
to do with Sot?
A. He was freed at the time. He had been accused of having
affairs with a lady and, later on, he was set free. But I did not
know later on what was going on, but I remember that he was
freed.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honour, I'm to understand from the civil parties that they
require 20 minutes. I don't know if it's possible to extend --
I'll hand it over to the civil parties.
(Judges deliberate)
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
The civil parties have just informed me that I can take their
time, so I'll proceed for the next 15 minutes or so.
Q. Sir, I want to ask you about a telegram also discussed
previously in -- on 7 June 2012. You were questioned about a
telegram, E3/248. This is dated 1 January 1978, and at about
10.08 they asked you some questions and read to you from that
telegram.
The first paragraph of the telegram said:
"We would like to report nine Yuon fleeing from the country.
According to their interrogations they said the Yuon had assigned
them to come to spy inside Kampuchea and live with the Kampuchean
people in order to grasp the Kampuchean people. Now, we have
swept them away."
Mr. Witness, when you wrote in the telegram you have "swept them
away", that means that they were killed; correct?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. That is not correct. I answered this question already. I did
not know what was implemented when <> Ta Laing was in the
<sector. However, there was no such issue when I was in charge of
the sector> and I <have never seen> the arrest of "Yuon".
Q. Sir, it's your name on this telegram. It's dated 1 January
1978, after the death of Laing.
Let me just ask you this question. The words "We have swept them
away", do you understand that to mean that the people were
killed?
A. I do not really understand about the killings of "Yuon". I
never made any report about the killings of "Yuon".
Q. Sir, let me ask you the question again. The words "We have
swept them away", do you understand that to mean that the people
were killed?
A. I do not understand that.
Q. This telegram was dated 1 January 1978. Did you ever receive
any reaction? It was addressed to Office 870. Did you receive any
reaction from Office 870 to the telegram?
A. I do not know about that.
Q. Mr. Witness, is it the case that you don't know anything about
killings? Are you telling the Court that you don't know anything
about killings during -- after the death of Laing until the
arrival of the Vietnamese?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You have the floor, Counsel Anta
Guisse.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I would like <a clarification
regarding> the document that the Co-Prosecutor has mentioned.
<In> the French version, I <see "bong", M-870, "bong">.
I understood that the <Co-Prosecutor> meant Office 870. If that
is the case, he should clarify that because in the French version
I see the word "<bong", M-870>.
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honour, I don't have the telegram with me right now, but
what I was reading was from the transcript of 7 June 2012.
And I think I did say Office 870 in my question. I asked the
witness if he had any reaction from Office 870 to this telegram
which was addressed to "Respected and Beloved Brothers of M870"
and signed "Sarun".
Q. Sir, did Office 870 ever respond to this telegram?
MR. SAO SARUN:
A. Never. I never asked any reaction from 870.
Q. Well, you reported regularly to 870; correct? All the
important matters going on in the sector that was your job, to
tell them what was going on; isn't that correct?
A. That is correct because 870 was my superior, so I had to make
the report on a daily basis and on a monthly basis; the report
was submitted to 870.
Q. How often would 870 send you telegrams?
A. I do not know how many times I received the reports -- or
telegrams from 870. <If there were any instructions, they would
send us the reports; if not, there was none>. Sometimes it
happened once a month and a telegram would be sent to me when the
situation changed, <and they instructed us about the people's
living conditions>.
Q. So, on average, would you receive it once a week? How often
would you receive telegrams on average?
A. Sometimes I received a telegram <twice> a month or <three>
times a month; it depended on the situation. Sometimes <when
nothing happened,> I <did not receive> any telegrams. <Sometimes
I received it twice or three times a> month.
Q. Did you ever receive any telegrams criticizing you for
arresting someone or criticizing the sector for arresting or
killing anyone?
A. Never. Since I never committed any crimes, namely, arresting
people to be killed and I was <working at the Sector> for two
months, no-one criticized me about that issue. I never,
personally, never committed such acts.
Q. Who were the people that helped you in the sector office, the
staff?
A. No one, I believe. There were combatants, ordinary combatants,
assisting me, and I worked without any assistant. No-one helped
me in my work.
Q. Do you recall that Thin was replaced by Ta Loy as chief of the
K-17 Office?
A. You mean Ta Thin?
Q. Ta Thin.
A. I am not quite sure, so could you repeat your question?
Q. Do you remember Ta Loy who replaced Thin?
A. I recognize -- I know Ta Loy and Ta Thin. Ta Thin was the
chief of the office and Loy was member of K-17.
Q. And was his name Vin Loy?
A. That is correct.
Q. What happened to him?
A. I do not know what happened to him.
Q. Did he continue to work for you until the Vietnamese arrived?
A. Could you repeat your question?
Q. Did Ta Loy continue to work in K-17 until the Vietnamese
arrived?
A. Yes, he remained working since the time of Ta Laing <with> Ta
Thin, <who> was the chief of that office and Loy was the member
<of K-17 office committee>.
Q. Well, let me remind you of something or see if I can refresh
your recollection.
Sir, we have lists of prisoners at S-21, E3/2251, E3/1651, and
they show that Vin Loy who was chief of the Office of Sector 105,
entered S-21 on 20 October 1978. So, sir, he couldn't have
continued to work for you until the Vietnamese arrived.
Can you tell us why you haven't told us that Vin Loy disappeared?
A. <Yes, he disappeared>. At the time, <Ta 06,> Ta San, <> was
part of the division<>. I was in the <sector, and I went to the>
district <occasionally> and I do not know <whether he was
arrested or he was> sent <> to another location. <I do not know
whether he was sent to the court.> I do not know about that.
Q. Sir, there are records of many people from Sector 105 commerce
office, from Division 920 and other parts of Sector 105, being
sent to S-21 in 1978.
How did they get sent there? What was the procedure to have these
people transferred to Phnom Penh?
A. I do not know about the implementation or measure applied by
the division. I do not know about that.
Q. Do you know how people were transported?
A. All I know is that people were transported on <> vehicle/s and
<were> sent to <> Kratie and after that, they may have been on
boats. <That's what I have heard, but I, myself, have not seen
it>. I do not know. As I said, at the time, I was at the
district.
Q. Well, let me go back quickly to when you first were asked by
Pol Pot to take over for Laing. You testified four years ago that
you would only go to the office about two times a week. Was that
because the office was being used to hold prisoners?
A. I was not yet in charge of that office. I went to assist <the>
work there <twice> a week or sometimes I spent one or two days
there to assist the work. <There were not many prisoners. There
were around three or four of them.> I do not know <what offences
they had committed>. Ta Laing was the one who was in charge of
<arresting> and tidying up the prisoners. And prisoners <were
interrogated>, some of them were released <because they did not
commit any offence>. I noticed that there were not many
prisoners, three or four of them. That was my observation. I am
not telling lies.
Q. Sir, two of those who were held in that office testified and
they said there were about 80 people, including children. Did you
see children among those being detained?
A. No, I did not see any children. After <I replaced Laing>, I
did not see any children, but three or four male prisoners.
Q. Sir, was the K-17 Office being used to detain people because
the prison detention centre Phnom Kraol, K-11, was full?
A. I do not know about that. While I was <assisting Ta Laing with
his work>, I never saw people <being> detained at K-17. As I
said, there were <> three or four prisoners detained at that
<prison only; I never saw people being detained at that office.
Ta Laing had called me to work (unintelligible) -->
Q. Let me summarize what you've told us this afternoon.
You were asked personally by Pol Pot to take over after the death
Laing. You loyally fulfilled the policies of Pol Pot and the CPK
and that you never received any criticism from them for how you
did that job. Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now time for the adjournment, and the Chamber will resume
its hearing tomorrow on Wednesday, 30 March 2016, at 9 a.m.
Tomorrow the Chamber will continue hearing witness Sao Sarun via
video-link, and then start to hear 2-TCW-1016, in relation to
Phnom Kraol Security Centre. Please be informed and please be on
time.
Thank you, Mr. Sao Sarun, the hearing of your testimony as a
witness has not come to an end yet. You are therefore invited to
provide your testimony via video-link tomorrow once again at 9
a.m.
I'm grateful to you, Mr. Moeurn Sovann, the duty counsel. You may
be excused. You are also invited to assist Mr. Sao Sarun via
video-link as well at that location tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Thank you, Mr. Nhem Samnang, staff of TPO (sic). Thank you for
assisting the witness while he is testifying via video-link. You
may also be excused. See you all again tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Security personnel are instructed to bring the two accused, Khieu
Samphan and Nuon Chea, back to the ECCCs detention facility and
have them returned into the courtroom tomorrow before 9 a.m.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1603H)
