P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
According to our schedule, today we're going to hear the
testimony of another survivor; the third person among the nine
survivors of S-21.
The lawyer, I note your presence.  Would you like to make any
comments?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Mr. President, good morning.  Your Honours, good morning, dear
colleagues.
Yes, I would like to make some observations and also I'm seeking
for clarification before we hear the next survivor.
We have observed that Mr. Chum Mey yesterday was overwhelmed
sometimes when he accounted his story and he had to cry, and he
could not control his emotions any more.  He shares his
traumatization as well as the next survivor, who is my client
together with Cambodian colleagues, and he shares this situation
with other survivors, victims, civil parties and witnesses.
I would like to make a proposal.  I would like that the Chamber
gives information to the witness at the beginning that if they
need time to cope with their emotions when they are moved, that
they get this time, that they can be sure to have this time
before they continue with their testimony; and as well to offer
them, in the case that they continue, that they can ask to
recover and have a short break.
And, as well, to offer them again that they can contact, even
during their testimony if they feel it is necessary, with TPO,
which is the psychological support organization, to recover and
to come back.  And I think we all can benefit and for the
witnesses, civil parties, victims, who will testify in Court, it
is then clear that they can have this time which they find --
which is necessary before they are able again to speak and tell
their story.  I'm seeking then for a clarification.
I would like to have the following information from the Chamber
to make it clear that from our time that we have, and I think for
all parties, the 30 or 40 minutes that we have, that this time
counts only for the interrogation of any witnesses or civil
parties or experts, and that outside events like, for example, a
witness cries and is overwhelmed and moved by his or her emotions
and traumatism, then this time is subtracted from our time that
we have.
And the same for other events like, for example, discussion of
any legal issues or whatever is not directly a part of our
interrogation because, if not, we are feeling very much under
pressure and I think this is only my perspective, seeking a
clarification from the Chamber so that we know this time is for
interrogation time.
These are my observations and I would appreciate if the Chamber
could make this clarification that would facilitate our standing
here in Court and, of course, the questioning of the civil party
today and other civil parties and witnesses.
And I also would like to inform the Chamber that the civil party
today is somehow very strong but is, at some points of his story,
very weak and will be moved very much by his emotions and, of
course, willing to testify here before this Court and very happy
to do this.  But I think this time should be granted that he is
more relaxed and able then to come back to the situation where he
can talk and really willing to talk.
Thank you very much for your attention.
MR. WERNER:
Mr. President, just to inform you that Ms. Studzinsky spoke on
behalf of our group as well.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, the lawyers, for making those remarks.
The Chamber has already determined -- and we also have the
impression that we are prepared concerning the matters raised --
and the Chamber has already indicated the times allotted for the
civil party lawyers.  However, we have also taken into account
the other objections and other times interfere during the time
when the civil parties are putting questions to the witness or
the accused.
So the time is calculated based on the time when the civil
parties are putting the questions, so the Judges are monitoring
and observing the proceedings, and we will see if there is any
time used other than the times used by the civil parties during
the given time.  Then the Chamber would like to give extra time
to them.  So we would be flexible accordingly.
The starting time of the session can be flexible also, depending
on something that happens practically in the Court, and yesterday
we had some problems because the witness was very emotional while
he was being asked by the prosecutor, and the prosecutors have
not used all the times given to them, and for the civil parties
we have observed that they have not used up all the times
allocated to them.
The calculation of the times for the civil parties are
appropriate.  It doesn't mean that the calculation is based on a
few questions the civil parties would put to the witness or to
the accused, but it's based on the proportion.
Regarding the survivors of the regime, we note that they have
been very emotional and yesterday, after having examined how we
could control the witness when he or she is very emotional and we
also checked to see whether there are doctors or psychiatrists on
standby, then the Court would seek their assistance to help that
witness before we proceeded further.
However, after a few moments, we observed that the witness could
recompose himself and that he was under control to respond to
further questions.  Of course, the Trial Chamber is taking into
consideration these matters seriously.
And the civil parties, the lawyers representing the parties, are
also to be vigilant.  I mean they should be vigilant when they
notice that their clients need such assistance.  Then they can
remind the Chamber, but I think probably it would not be
appropriate if the civil party lawyer asked for like a half-day
break for a witness to recompose him or herself.  Then it would
be a long break for him, which could also affect the schedule of
the hearing.
We believe that the psychiatrists have already been employed to
assist the clients or the witnesses, and they are ready to be of
any assistance when needed.  So we do not really intend to really
incite the emotions of the witnesses until he or she cries, so
emotionally that it could even affect his mental fitness and, of
course, the Chamber is well informed of this.
To sum up, the Trial Chamber is very deliberate when it comes to
the calculation of times allocated to parties, however, the times
for objections have not been included in the allocated times to
the parties.  So the parties could still exercise their full
rights to use the full time allocated to them, except the
objections or any matter that arises during such proceedings.
We, as human beings, are cautious and we really take the concerns
or remarks raised by the civil parties, and we really appreciate
the civil parties to raise these before the Chamber so that we
can take immediate action to make sure that the witness can be
under his control of emotions.  Of course, if the Chamber noted
that the witness is under control of his feelings, then we could
proceed further without any other suggestions from the civil
parties' lawyers for the clients.
The Court officer, you are now instructed to bring the survivor,
Mr. Bou Meng, into the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What is your name, Uncle?
A. My name is Bou Meng.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You can sit down, no problem, because we will take the full day
to hear your testimony, so you are allowed to be seated.
Before you respond to any questions, could you please wait until
you see the red light on the mic.  If you speak when the light is
not on, your message would not be interpreted and the
international colleagues in the proceedings and the public
gallery would not hear what you are saying.
And, number three, according to the note of the Greffier, you
seem to have a hearing problem.  So the Chamber would like to
inform you that when you listen to any question and that you
understand the question, you should be quiet and wait until the
red light on.  Then you can respond.  If you are not able to
understand the questions, then you can make a request to the
party who puts such question to rephrase or to ask you again
before you can respond.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. How old are you?
A. I'm 68 years old this year.
Q. Where do you live now?
A. I live in Kampong Kong Commune, Kaoh Thum district, Kandal
province.
Q. What is your occupation?
A. Since I have been detained at Tuol Sleng, I had hearing
problems.  My eyesights are not good and I am physically weak.
Q. Could you please be reminded that you should wait until you
see the red light before you can respond, otherwise your message
would not be communicated.  Please wait, Uncle.
Are you married?
A. I have another wife.
Q. What is her name?
A. She is 48 years.
(Microphones not activated)
A. My ex-wife was Ma Yoeun, alias Thy.  She died during the Pol
Pot regime.
Q.  You have filed a civil party application to join as a civil
party.  Now, before the Chamber, what is actually the purpose of
your application?  Would you like to seek reparation on your
behalf or you would like your lawyers to act on your behalf?
A. I would like to allow my civil party lawyers to act on my
behalf regarding these reparations.
Q. After having decided to join as a civil party, what is your
involvement in the facts regarding the accused in this case?
A. Mr. President, I'm not really sure whether I understand your
question.  Could you please make it in a more simplified Khmer
language?
Q. The Chamber would like to ask you that you have already joined
as a civil party, but we would like to know of your involvement
into any particular fact; for example, the fact of S-21 or the
fact of S-24, Prey Sar.
And, number two, have you been the direct of victim of the fact
or you are here on behalf of your loved ones who were victims of
S-
or S-24, or you were here as the victim of both facts? 
 
         21
A. Mr. President, I am here to be on behalf of myself who is the
victim of the regime because I had been beaten severely and my
wife disappeared, and I don't know where she has gone or how she
would have been tortured.
Q. Before the 17th of April 1975, where did you live and what was
your occupation back then?
A. I went into the maquis jungle to liberate the territory and to
save King Norodom Sihanouk.
Q. Could you please tell the Court about your experience and what
you have come across during the Khmer Rouge regime after the 1
7th            7   of April 1975 until the 7th of January 1979?
A. After the 17th April 1
975, I was ordered by Angkar to work in 
           9   the technical school in Ruessei Keo.  I did the drawing and the
sketches for the workshop participants.  It was at the technical
school in Ruessei Keo.
Q. You can just continue to describe your accounts from the time
that you were at the Ruessei Keo Technical School until you were
free from the Tuol Sleng on the 7th of January 1979.  If you can,
describe all those accounts.
If you can not, then the Chamber would put some questions to you
based on the certain periods of the events.
A. Mr. President, during the times that I served at the Ruessei
Keo Technical School, I had worked for about one year; I cannot
recall exactly.  My apology if I cannot recall the exact date due
to the serious torture that I received.  So my memory is not in
great shape.
In 1976, Angkar arrested my superior, Hak, from the Ruessei Keo
Technical School.  Two or three months later, the Southwest Group
came to take control of that school.  I was then transferred to
Ta Lei Co-operative in Dangkao Commune, Dangkao district, Dangkao
province.  It was the co-operative with the education site.
At that time, I was forced by Angkar to dig canals from Ta Lei
village to the Prey Sar prison.  I was forced to build dams, to
dig canals actively, so I was so severely physically used to
provide the labour to Angkar.  It was to the limit of my physical
stance to do that labour.
Later on, Angkar ordered me to the group of adult people to make
ploughs and some other wooden tools, rakes, and the chief of the
group was Pak.  We called him Brother Pak.  It was still at the
Ta Lei Co-operative.
And later on, I was assigned to plant vegetables, and while I was
working the soil at the vegetable beds, I grew cabbage, and over
there we use human fertilizer.  It was called fertilizer number
one.
And one day, there was a group of people in black clothes.  I
think they were driving a Jeep, if I can recall correctly.  At
that time, I was planting eggplants.  I was told by that group
that Angkar required me and my wife to prepare my belonging in
order to teach the children at the school of fine arts.
By hearing that, I thought that would be right because it's my
expertise.  So I was happy, very happy, and I thought that I
would now work in my right profession.  However, unfortunately,
at that time when I was in the car with my wife in that Jeep, I
was taken to a location near Kirirom location and I thought that
was not the way to the school of fine arts.
I felt uneased and I felt a bit scared and I felt I was dizzy.
For about a half-an-hour later, we reached a location which was
unknown to me at the time and the chief stopped there.  And we
entered a house which was near by the Tuol Sleng prison or the
S-21 Office.  There was a house opposite that office.
They had two rows of chairs and we were asked to get off the car
and we went to sit on the chairs.  Then there was a person who
ordered me to put my hands behind my back, so my wife and I put
our hands behind our backs and they cuffed our hands.
Then my wife started crying and said, "What do I do wrong?  We
both are orphans."  I was so pitiful of my wife.  At that time,
they used a piece of black cloth to blindfold both of us, my wife
and I.  Then we were walked into the S-21 Security Office or Tuol
Sleng prison.  Then I realized that was a prison.  From then
onward, I was asked to enter a room and I was photographed.
After they photographed my wife, then they photographed me, and
that was the only photograph of my wife that I have had with me
until today because I lost all the photos from the 7th of January
1979.  And with me I only have a photo of my wife that I would
like to show to the judges.
After we were photographed, we were walked to Building C and from
that time onward, I separated from my wife.  I did not know which
building she was taken to.
So I was placed in the common room on the upper floor.  I think
about five months or one year later, I received torture.  First,
I was threatened that they would peel my skin.  I didn't know
what it means by that, but a person who slept next to me told me
that it means that you will be beaten during the interrogation
and I felt so horrified in my mind.  I was so shocked.  I
thought, what mistake did I make?  I tried my best to serve
Angkar.  And in the end, I became and fell into such a situation
so I kept thinking.
While I was in the prison, all the clothes were stripped off
except my underwear.  So I slept directly on the floor for
several months.
Then they started to interrogate me and beat me up.  It was --
the interrogation location was in a house outside the compound.
It was behind the Building A.  They cut me and they asked me to
lie down on the floor with my face facing down and they had a
bunch of sticks and they dropped it on the floor and it made
noise.  And I was asked to choose which stick I preferred.  And I
responded, "Whichever stick I choose, it is still a stick that
you will use to beat me up so it is up to you, Brother, to decide
which one you want to use."
Mam Nai stood up and grabbed a stick and started to beat me up.
After he felt exhausted, then another person came to take turn to
beat me up.  So that Mam Nai was Mam Nai alias Chan.  He got his
skin condition with a spotty skins and quite a red in his face.
He asked me to count the lashes and when I counted up to 10
lashes, he said, "How come you count to 10 lashes?  I only beat
you for one lash."
I was -- I felt so painful at the time.  There were wounds --
many wounds on my back and the blood was on the floor flowing
from my back.  Whips were also used to torture me.  I was so
shocked and painful.
Every time they beat me up, they asked me questions; when did I
join the CIA and, "Who introduced you into the CIA network and
what was their name?"  And I responded that I did not know.  So
the first beating, I responded I did not know.  The second time
of the beating, the third times; I gave the same response.  Even
if my back had wound, they beat on that wound.  It was so painful
and I could not think of any mistake that I made.  I did not know
what CIA or KGB network was; then how could I respond?  So they
just kept beating me up.  I had a lot of scars on my back as
evidence from that torture.
In my mind, I thought of my mother; that if I could live, I would
pray.  Probably it's because of my mother that gave me birth.
And I would -- and I thought that if I could lived to give my
story to the Chamber and now, finally, I am before the ECCC and
that the ECCC would  find justice for me.  And I feel so happy
even if 100 percent of justice cannot be provided by the Chamber,
50 or 60 percent of justice to me is fine because I determined
from the prison where I was detained that I had not committed any
mistake or offence and that I prayed just to be survived.
Q. Uncle Meng, please try to recompose yourself so that you would
have the
opportunity to tell your story.
As you have stated, you have been waiting for this opportunity to
tell your accounts, your experience and the sufferings that you
received from those unjust acts; from the torture committed by
the Khmer Rouge, as well as the ill treatment on your wife.  So
please try to be strong, recompose yourself so that you are in a
better position to recount what they did on you so that the
public and the Chamber who are participating in this proceeding
or the Cambodian people as a whole as well as the international
community to hear, to understand the acts committed by the Khmer
Rouge clique on you and that they would express the pityness on
you as you received those ill treatment from them.  So do not let
your emotion overwhelm you.  So try to grab the opportunity to
tell your accounts to the Chamber as well as to the public.
Uncle Meng, do you understand what I said?
A. Yes, Mr. President; I understand.
Q. Please try to recompose and be strong.  Today is the
opportunity for you to reveal, to describe your sufferings to the
Chamber so that the Chamber can understand.  If your emotion
overwhelms you, then it's unlikely that we have another time to
hear your account because the Chamber has scheduled other
witnesses to provide the testimonies and they had gone through
similar experiences, either at S-21 or Prey Sar -- although some
of them are not the direct victims but they're relatives or
family members, wives, husbands, parents -- received the unjust
acts over there.
So, in summary, please continue to recount the experience and the
sufferings that you received from those unjust acts during the
time that you were detained until the day you were free from that
prison, thanks to the National United Front for Salvation armies
on the 7 January '79.  Do you understand what I said?
A. Yes, I can continue, Mr. President.
Let me go back a little bit because I forgot to talk about the
food ration in the common room.  In that common room, there were
about 30 or 40 of us and at one corner I saw foreigners with
light complexions and they were detained there as well, and they
received the same food ration; that is, very thin gruel.  There
was no rice grain in there, just one (inaudible) or one there,
and I was so skinny I had no strength.  Even if I had a stick, I
would not be able to use it to attack them.
When Him Huy took me to the upper floor, he rode on my neck, on
my shoulder, and I stumbled on the stairs and my knee was hurt
and there was a wound on my knee.  So when I think of those
events, I felt so painful.
Each day when they took me for interrogation they took me twice,
from 7 to 12 in the morning, and in the afternoon from 2 to
or 
 
          6
p.m.  The interrogators who beat me up, I could recognize their            7   faces because when they talked to each other, I recognized their
names.
They were Brother Mam Nai, Comrade Hor, Comrade Huy, Comrade Tith
and Peng, so there were five of them altogether.  My apology that
I went back to describe this account because I forgot.
Q. As I told you, please try to re-compose yourself.  This is the
day that you have been waiting for for so long.  I know you are
very emotional now and probably you will miss certain events that
you would want to recount.  Of course, the sufferings you and
your wife received were indescribable and right now the Chamber
would like to ask you some questions.
When there was a vehicle going to pick you up from the Ta Lei
Co-operative in Dangkao district to the School of Fine Arts, were
you tied or cuffed, and what about your wife?
A. Mr. President, Your Honours, at that time I saw a vehicle but
there were no cuffs in there.  We were asked to pack our clothes,
so I had some clothes so I put them in my backpack and they were
all taken away at Tuol Sleng.
Q. When they took you to Tuol Sleng, did they take you to Tuol
Sleng straight away or were you taken to another place first?
For example, like the place that you described where there were
two rows of chairs.  Was it within the compound of the Tuol Sleng
prison?
A. It was outside the Tuol Sleng prison.  It was opposite the
Tuol Sleng prison.  There was a house and there were two rows of
chairs, and in the middle there was a long table.  So we were
asked to enter that house and they ordered us to put our hands
behind us and then they cuffed our hands, both of us.
Q. When they ordered you to put your hands behind your back and
then later you were cuffed, did they tell you the reasons for the
arrest of your wife and yourself?  Did they tell you the reasons?
A. Mr. President, at that time they did not tell us any reasons
or any mistakes we made, and I and my wife asked them what
mistake did we do and we told them that we were orphans and what
mistakes we did?  And they replied, "You, the contemptible, you
don't have to ask.  Angkar has many eyes, like pineapples, and
Angkar only arrests those who make mistakes or offence."  And I
was still wondering what mistakes I did, and my wife wondered the
same.
At that time. I was in the adult group in the co-operative to
make ploughs and rakes, and my wife worked in the rice fields and
I could not think of any mistake that my wife and I made.  Until
today, I could not think of the mistakes that I made at the time.
Q. The people who ordered you to put your hands behind your backs
and then they cuffed you and your wife, were they the same people
who went to pick you up from Ta Lei Co-operative?
A. Mr. President, they were different people.  They were not
those who took me, who brought me from the co-operative.  They
were there waiting for us in that room.  So once we entered the
house we were asked to sit, in a nice gesture, and later on what
happened I already described to you.
So I broke into my tears because I did not know what offence I
committed.  If I stay home and did nothing, maybe I made a
mistake, but I did not do that and I cannot think of the mistake
I committed.  Whatever I was asked by Angkar, I just did.
Q. Can you recall the day that you were arrested and taken to
Tuol Sleng prison or can you recall the year?
A. Mr. President, I can remember the year.  It was 1977 when I
was entered into the S-21 Office.  I am a bit weak on the month
because at that time there was no calendar to see, so it's only
just based on the thinking or estimation.  I think it could be in
May or June in 1977.
The reason why I thought it was in May or June because after they
tortured me and they were fed-up with torturing me, there was a
teenager about 16 or 17 years old made an announcement.  He said,
"In this room, who can do the painting?"  So I raised my hand.  I
said, yes, I can do the painting.
And that person ordered another person to unshackle me and they
then put a chain on one of my feet.  I was then walked from the
upper floor of that C Building to the ground floor in order to
meet Mr. Duch.  The reason I recognized him because when I was
painting the portrait of Pol Pot, he was sitting nearby me,
watching me, sitting on a chair with his legs crossed.  I did a
lot of portraits, not only just for Pol Pot, I also did a
portrait for Mao Zhedong.
Q. The Chamber asked you to describe about the situation but you
have not been able to detail what we asked you, so I would like
you to please listen to the question of the Chamber step-by-step
until the 7th of January 1979.
I think would you please wait until the question is referred to a
particular section that you can respond otherwise you would not
be able to recall the consequential event.  So could you please
be waiting for the question from the Chamber before you could
respond to them?
When you were arrested and sent to S-21, were you sent in at
night or in the daytime?
A. It was at about 9 or 10, I can't remember it well, and when I
reached Tuol Sleng there was no clock that I could check the
time, but it was during the daytime not at night.
Q. When you were handcuffed all together with your wife and
walked into Tuol Sleng compound, were you both blindfolded?
A. We were blindfolded before we were walked into Tuol Sleng
compound.
Q. You stated earlier that when you entered the location you were
taken photograph.  Before the photos were taken, did they ask you
for your biography or was it done later after the photography?
A. I don't remember all.  Please accept my apologies.
I think the document from Tuol Sleng still survives and the
person who kept the record was Ti (phonetic), and I was shocked
and confused because I did not know why I was arrested and I did
not know how I responded to them.  I did not know whether my
biography would have been sent to them earlier, prior to my
arrest.  I'm not sure.
Q. You said your wife and yourself were blindfolded.  Were you
still being blindfolded while being taken photograph or were the
blindfolds removed?
A. When we were at the photo workshop then our blindfolds were
removed, and we were seated and I was taken photograph and
followed by my wife.
Q. What about the handcuffs?  Were you removed from the handcuffs
while being photographed?
A. I don't recall having been removed from the handcuffs.  I'm
not sure; I forget it.  Maybe the handcuffs were removed or maybe
they were not.  But so far as I remember after our photographs
were taken, then we were blindfolded again before we were walked
to Building C.
Q. You said you were stripped to your underwear.  When was that,
before you were sent to Building C or only after you got to
Building C that your clothes were stripped off?
A. I think maybe my clothes were stripped off downstairs before
we were walked upstairs or maybe only when we reached upstairs
that our clothes were stripped off.  I seem to forget.  But as I
remember, it is sure that after we were taken photographs then we
were re-blindfolded and I did not know where my wife would be
walked to.
Q. When you reached the building, it was the common building for
all prisoners or it was a separate prison cell for detaining you
alone?
A. Mr. President, at that time I was put in a common large room
in which about 20 to 30 detainees were placed.  They all looked
like hell because their hairs grew long, even they were male but
their hairs grew so long.  I felt dizzy when I entered the room
and I was so confused.
Q. When you were being handcuffed, were you handcuffed and
attached to the bar, the metal bar with the other detainees, or
you were handcuffed and then isolated?  Could you please tell us
about the condition of the shackles?
A. We were put into the common rooms and in each metal bar
resembled the shackles.  There were a lot of detainees attached
to the shackles by our ankles, maybe five to 10 people for each
long shackles and we were put to sleep head to head with other
detainees, so my head was put against the east wall.
Q. At that time could you sit up when your both legs were
shackled to the long bar like that?
A. I could sit up but we had to ask permission from the guards
before we could relieve ourselves, although we were given an
ammunitions box for such purpose and we were given a plastic jug
for our urination.
Q. Who collect the wastes or were they left with the detainees
all day?
A. At that time the people who worked there in the common cell,
the person whose age was about 15 years old, would go up and
collect the waste because the detainees would only be put to lie
down in the cell and could not be moved.
Q. You mentioned about the food ration, the thin gruel with very
few rice grains and sometimes you would be offered a watery soup
with water grass.  The question is how food was provided to you?
Were you fed with a plate, a spoon or what was it like when food
was delivered to you, and how often did you get the meals?
A. When it was time to eat it was at 12 or 11.30; let's say
between 11.30 to 1.  That's for lunch.  In the afternoon, late
afternoon, the food was served at 5 p.m. or 6 p.m. and when the
food was carried to the place then they would leave it there, and
if people made noise then they would be beaten with the stick
that they used to carry the food to the detainees.  I felt very
pity for them and for myself because we were treated like
animals.  We whispered to one another, I mean to the neighbours,
but we could not make loud noise.
Q. Did the detainees have to share -- have to distribute the
porridge or the gruel, or were they distributed by the guards?
A. We were given the gruel on a plate by the guards, and after we
finished the meal then the plates and spoon would be collected
because they were afraid that those items could be used for the
detainee to commit suicide, because every night people would come
to search for any metal items or sharp items.  I did not know why
they came to search for those items.
Q. When you were thirsty what would you do?
A. We had to ask for permission; for example, "Brother, I am
thirsty.  Could you please give me some water?"
Q. So it means in the common cell there were the prison guards
who stationed there regularly.  Is that correct?
Please wait until you see the red light before you respond.
A. When I needed some water I would ask them for the water and
they would give it to me.
THE INTERPRETER:
The President's mic is not on.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Now, you have not answered the questions about the guards who
would be regularly stationed at the cell, and you said that when
you would like to relieve yourself or you were thirsty you would
ask the guard.  My question was:  were there regular prison
guards at that location, and how many guards were there in your
room?
A. I think guards would be seen walking on the corridor, several
of them, because we were locked inside and we could see them
walking on the corridor, passing the windows.  And when we needed
to relieve ourselves then we would call them.  But they gave us
the boxes for relieving ourselves, although we were not removed
our shackles.  But I seem to be forgotten when it comes to how we
could ask them when we would like to relieve ourselves, but I am
sure that we were shackled at all times.
Q. I think we learned from you that there were the plastic jug
and ammunition box placed for the detainees to relieve
themselves, but when you were thirsty how could you do it,
because there were no water jars left with water for detainees,
so you had to shout to the guards?  I mean, if you shouted it
means that the guards would be outside but if they were inside,
the detainees would not need to shout to alert them.
However, during the time when you had a bath -- because you were
detained quite a long time from mid-1977 to 1979 and you were
detained the longest there among the others, so when it comes to
having a bath, what was it like?
A. When we had a bath we would take off our shorts and then
remove it from our legs, one leg at a time, and then we had to be
naked and then the water would be sprayed from outside through a
water hose, and some would get soaked, some would miss the water.
And then we would use the clothes to dry the water.  It was so
miserable because we would -- had been treated like the cattle
while we were sprayed the water on.
When we asked for water, of course we had to ask them for
permission.  Otherwise we would never be given such water to
drink.
Q. You said you took off your shorts to dry the water.  What was
the purpose of doing so?
A. We only used them to dry the floor so that we could -- when
the floor dried then we could lie down, because the water floods
the floors and we had to dry it to make sure that it's dry.
Q. So the purpose of removing your shorts was to dry the floor so
that you could sleep on it.  Is that correct?
A. That is correct, Mr. President.
Q. How often were you sprayed the water on like this?
A. Once every week or maybe once every fortnight.  I don't
remember; you know, it has been 30 years or more already, but I
know that every time we had a bath, everyone had to be naked.  It
was like hell.
Everyone would look the same and sometimes they mocked at us.
They said that you guys look small physically but your thing was
not that small.  I'm sorry to say that, but we would laugh by
mocking on some other things, private things.
Q. When you were detained, besides being removed from the
shackles to be interrogated, were you released to do exercises,
for example, every now and then or were you never allowed to do
that?
A. I don't remember it.  I think we were never allowed to do
exercise in the room or maybe we were allowed to do so.  I am not
sure because it has been so long already.
Q. When you were taken to be interrogated, how was the process
carried out?
A. Every time I was taken to be interrogated, they would handcuff
me and walked to the compound of the prison to Building A.  I
think the previous trace of the building vanished over time and I
think I could never take any visitors to the same original
location as it already altered.
Q. When you were removed from shackles, then you would be
handcuffed before you would be walked to be interrogated.  Can
you please tell us how this process would be carried out?
A. I was walked to the interrogation room into the house.  We
walked to upstairs.
Q. No, I'm talking about the time when you were in the room and
were shackled, and then you were shackled and attached to other
people, other detainees.  And before you were taken to the
interrogation room, would you be removed from the shackles and
then walked outside of your room before you would be re-shackled
again and walked to the interrogation room?
A. They removed the shackles from the long bar.  The shackles
were removed then they cuffed -- they put the cuffs on me again
and then they walked to the outside area of the room, or the
prison.
Q. Were you blindfolded when you were being walked away?
A. Of course, I was blindfolded while I was being walked away.
Q. Could you please tell us about the moment when you were put
into the room for interrogation?  How were you treated by the
guards?
A. They treated us -- they used derogatory language to me and
they shackled me by my ankles -- the long bar of shackles which
was about half a metre -- and then they locked the chain and then
they closed all the windows and doors.  No, I think the windows
would be left open because there were metal bars.  I could see
Building A or B clearly.
After I was shackled and they removed the handcuffs and removed
the blindfold, and then they started to beat me to answer when I
entered CIA and KGB.  I told them that I did not know anything
about it and I could not answer anything about CIA and KGB.
I kept repeating my response and they kept beating me and, of
course, if we did not respond or answer to satisfy their request,
then we would be beaten severely.
Q. During the time when you were interrogated, you would be
shackled and then you would be asked to sit on the floor while
your handcuffs would be removed along with the blindfold before
you would be interrogated.  In case you did not respond to what
they wanted to get the confession from you, then you would be
beaten with a stick.  Do I understand you correctly?
A. They removed the blindfold and handcuffs.  They put me to lie
face down and then they started to beat me until they had enough,
and then they kept asking me when I entered CIA and KGB and who
introduced me into the agents.  And I did not know how to respond
to them because the person who worked honestly and worked the
best to serve Angkar and never been involved in such
organization, how could I respond to them that I introduced
anyone into the CIA, even myself.  I did not know what CIA was.
Q. You said you were shackled and put face down.  I find it
difficult to understand because if you talk about the shackle,
then you could sit up.  And how could you be put face down and
then if you were shackled before that, you could not sit up
because it was a wooden kind of shackles.  Then you put your legs
-- or your legs were put into the shackle then you would not be
able to lie face down on the floor.
Or were you put to lie face down on the floor and tortured before
they removed the shackles, and then -- or what?  Could you please
clarify it to me or to the Court?
A. It was not a wooden shackle, Mr. President.  It was a metal
bar, long bar, designed to only put on one individual detainee.
After having that long metal bar attached to my legs and my
ankles, then they locked both ends and then they put me to lie
face down in order for the interrogator to be able to beat me on
my back and I could put my face down.
Q. Were you taken to be interrogated immediately when you were
sent during the first night at S-21 or were you kept a few days;
only later that they would take you to be interrogated?
A. Mr. President, I was detained for quite a long time.  I think
it was until May or June 1977 so I had been detained for four or
five months before I was interrogated and tortured.  And as I
stated earlier, then a guy came and asking for anyone who could
paint.
Q. Can you try to recall the S-21 staff who took you for
interrogation and torture?  How many times were you taken and
what about the types of torture?
A. Mr. President, when -- for every times they interrogated and
tortured me, they did not use or change the method.  First, they
used a rattan stick or a whip to beat me up.  They beat me up
with the stick or the whip for the two sessions.  So from 7 until
1
or 1 p.m. in the morning, then I was allowed to eat and in the            2   afternoon, they only stopped after 6 or 7 p.m. when I was taken
back to the room.  After they beat me up, they did not take me to
the common room.  They took me to the individual cell.  So every
time after the interrogation and the torture, I was taken to the
ground floor -- to the individual cell.  And for the mealtime,
then we were fed with a bowl of food.
Q. So in summary, you were detained in two different rooms.
First, you were in the common room and about five months later,
when they started to interrogate and torture you by using the
stick, then you were detained in an individual cell.  Is that
correct?
A. Mr. President, that is correct.
Q. Was your torture in a different method; for example, by
electrocution?
A. Yes, Mr. President.
One day after they beat me down -- they beat me up, they walked
me to Building D and there was a power outlet on the wall and
then they used an electrical wire to electrocute me.  I felt
unconscious and later on they used the water to pour on my face
and I became unconscious again.  I did not know the voltage of
that electricity, but once they started it, I felt unconscious
immediately.  That was done in Building D.
Q. I already asked you and you said that you did not know if you
committed any offence so when you were detained in the prison,
was there any decision by a trial committee to punish or sentence
you -- for example, in a form of a trial in a similar form of
this Chamber -- during your detention there?
A. Mr. President, no, there was no judgment; no order from
anybody.  We were just detained.  And one day after they
exhausted by beating me up, then they walked me back into the
room and while at the path walking to our Building D -- there was
no concrete path there at the time  -- and at that juncture, I
was beaten up again.  And another person came and said, "Don't
beat him up today because Brother instructed so.  Keep him
alive."
Because there were a lot of wounds on my back, I felt so painful,
but because they beat me up so I had to lie down on my back.
However, Him Huy used a stick to push under my back and a lot of
gravels went inside the wound on my back so because it was so
painful, then I had to turn myself again for them to beat me up
on the back.
Q. When did they decide to use you as a painter?
A. One day, I was taken from that individual cell to the upper
floor for treatment.  Actually, there was no medicine at all.
There was a bowl of saltwater and they just poured that saltwater
on my back and it was so, so painful because of my open wounds
and the salt.  You could see when you used the salt on the frog,
you could see the effects and you could imagine how painful it
was when they pour the water -- the saltwater on my back.  And
indeed, finally the wounds recovered from the saltwater.
Sometimes, I was given a rabbit pellet tablet.  It was so
miserable.
Q. And now to the scars from the beating; do you still have the
scars or are they completely gone?
A. The wounds recovered, but the scars are everywhere on my back,
on my shoulders.  They were the scars from being whipped or
beaten.  Sometimes, there were five of them beating me up at the
same time.
Q. Can we see the scars on your back?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Mr. President, I would like to make break now before Mr. Bou Meng
shows his scars and to decide if this is appropriate -- an
appropriate measure now and maybe it is time for an adjournment,
and that would be great if he could get it.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time for a break.  The Chamber will take a 20 minute
break until 11 a.m. when the Chamber will resume.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 10H38 until 11H02)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We would like to inform the parties and the public that the
Chamber now cancels its attempts to show the scars on the
survivor's back and all parties are also reminded not to proceed
with the request to show the scars on the survivor's back.
Do you have any further requests or observations?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  We would suggest to proceed in closed
session and then Mr. Bou Meng could show the scars to the Chamber
and the parties.  That is something that could be a possibility
to do.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber already decided to cancel its attempts to show the
scars, even if in an in camera hearing.  In case of necessity, it
can be shown by photos.  So the photos can be shown of the scars
on his back.  Bou Meng, you think you can have those photos for
the Chamber?
MR. BOU MENG:
Mr. President, I do not have any photos of the marks.  I only
have the marks on my body.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to request to take photos of your -- of
the scars or your marks that can be displayed on the screen.  Do
you agree to this proposal?
MR. BOU MENG:
Yes, I agree.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Next, so you were chosen to be a painter.  When were you
chosen?
A. Mr. President, towards the later '77, because in early 197
I  
          8   already painted a canvas.  One day I heard the noise from the
loudspeaker, I think they celebrated something at the Olympic
Stadium, and we were given a lot of food.  We ate to our fill and
the guards gave us the food.  And I even have the noodles,
Chinese noodles to eat.
And Nath said I had to jump, to jump up so that the food will go
down lower through my stomach and I can eat more to fill to my
stomach.  And I told him, "Once you are full, you are full.  You
only have one stomach to fill in."
I think I started painting the portrait in late '77 or early '78
because there were four portraits and each portrait, when Duch
asked me, "How long did it take to make that portrait?  And the
portrait must look the same as the photo," and I told him -- I
requested to have three months to make that portrait because the
canvas was huge.  It was 1.5 metres wide and three metres high.
I would like to seek your permission to show the portrait of Pol
Pot that I painted.  I survived because I could paint the exact
portrait of Pol Pot, so I was spared until to the 7th January,
'79.
This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. During the time that you were released to work by doing the
painting, where did you paint and who else worked with you in
that location?
A. Mr. President, yes, I myself, Bou Meng; Vann Nath too; Im
Chan, the wood sculptor and the wax moulder, another wax moulder;
so that's all.  And we worked in Building E.  Building E is the
building in the middle of the compound.  I think that is used as
the reception area for the guests who come to visit the museum.
Q. What about the food ration after you were chosen to work as a
painter?  Was the food ration the same as those given to the
prisoners?
A. Mr. President, the food ration was better than previously, so
it was from the thin gruel to rice and we had sufficient soup.
So the prison guard carried the soup to deliver it to us and we
shared among ourselves.
Q. During the time you were selected to work as a painter, where
were you allowed to sleep at night?
A. After I painted and when it was time to sleep, it was at the
generator's room.  It was behind Building E.  At that time there
was a generator there, so when the electricity was cut off, then
they started the generator and we slept in that generator's room.
Q. Were you cuffed or shackled in that room or were you locked
from outside?
A. I was allowed to sleep in that room but I was not cuffed or
shackled, so there was seven of us -- Oeng Bech, Vann Nath, Im
Chan, Pha Tha Chan, Ruy Makong.  There were seven of us -- and
Chum Mey.  I requested to see the photo: Pha Tha Chan, Bou Meng,
Vann Nath, Im Chan, Ruy Makong and Chum Mey.  And now only Chum
Mey, Vann Nath and Bou Meng are alive.  The other four died.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to suggest to the Court
officials to show the photo on the screen.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I don't think it is yet your time.  It is now my question and I
have the discretion.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. During the times you were asked to do the painting, did you
meet the accused, Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch?
A. Mr. President, Your Honours, at that time Mr. Kaing Guek Eav,
alias Duch, sat next to me watching me painting the portrait of
Brother Number One, Pol Pot, and he ordered me, "You should
adjust the throat.  It's not a tumour, it's just fat."  So as can
be seen from this photo which was taken of the portraits that I
painted, so you could see that the throat was slimmer.
Q. Did he come to visit you often to see you painting?  And if he
came, during the day or nighttime?
A. He came often during the daytime and he wore shorts and a
short-sleeved shirt.  So he came in, he sat with his one leg
across and watching me drawing, for example, another portrait of
the head of Ho Chi Minh on the body of a dog.  It was like a
cartoon which they -- it was like a sketch of the sea with a
flat, windy situation, et cetera and et cetera.
Q. Did you notice his character and behaviour during the time
that he watched you making the painting or the portrait?
A. Mr. President, he did not really beat me up, however, one day
I didn't know what I did wrong.  He asked me and Im Chan to beat
each other up.  So we were given a piece of black plastic tube to
hit, to beat each other, and he sat there watching us beating
each other up.  After a while he ordered us to stop.
But if I could make a very lifelike portrait, he would look at it
carefully and I think I lost some of the portraits.
Q. The question is, did you observe his facial expression or his
behaviour; that is the behaviour of the accused, Kaing Guek Eav,
alias Duch, during the time that he went to watch you painting?
Was he a person full of joy or full of sorrow?  Did you notice
that?
A. Mr. President, his facial expression was normal.  If he needed
to laugh, he laughed.  Sometimes he smiled.  I could see him
through his face but I could not judge his feeling or emotion,
and that's the word I was asked especially by a journalist, and I
always tell them, "I know his face but I don't know his feeling".
He was close to me, observing me painting.  Sometimes he gave me
cigarettes to smoke.
Q. Did he ever beat you up personally?
A. No, but he ordered me to beat up with Im Chan.  I was not
happy with that.  He did not treat me like a human being.
Q. Did you ever see him going from one building to the next
within the compound of the prison; for example, from Building A
to B to C, or did he only enter the compound and only come to the
place where you worked?
A. Mr. President, I did not see him walking along each building
because when he entered his main focus was on the portrait of
Brother Number One, Pol Pot.  I only saw him coming to my
workshop.  I did not see him going anywhere else.
Q. So besides him, besides you yourself, did you see him
torturing or beating up other prisoners?
A. Mr. President, let me go back a little bit.
One day there was a Vietnamese citizen.  He boasted that he could
make a wax mould and then he was ordered to show his skill.  So
he was tested and Duch saw that he could not do it.  Then he
ordered the interrogators to kick him like kick a ball because,
from what I understood, he was angry that that person lied to
him.  And I did not know what happened to that Vietnamese person.
Probably he was taken out.
Q. Did he himself order the guards or his subordinates to torture
that person?  And if he did order, can you recall his exact
words; that is, the words that Duch used to order his
subordinates to torture that Vietnamese person?
A. Mr. President, I forget some parts.  I am not sure.  I think
probably he signalled his guards to beat that Vietnamese person.
And the Vietnamese person was taken away from the workshop where
I worked.  So there were woodcrafters; there was a painter and
another artist.  We worked in the same workshop.
Q. You saw the guards beating up that person who boasted about
his skill.  Was the beating taking place within the workshop
vicinity in Building E or was he taken out and beaten up outsides
that area?
A. Mr. President, at that time the three or four of them kicked
that Vietnamese person and beat him up and walked him away.  I
did not hear his order.  So when those guards beat the Vietnamese
person up, Duch had already left.
Q. So during the time you were asked to work as a painter, how
many portraits did you paint and whose portraits were they?
A. There were four portraits of Pol Pot.  However, there was
another portrait in 1981.  There was a German group to make a
film on that portrait, so I showed the portrait to the person and
then I used paint to make a cross sign on that person to express
my hatred of that person, and that was filmed by the German
group.
Q. You said that you painted various other paintings or
portraits; for example, a painting of a dog with the Ho Hi Minh
head on it.  But for Pol Pot portraits you only made four
portraits?
A. That is correct, Mr. President.
Q. So besides the portraits of Brother Number One, Pol Pot, did
you make any other painting or portrait?
A. Mr., President, yes, I painted Hua Guofeng, Mao Zhedong in
large canvas as well, so the canvas was as big as the canvas for
Pol Pot's portrait.
Q. When you did your painting or portrait, did you do it
individually or together with Vann Nath?  That is, Vann Nath was
painting his own painting or portrait and you yourself had a
separate painting or portrait?
A. Mr. President, at that time he did not have a skill of
painting black and white portraits so I mixed the black and white
painting by myself with one litre of gasoline to burn it and the
smoke would go into that painting and then I mixed it.  And Vann
Nath did not have this skill.
Q. So it means that your painting was separate from him because
one was colour and one was black and white.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. You talked about the portrait of Pol Pot.  This is one of the
portraits of other people that you painted.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, Mr. President, that is correct.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you take a photo of the portrait of Pol Pot to
be projected on the monitor, on the slide?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is this the portrait of Pol Pot that you painted by yourself
during the time that you were detained there and then when you
were asked to make a drawing or portrait of the leader of the
Democratic Kampuchea?
A. Yes, Mr. President, this is the portrait.
Q. You stated just then that because of your skill of making the
portrait that you survived until today.  Can you explain further
the reason of this portrait that led to the survival?
A. Mr. President, the reason, from my understanding, is that my
painting is a resemblance of the photo, so I started painting
portraits 1, 2, 3 and 4 and another one.  While I was painting,
then the time came when the Vietnamese and the National United
Front for Salvation army entered Phnom Penh and we fled.
They gathered us to move from the compound in one long straight
line without stepping anywhere off the line or we would be shot.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court official, can you remove the sketch?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. There are still some other documents in which you stated that
you were sent to Prey Sar and then you stayed at Prey Sar for a
while before you were returned to S-21.  What happened back then?
Is it true that you were sent there?
A. I think it is not true because I stayed in Tuol Sleng prison,
but when we were evacuated it would be true that I was walking
and reached Prey Sar somewhere near Boeung Choueng Ek for about
five minutes, and then we later on were ordered to move to Prey
Sar prison.  I think after about 10 to 20 minutes then we would
be ordered to move further during the nighttime.
Q. So you went to Prey Sar during the evacuation process when the
United Front of the National Army actually liberated Phnom Penh,
and you went along with the other people, so you were forced to
move out with other people.  Is it correct?  I think you were
leaving on the 7th of January 1979; is that correct?
A. Mr. President, it's correct, we left at night in the late
evening at about 6 to 7 p.m.
INTERPRETER:
The witness's mic is not activated.
MR. BOU MENG:
We dragged our legs -- our feet.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Please wait until you see the red light.
The question is where were you up to -- I mean, you were at Prey
Sar and then you moved forward to other locations.  So could you
please tell us about the date during the process you were
marching or you were getting out of town that time?
A. We left Prey Sar prison at night and we walked to National
Road Number 4, and at dawn we saw the presence of the United
Front army, and the guards who guarded us all the way while we
were on our journey then left us.  And I could proceed with Pha
Tha Chan and I did not know where the other people went to
because Vann Nath also left us, except I and Pha Tha Chan who
would be left alone, and we walked until Amleang and stayed at
Prey Chrov co-operative.
I did not ask for the food from the co-operative because we would
be afraid that we would be killed, because if he got in trouble
then I would too be in big trouble.
Q. When did you return?
A. When Nath came to Phnomn Penh ahead of me and along with Oeng
Bech and Comrade Kong, and I walked with other people until I
reached Pursat province.  And Vietnamese troops would be seen in
several jungles.
And at Svay Dangkao we could also see Vietnamese militaries and I
was recruited as the soldier during that time.  I worked as the
typist at that moment at the provincial office with Ros Sreng,
Kang Heang, who at that time were the governors.
Q. Can we talk about your wife, because we have heard your good
accounts of your story, because in your complaint you state about
the inhuman acts against you and your wife.  So now could you
please tell us a little bit about your wife when you were both
sent and taken to S-21 while your photos were taken, biographies
were taken and while you were blindfolded and put into the
detention room?  Have you ever heard anything about your wife?
A. After we were blindfolded and sent to the upper upstairs I
have never known or seen my wife.  But at one moment when I was
painting the portrait of Pol Pot, Him Huy was outside of the
window and told me that, "Your wife was working in the rice
field," and then I told myself -- I thought that probably she
would be kept there to be killed, but I did not tell anybody
because I only were thinking alone.  Because I was also a farmer
and Duch once said that people could be used as fertilizer for
rice field or rice farming and that's why I had to be very
careful and I had to work so hard to concentrate on my work and
it took me three months to finish one portrait.
Q. Have you ever learned anything about the fate of your wife or
what happened to her?
A. I don't know what happened to her, whether she would be
tortured.  We were parted since we were taken into that common
room.  Until now we have never seen each other and I never know
what happened to her.
Q. Do you think that she would be killed at S-21, or what else?
A. Your question reminds me the question that I would like to ask
to Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, I want to know whether he asked his
subordinates to smash my wife at S-
or at Choeung Ek so that I            2   could collect the ashes or remains so that I can make her soul
rest in peace.
Q. You have not answered to my question, but you would like to
refer the question to the accused; is that correct?  You said you
have obtained a photo of your wife named Yoeun alias Phy; have
you brought it along with you and when was the photo taken?
A. I have the photo with me.  If you would wish me to present,
then I could present it to you.
Q. When was the photo taken?  Was it taken during the time when
you were sent into S-21 or Tuol Sleng prison compound at that
moment when you were taken all together or was it just another
photo you took with her?
A. This photo was taken during the time we were sent into S-21
because her photo was taken first, followed by me.  You can see
her ID on the photo.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Greffier, could you please make sure that the photo could be
projected on the monitors?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your wife, Yoeun alias Thy, what is her family name and how
old was she at that time?
A. Her name was Ma Yoeun alias Thy.
Q. When she was taken photograph -- I mean, when you were sent
into S-
office; how old was she?            2   A. She was about 25 years old because I was about
years old;  
          3   maybe 36 or 37 years old.  I am nine years older than her.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The court official, could you please remove the photo from the
monitors?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Now, the story of yourself and your family have been heard, we
would like to put
further questions concerning the time when you were detained and
then later on, you were chosen to be the painter; the position
you hold until 7 January 1979.
During that time, had you seen or been aware of any activities of
the guards at S-21 towards the other detainees?  Through your
observation and recollection, could you please tell the Court
about those events?
A. During the time when I worked as a painter in Building E
painting a portrait of Pol Pot, I could see through the window
the sending of Vietnamese soldiers and the Khmer Rouge soldiers
who were sent en masse into the compound.  I did not actually
witness the torture, but I heard the screams; people crying for
help all around the compound.  I did not see the tortures
directly, but I did hear people crying for help.
Q. When you were detained in the common room, did you see dead
body of other detainees in the room and if you saw them, did you
see them often?
A. Mr. President, I saw a dead body who was lying head to head
with me.  He was with dark complexion, a small person.  He was
taller than me.  He was about the same age as me.  If he would
live, now he would be 6
7, 6
8.  A young guard stamped on his chest            7   and he coughed with blood and he was lying dead there inside the  
          8   common room.  At night, he would be taken to be buried in the
compound not far from that.
Q. So how long was it -- I mean, the interval between the time
when the person died and the time when he was buried?
A. I noticed that he was dead in the daytime and then late at
night -- I can't remember when, but it was at night that the
person disappeared and would be buried.  I don't know where he
would be buried or discarded because I was still shackled and I
didn't know more about something outside.
Q. You were detained and shackled for a long period of time
before you were let out to be a painter.  And have you noticed
the people who were sent in and shackled along with you in the
same room would be taken out and disappeared or had they returned
or have you noticed that?
A. I'm talking before the God, the Buddha.  I'm talking the
truth.  People would be put into the trucks and carried away and
they never returned.  And after being interrogated, I would be
kept downstairs and I did not know much about the fate of those
people, but when I was in the common room, people who would be
taken away would never come back so they just disappeared.
Q. What about the other situation, for example, when a detainee
was so weak that he would be carried to the truck or to the other
location?  Had you seen such scenes?
A. I did witness the very thin person who were tied to his legs
and arms, and a stick would be put to -- and then carried by two
people.  He was carried like a pig, like people would be carrying
a pig, and he was passing the place where I was painting, and the
guard banged the door shut in order not to let me see them
carrying that very sick and thin detainee.  I did not know where
he was up to.
Q. Were they carrying the dead body or a person who's still
alive?
A. He was not yet dead.  He was still breathing and then he would
be carried onto the truck waiting outside the prison.  We could
hear the sound of the truck coming in and out all day long.
Q. I think you should have known about this, about the trucks
that came and take people away all night.  Can you tell us
whether the trucks only came during the night or during the
daytime, or detainees would be taken by the trucks at any time
from S-21?  I mean, those people who would be taken away and
would never return.
A. I was in the common cell or common room.  After being
interrogated, I was put in the cell and I could hear the sound of
the trucks.  I never saw the trucks; just heard the sound, the
noise.  I did not know or see the detainees.  I only saw him once
when I was painting the portrait of Pol Pot while they were
carrying him, passing me.
Q. So was it at night or during the daytime?  I'm asking this
because after hearing testimony we have received two different
kinds of information, especially concerning the transportation of
detainees to Choeung Ek, because the information we obtained so
far is that detainees would only be sent during the night.
Another thing is that I don't know whether you're confused among
two of you.  One witness who testified said that during the time
he was detained at the location from the morning until 12 p.m. he
would not be able to sleep because he wait until 12 p.m. passed
so that he knew that no people would be carried away to be killed
after that.  So that's why I would like you to clarify whether
prisoners would be taken at night or in the daytime, especially
regarding the person who was very sick and would be carried away
by two people with a stick.  Was it done during the day or at
night?
A. At that time I did not see at night, of course, but I saw it
during the daytime.  It was about 9 or 10 a.m.; I think more or
less at about nine, between 9 and 10 a.m.
Q. Normally when the trucks came, were the trucks driven to
Building E or just they were parked right in front of the
entrance; close to Building B or C, for example?
A. Mr. President, regarding the trucks that transported the
detainees, the truck parked outside under the gate -- I mean near
that gate.  The truck did not come into the compound of the
prison.  They parked outside.
Q. Did you notice other activities of the staff at S-21 towards
other detainees?
A. When I was painting at Tuol Sleng, I saw female detainees.
Some pregnant detainees would be walked away while being kicked
by the guards -- female guards.  And they asked them to walk
faster and they walked past Building B and then -- I mean from
south to north, from Building A to B.  I did not know where they
would be detained, but they passed us while we were painting the
portraits.
Q. The last question.  When you left with Uncle Nath and other
survivors from S-21 on the 7th of January
1979, did you notice 
          19   that in the buildings of S-21 there were some prisoners left?
A. Mr. President, I think it is more about freedom of the
prisoners.  Prisoners were deprived of their liberty and we would
not be allowed to move, so people -- I think there was quiet
inside.
Q. My question is this.  I mean the last day, the last day when
you left S-
21, because there were dead bodies on the beds.  There            2   were 14 of them.  Some witnesses would say that there were only
10; the accused said that there were only four people; and now
the survivors, including you yourself, have noticed that there
would be some kind of noise and could see people were still left
inside the building during the time when you were leaving the
premises.
The question is whether you could receive any information or see
that detainees still were there on the 17th (sic) of January
1979, the moment before you were leaving S-21.  So just tell us
whether you saw people still there at the premises when you were
leaving.
A. Mr. President, the last day on the 7th of January I left S-21
at about 9 a.m.  We heard the gunshots and we were ordered to
leave immediately.  At that moment I did not see or hear any
noise, and I was so panicked that I did not pay attention to who
would remain, because they pointed the guns at us and they warned
us not to even turn back.  We had to really walk forward
otherwise we would get killed or shot.  So I did not see any one
I guess.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much, Uncle, for your responses.
And it is now time to make an adjournment for lunch.  So the
Chamber will now take adjournment, and we resume at 1.30 p.m.
The court official, please make sure that Uncle Bou Meng is
offered the food, and please bring him back to the courtroom by
one thirty.
The security guards, please take the accused to the detention
facility and bring him in by one thirty.
The court is adjourned for lunch.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses for lunch from 1200H until 1331H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Uncle Meng, when the interrogators stopped torturing you
because you agreed to confess and it was a false confession, was
it based on the purpose in order to satisfy the interrogators, or
you survived because of your skill as a painter?
A. Mr. President, regarding the torture inflicted upon me --
after they still couldn't extract the confession from me because
I gave the same response every day, and because I did not know
who was the leader or who introduced me into the CIA or KGB, they
kept beating me up every day.
And because they could not get my confession, they took me to the
building which is now where you can purchase the ticket to visit
the museum.  I was asked to sit there and they wrote a false
confession and ordered me to sign.  I can not recall the content
of that confession, it's been so many years now, and also because
of the serious torture inflicted upon me my memory was not good.
And at that time, if my memory was like I am now, I would not be
able to paint the portrait and I would not survive because during
that time if they thought somebody lied, especially lying to
Angkar, then that one would be dead.
Q. During the time that they decided to use you as a painter to
paint the portraits of the leaders, including Brother Number 1,
Pol Pot, and other leaders including the Chinese leader as you
stated, what happened during the times that you did the painting?
For instance, were you detained again as a prisoner?
A. Mr. President, no.  During the times that I did the painting I
worked every day regularly so it took me a long time to complete
the four portraits.  That was after I had been tortured.
Q. Until now, can you try to remember or recall, besides the
serious torture inflicted upon you with the present scars on your
back until today, was the situation of receiving torture
physically or emotionally, did it happen elsewhere?
A. Mr. President, if you talk about my memory, I am very
forgetful now.  My memory is not as good as when I was young.
For example, if I leave something somewhere, sometimes I forget
where I left it.
MR. PRESIDENT
Judges of the Bench, do you have any questions to be put to Uncle
Bou Meng?
Judge Cartwright, you take the floor.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Q. Mr. Bou Meng, you were at S-21 for a very long time and you
have described your suffering and your experiences there; thank
you for that.  But I have just one or two small questions to ask
you.
I want to know something about other prisoners whom you might
have seen at S-21.  You have talked about the people who were in
the same room shackled as you were.  You have spoken of seeing
some pregnant women being kicked by female guards and told to
walk more quickly.
Did you see any foreigners at S-21, other than the large number
of Vietnamese soldiers that you have described?
A. Your Honour, the inmates in the common room where I was
detained, there were some foreigners.  I was not sure of their
nationality, whether they were European, American or Australian.
They were detained in the same common room as I was detained, and
they had the same food ration as I received.
Q. Were you aware of any foreigners other than westerners or
Vietnamese, such as Thais, people from Thailand?
A. Your Honour, I did not see any Thai citizens.  I only saw
Vietnamese people and some foreigners.  They were tall, they had
bright eyes, and sort of bronze hair.  Besides that I did not see
any other nationality, including Thai.
Q. In addition to the Vietnamese soldiers, whom you saw, did you
see any ordinary Vietnamese people; that is people who were not
soldiers?
A. Your Honour, yes, I saw civilian people.  They were not
soldiers.  And I saw these one civilian, as I said earlier, he
said he knew he was a real artist, but when Duch ordered him to
test, to make the mould and he couldn't do it, and, of course, at
that time Angkar was not happy -- was not happy of anybody lying
to Angkar.  And I don't have anything else to say regarding this
question.
Q. The people whom you think might have been westerners, and the
ordinary Vietnamese people whom you saw, were they all treated
the same way as you were?
A. Your Honour, for the prisoners the treatment was not the same.
For example, I, myself, I received very serious torture, so only
I, myself, knew clearly about what happened to me, and I cannot
say about what happened to other inmates.
Q. Did you see many children at S-21?
A. Your Honour, for children at S-21, I did not see any of them
walking around or detained there.  I only saw those children in
the photos, but I did not see them personally during the time of
my detention.  This is my frank and honest response.
Q. Did you ever hear the sounds of children around S-21?
A. Your Honour, for the sound of children, I did not hear.  I
only heard the screaming, asking for help of the adult people
while I was in the common room.  And while I was in the
individual room, individual cell, I also heard the screaming, but
the screaming of the adult, not the children.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you very much, Mr. Bou Meng.
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, do you have any questions?
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Bou Meng.
I also have a few questions to ask you, to try to clarify what
you already explained in detail to the Chamber earlier on today.
I think I understood through what you said this morning, and
through what I have read in your testimony, that your life was
essentially impacted by many sacrifices, and by a life of
obedience.  And you said this morning that you answered Prince
Sihanouk's call in 1970 to free Cambodia, to liberate Cambodia.
Is that so?
A. At that time, I heard the appeal of the Prince Sihanouk on the
radio broadcast.  I was not sure which broadcast was it.  He
appealed for his children to go to the maquis forest to struggle,
so I decided to enter the maquis forest in 1971 with another
friend from K25 office.
So we went to the maquis forest to make some sketches and drawing
of Marx and Lenin.  I was the one who drew the pictures of Marx
and Lenin.  And those sketches were stencilled and distributed to
various units in order to understand the supreme leaders of the
Communists -- of the Communist country.  There were five of them
all together: Karl Marx, Engels, Lenin, Mao Zhedong.  So I even
drew the sketches of these people on the cloth.
Q. So you worked there for the -- at the services of the
Communist Party of Kampuchea's propaganda.  You were very
respectful of what you were requested to do.  And then between
the end of your activity with the propaganda services and your
job at the Orussei Technical School, did you do anything else
between; was there another episode in your career?
A. Your Honour, let me correct that.  It was called the Russei
Keo Technical School, not Orussei Technical School.
Q. Did you go directly from the propaganda services to the Russei
Keo Technical School or did you do anything in between?
A. In between that time -- in order to make it easier to
understand, let me go back. First, I worked for the Ministry of
Commerce, of State Commerce,  and Koy Thuon was the Prime
Minister at the time.  I was requested to draw placards for a
boat.  It was called Marinal Transport.  And I made some other
placards and signs and boards for those boats and vehicles while
I was there.
Q. Well, back then did you trust the CPK entirely?  Were you
somebody who was very much obedient, who would follow what you
were being told to do?
A. Your Honour, that was my specialty, the skills that I had.  I
knew that the evacuation of people from Phnom Penh disappointed
me because I struggled, I was so sick with malaria, and in the
end I received such a suffering which is indescribable.  I felt
so regretful for such inhumane acts of leadership which did not
satisfy my willing -- my understanding.  I physically served them
but emotionally I did not, although I wore black shirt, but my
mind was not black.  I did what I was instructed, based on my
skill.
This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. Was there a specific moment where you might have entirely lost
trust in the CPK?  Was there any moment when you said to yourself
that what you might have believed in did not correspond to
reality?
A. I don't really understand your question.  Can you rephrase
your question again and please try to be simplified and make it
short?
Q. Well, can we say that when you were working for the Russei Keo
School and when you worked previously for the propaganda
services, that you trusted the CPK and Angkar?
A. Your Honour, I carry out the task based on the assignment from
my superior, including drawing the sketches of the machines or
for the new parts of the machines.  Everything was done based on
the instructions from the chairman of that technical school.
This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. You explained that your superiors at the technical school had
been arrested and that you yourself had been sent to be
re-educated.  At that moment, was your trust in the CPK -- was it
-- did it change or did you still have full trust in the CPK?
A. At that time, Your Honour, I lost my trust because my
performance in carrying out the assignment was excellent, I did
what I was asked, but I could not understand why I was
transferred to be re-educated at the Ta Lei Co-operative.  I was
disappointed and this is my frank response to you.  I no longer
had my trust.
Q. But, however, despite the difficult conditions in which you
were, you continued obeying and you continued following the
orders that were given to you.  Is that why it was particularly
difficult for you to understand why you had been arrested by
security cadres of the CPK?
A. Your Honour, at that time, I myself and some other people
totalling about 10, were transferred from the Russei Keo
Technical School to Ta Lei Co-operative and I did not know the
reason for the transfer.
However, before the transfer we were instructed to make our
biography, as I can recall, so I made my biography to the Angkar
and about one or two months later I was transferred to the Ta Lei
Co-operative amongst about 10 other people, including my wife.
So we were tempered to do hard labour at the Ta Lei Co-operative.
I did not know the reason for the transfer, Your Honour.
Q. Back then, had you heard of the security centres?  Were you
aware, for example, of the existence of S-21 or of other security
centres?
A. Your Honour, regarding the security offices or the prisons, I
did not hear anything at all during the time, however, people
kept disappearing.  Some probably were sent for re-education or
sent for training here and there.
I had heard a lot about transferring of people or relocation of
people starting from
1976, and I was wondering how come, while 
          19   people were still working good and they were transferred
elsewhere?  Or whether they had any plan of transforming in the
agriculture production?  I only had doubt in my mind, however, I
just kept doing what I was given or instructed.
So I typed some documents that I was asked to do and I drew
sketches for the students to study.  I could not understand their
thinking.  They were in a higher class and I thought I belonged
to the lower class with limited technical capability.
Q. Can we say that you were not at all aware of having committed
any kind of offence that you absolutely were not aware having
betrayed the CPK, that you had absolutely no awareness of being
part of a group of traitors?
A. When I came I knew that there was a Minister of Propaganda,
Mr. Ho Nim, who
called me to draw a portrait of the embarkment structure.  And at
that time the current king was teaching students how to perform
the ballet dancing and then he told me to help draw a portrait of
his father.  And he called his father the normal, ordinary
person's language and I was surprised but I did not ask further
questions.
Probably they saw the picture, the photo that the king asked me
to draw; that's why they arrested me, or not.  I'm not quite
sure.
Q. This morning, you also talked, at length, about the
ill-treatment that was inflicted upon you.  You also talked about
the physiological consequences thereof.  You also said to us that
you still had scars.  I seem to have understood that these
tortures led to other consequences, such as problems with your
hearing.  Do you have other physiological conditions or
difficulties that you may ascribe to being the consequences of
that ill-treatment?
A. I was slapped and I was beaten on the head; all kinds of
tortures had been inflicted on me.  So in short, I believe that
because I was severely tortured, that I look older than my age
and I lose all the teeth, and I can observe that Brother Chum Mey
still have his teeth.  And also I have had problems with hearing
and I think this is probably the consequence of the torture.  And
I look much older than I am and if you compare to the age, I
think I should have not been that old if I was not tortured.
Q. From what you can remember, do you have the feeling that the
people interrogating you were enjoying themselves by making you
suffer or seeing you suffer?
A. During the time when I was being interrogated some people ate
the jackfruit and they threw the remaining -- the peel of the
jackfruit onto my head and I could feel like then I was perceived
as enemy and prisoner.  I could not do anything but to let them
do whatever they wish and they did not show any mercy towards me
as a human being.  And whenever I recall it, I cannot hold back
my tears.  I was so disappointed that I had devoted myself for
the work and after all I end up being tortured.  I wished I were
killed by the malaria in the jungle, but I think my life was
valuable that I could survive longer to be tortured again.
That's all, Your Honour.
Q. When you were a painter at the workshop, do you now remember
having been taken out of the workshop in relation to an incident?
You were taken away from the workshop for about two weeks; do you
remember that?  Do you remember then coming back to the workshop,
having to say you were sorry, seek forgiveness?  Do you remember
having been kicked?  Do you remember this episode or something
like this, or do you not remember something like this happening
to you?
A. I think, through my recollection, this incident might not have
happened.  I knew that one of my neighbours in my next room was
taken away -- no, the guy who worked next to my school -- the
technical school of Russei Keo.  A couple were taken or arrested.
I don't know whether two of them or one of them was arrested but
they both disappeared.  Then it came my turn who were transferred
to Ta Lei Co-operative and that's what I have seen and known and
I think my memory is not that good.  Maybe I have not fully
recollected all the episodes, and accept my apologies for not
being able to recall everything.  That's all.
Q. Mr. Bou Meng, sorry, I was referring to the period when you
were working in the workshop at S-21.  You were at the workshop
in S-
21.  During that period when you were working at S-21 
 
         21   workshop, where you were working with Vann Nath and other
artists; during that period, was there an episode the result of
which was that you had to go and say sorry; that you had to go
and apologize?
A. I don't know whether the apologies were made to my colleagues
or to the guards.  I'm not quite sure I understand the question.
Q. Were you forced to apologize to your colleagues in the
workshop at S-21 or to other people?  Were you, one day, shackled
or tied up and led to go and offer apologies to either your
colleagues or somebody else in the workshop?
A. I cannot recall or maybe I forgot, because I never offered my
apologies to anyone, even to my colleagues.  It is based on my
recollection but of course I would have forgotten.  As the Khmer
proverb says, "The elephants with four legs would have collapsed
sometime and the wise person would forget anyway."
Q. Thank you, Mr. Bou Meng, for these responses.  I have one very
last question for you.
This morning you told us that the accused had talked about
fertilizer, saying that humans could be fertilizer in the paddy
fields.  Could you explain to us the meaning of this term,
please?
A.  The statement is based on the accused Kaing Guek Eav, alias
Duch.  He said that if I could not resemble the portrait of Pol
Pot then I would be used as the human fertilizer.
And I didn't understand whether I would be used to produce
fertilizer or would I be used as the fertilizer myself for the
rice field.  That's what he asked me and I found it difficult to
respond to him also at that moment.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. Bou Meng.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the opportunity to the prosecutors to
put questions to Uncle Bou Meng, the survivor of S-21.
The floor is yours.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Good afternoon, Uncle Bou Meng.
I have a few questions to be put to you.  Regarding the food
ration, was it enough?
A. The food ration, during the time when I was detained, was
inadequate.  But when people were looking for someone who could
paint and when I came out to work as the painter with Vann Nath,
with Kong, with Pha Tha Chan and Bech, the food was adequate.
But it was inadequate when I was still in the prison.
And there would be other documents to support my arguments about
this condition.  You may refer to it.  Thank you.
Q. Thank you.
When you were being detained at S-21 in the common room and in
the individual cell, you said that the food ration was
inadequate.  How could you fulfil your hunger?
A. There was no substitute.  I was so hungry.  When I saw the
lizard crawling on the ceiling I would wish that it dropped down
so that I could grab it and eat to fulfil my hunger.  I told
myself that I did not know what kind of bad deeds I committed
previously that I would be treated like this without enough food,
without enough water, and I was questioning myself and I was
asking myself what kind of mistakes I had committed that I would
end up being here.
And I was thinking of karma and I did not even recall any
mistakes.  But then Angkar would say that Angkar had multiple
eyes like the pineapple so they never made any wrong arrests.
Q. Thank you.
Have you ever seen or known that at S-21 the practice of blood
drawing took place -- I mean blood drawing from detainees?
A. I have no idea of that practice because when it comes to
tortures, as I told you, for me I know it for sure,I was being
tortured, how I was being tortured.  But for the other people,
whether their blood were being drawn or were they inflicted other
kinds of tortures, it was far beyond my knowledge because it was
their own business.  That's all.
THE INTERPRETER:
The Co-Prosecutor's mic is not activated.
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. You said you were tortured and you were beaten until you were
bleeding and that one day you were sent to be poured with salt
water.  Who actually poured such water, salty water, on you?
A. When I was called to be treated upstairs when I was detained,
I was called so that my wound would be treated on the second
floor.  That person was a medic who would come to distribute
medicines to sick detainees and they would give us some kind of
rabbit pellet medications.  I could not even swallow that kind of
medication and they would beat me and scolded me for not being
able to just swallow such a small piece of rabbit pellet
medication.
Q. Thank you.
When they were searching for a painter at that time you were
being taken to see Duch.  When you saw him were you happy or were
you terrified?
A. At that time I was so happy because I would be able to eat
enough food and I told myself that it would be the moment that I
could be relieved from those kind of hell.  And then I was
determined that I would do my best to devote myself to work with
the painting, but I was at the beginning tested.  And I would
like to go back a little bit how I was tested.
Because they wanted to know whether I was really a painter, they
gave me a paper and a pencil so that I could draw.  I think that
person was smart.  Mr. Kaing Guek Eav is very smart.  His
education is much higher than me, so far as I know, and I know
for sure that he is smart and intelligent because he was the
first-class student in mathematics.  So for me, I am just a very
little and ordinary person.  I only know how to draw; that's all.
Q. Thank you.  During the time when you were asked to paint
portraits did you see any senior leaders of the Democratic
Kampuchea regime pay a visit to S-21?
A. I used to see them but I don't remember their names.  I saw a
well-built and tall guy, taller than him.  A few people paid a
visit to the workshop.  They went there briefly and then they
left when I was still painting the portrait of Pol Pot.
THE INTERPRETER:
The Co-Prosecutor's mic is not activated.
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. You said you have seen the Vietnamese soldiers were being
walked into the compound and you saw it through the window.  How
did you identify them as the Vietnamese soldiers?  Were they
brought in with uniforms, or what?
A. I could tell that they were Vietnamese soldiers because their
hats were very identical and their uniforms were different from
the black uniform worn by the Khmer Rouge soldiers, because the
Vietnamese soldiers would wear other like a green kind of
uniform.
Q. Thank you.
Now I would like to move back a little bit to the time, the
episode when the accused would like to test your painting
ability.  How could he test you?
A. As I already mentioned, I would like now to add further for
full details I may have not fully told the Court yet.  He gave me
a piece of paper to just make a few sketches and I -- when I was
in the jungle I used to drawing pictures, and at the technical
school I was used to drawing and then he noticed that I could be
a good painter and he asked me what kind of equipment or tools
that I would need to make sure I could paint on a big portrait;
on a big board, for example, and he would go and find those tools
for me.
So he asked his subordinates to look for the tools.  At that time
in Phnom Penh it would not be difficult to find those materials
because many things were left, including the big sheet of paper.
The roll of those paper could be easily taken, and then I took a
long piece of paper about one metre and a half long and one metre
wide so that I could really paint the portrait of Pol Pot on it.
I did not see Pol Pot or his picture before.  I was given a small
photo of him and then the photo was put in a photo frame, and
then there was a label underneath.  It tells us about the photo
shop in China.
Q. Thank you.  Could you please tell us more about when you were
being sent to S 21?  Have you ever thought that at that moment
your life would be ended although you have not made any mistakes?
A. I did not think about this because for a frank, honest person
like me I did not know that I would be taken there to be killed,
because I thought that when I could be used to work then I knew
that I could survive longer because I was very obedient to their
orders, assignments.  I could do whatever they wished me to do
and I could paint the four portraits as requested and ordered.
And the last portrait was missing already and I am sorry that
that painting is lost because the international community had
been asking for such a portrait but it is gone already, and we
have a lot of people from other countries who paid a visit to
Tuol Sleng and they asked me about that.
Q. Thank you very much.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Mr. President, I have no further questions.  I hope my colleague
would like to make some further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The floor is yours, the Co-Prosecutor.
MR. PETIT:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I don't have any further questions for
the witness but with your permission I'd like to thank him for
his testimony today on behalf of the Co-Prosecutors.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the civil party lawyers
and, according to the observation we obtained yesterday, the
civil party lawyers whose clients are to be testifying today
would get the most time.  I don't know whether they still
maintain the position or would they want to change?  Then they
could tell the Chamber to know also.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
We would like to continue with the same procedure the whole time
this week and next week, as long as we are here as civil parties.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now you take the floor.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to put
questions to the survivor of the regime, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. Good afternoon, Uncle Bou Meng.  My first question is the
follow-up question concerning the earlobes, your earlobes.  You
said that you received tortures onto the earlobes -- no, the ears
as a whole, and you said you had a hearing problem.
I would like to ask whether now you can listen to people and your
ears are okay, or you need a hearing aid to assist you with the
hearing?
A. The Court officials have helped me and taken me to the
hospital specializing in hearing and then they offered me a
hearing aid.  I now can hear better.  If I use my bare ears to
listen to people talking I would not be able to listen or to
understand their conversation unless I paid very close attention,
or move very close to them.  So if I could put number one to 10,
I could hear about 30 percent.  I mean three out of 10 because of
my impairment.  And I think my eyesight were not good.  My teeth,
also, are not good.
Of course, when people get old, this kind of thing will get old
as well, but you know, like, Chum Mey is still young, and I am
older than my age because I had been tortured, otherwise I would
be ok now.  And my ears would have not been that bad.  So here --
I can sit here, I cannot even listen to you if you talked over
there.
Q.   Thank you.  My next question.
I want to know about your suffering.  How long had you endured
this suffering or you still feel the suffering at the present
time?
A. Are you talking about the suffering, the physical suffering,
in addition to the emotional suffering?
Q. Thank you.  I meant regarding your earache.  So you suffered
when they tortured you.  Are your ears in a better condition now?
A. They are fully recovered, however, I have had hard hearing.
So that's why I need the hearing aid so that I could hear
properly.  Without the hearing aid, I could hardly hear anything.
That's all.
Q. Thank you.  Regarding the electrocution, as you stated that
they used the wall power outlet to electrocute you.  You said you
were electrocuted near your genitals.  How far was the spot where
it was electrocuted?
A. It was to the inner side of my thigh.  So once I was
electrocuted, I fell unconscious immediately, and when I gained
my consciousness, the water was everywhere on my face.
Q. Thank you.  Did they place the wire on your pants or on your
flesh directly?
A.  It was placed on my shorts, however, there was a machine that
I think it controlled the voltage, and that machine hooked into
the power outlet from the wall.  So I think they could increase
the voltage from that machine.
But you could easily understand that if the voltage was not
strong enough, then I would not fall unconscious.  That's it.
Q. Thank you.  You already informed the Chamber that once you
were electrocuted, you fell unconscious straight away.  And for
how long did you become unconscious?
A. If you are unconscious, it's like you were sleeping.  You
would not know how long you fell unconscious.
Q. On another matter, did you go and make consultation with the
psychological support?
A. Previously, I have had consultation with a psychological
support.  I was assisted with some tablets so that I would not
have insomnia, and I take two types of tablets on a daily basis.
But when I come to the Court and speak in this current condition,
I can't not even eat my lunch today because I was overwhelmed and
I did not feel like eating anything.
Q. Thank you.  Now, on the matter of interrogation, you stated to
the Chamber that there were five interrogators: Hor, Chan, Tith,
Peng and Kuy, but you haven't clearly verified that for each
interrogation, were the five present and beating you up or were
you interrogated and tortured by only one interrogator at a time?
A.   They were there during the interrogation, but only one
person beat me at a time and then they took turns.  First Chan
beat me up.  He asked me to count the number of lashes.  When I
counted up to 10 I told him, and he said, "It's not yet 10, I
only hit you once".  And I can remember his word.  I remember his
words, I remember his face.
I can always remember his face, the person who mistreated me.  I
remember both, those who did good thing and who did bad things to
me.
Q. Thank you.  The question is, on one day during the
interrogation, were the five interrogators beat you up on that
same day or only they came on another day?
A. That group of interrogators, the five of them, they took turns
to beat me up until all the five became exhausted or when the
time was up.  For example, from 7 a.m. until about 11 or 12, then
they rested.  I saw all of them.
Q. So from what I can understand, you confirmed that in -- for
each date, the five of them present at the same time.  Is that
true?
A. That is correct.
Q. My next question.  You stated to the Chamber that when they
water-hosed you in the common room, so all the inmates had to
take off their clothes, and later on they had to dry the floor
with their shorts.
The question is, did the guards order the prisoners to take off
their shorts or the prisoners took off their shorts by
themselves?
A. I am not sure on this point.  My memory is not clear.  I can
remember that all of us, 30 or 40 of us, were all naked, and I
even remember one phrase.  The person was about 15 or 16 years
old.  He said, "You, you have a small build but with big
genital".  That's what he said.  "And this guy, you're big, but
your penis is tiny".  That's what he said.  So they just make a
joke out of us being naked.  And I still can remember what was
said, but I can not say for sure whether we took off the pants by
ourselves or they ordered us to take the pants off.  I'm not sure
because probably they ordered us to take the pants off so they
can joke about our genitals.
Q. Thank you.
So for every time you were water-hosed, were all of you had to be
naked?
A. Yes, we all had to be naked.  I looked around.  Nobody had
underwear or pants on them.  People were like animals from hell,
all naked.  Because they treated us as enemies, as traitors, they
water-hosed us from outside so the water was everywhere in the
common room.  So then we tried to dry the floor with our pants
until the floor was completely dry.  Then we could lie down on
the floor again.
And we all of us had skin rashes and a lot of skin lice.  It was
so itchy everywhere.  I think it was Nhem En (phonetic) who
wanted to find a cure, a treatment for skin rash and itch, and
after that it was better.  Let me say, only the guards who could
able to find that traditional medicines to help us with the
itches and the skin rash.
Q. So when you were water-hosed, were you provided any soap?
A. No, there was no soap or nothing to scrub our body.  We were
washed like pigs were washed.  Because I used to raise pigs, when
I washed my pigs, then I water-hosed my pigs and I used my hands
to clean my pigs.  But I was even lower than my pigs or my dog
because no soap was used, no scarf was used to change or dry my
body.
Q. Thank you.
Regarding the common room, did you ever see the prisoners who
were taken out and when they returned, did you see any wound or
marks on their bodies?
A. It seems that I did not see such incidents.  I was not sure.
Because maybe they were in the same way like I was there, it
means after the interrogation and the torture, they would be
taken to the individual cells so that those in the common room
would not know that we were being tortured.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber will take a break now for 17 minutes and we will
resume at 3 p.m.
Court Official, please arrange refreshment for the witness.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1442H to 1500H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
I would like, now, to give the floor to the civil party lawyer to
continue the questions to be put to Bou Meng, the survivor -- one
of the three survivors from the S-21 office.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Thank you again, Mr. President.  Good afternoon, Your Honours.
Now, I'll continue my questions to the civil party and the
survivor of S-
office.            2
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. You already stated to the Chamber that you saw female guards
walking pregnant prisoners.  And the question is, where did you
see the pregnant prisoners being walked; from which direction to
which direction?
A. Mr. Lawyer, when I looked to the east direction, the canvas
was propped against the window and through the door, I could see
a pregnant woman being walked and kicked and I did not look for
long.  I did not know whether that pregnant woman fell on the
ground and got up or walked again because I only had a quick look
in that direction and that was what I saw.
Q. Thank you.
So how many pregnant woman did you see and how many female guards
did you see?
A. There was only one pregnant woman and there were two or three
female guards
walking behind.
That's all.
Q. Can you confirm whether she was kicked from behind or she was
hit?
A. They were female guards so they kicked her from behind because
that female -- that pregnant woman did not walk quickly enough.
So because, probably, she was in a state of fear as it was --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Uncle Meng, please you respond only when you see the red light so
that the interpreter can listen fully; otherwise, the
international judges and participants would not be able to hear
what you say.  Of course, you would wish your statements to be
heard by both Cambodian people and the international participants
and both on the radio and on the TV so that the whole world can
see and hear what you said.
MR. KONG PISEY:
I no longer have questions, Mr. President, and I would like Your
Honour's permission to permit Bou Meng to ask questions to the
accused through you.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I would like, now, to give the floor to the next lawyer for
civil party; the lawyer for Group 1.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good afternoon, Your Honours.
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Q.  Good afternoon, Uncle Bou Meng.  I have some questions for
you.  Please answer
briefly to my questions due to the time and location for the
civil party lawyers.  Thank you.
From the time you arrived at S-
21, you were tortured in order to            2   extract your confession.  How long were you tortured?
A. Miss Lawyer, I am really not clear on the total period of
being interrogated; however, it was several months or several
weeks, I think.  But being detained there from when I was healthy
until I was so skinny; it was quite a long time.
It was common when we still had full strengths, but once we
became weak they would start to peel our skin.  That expression
means they would start to interrogate and torture us.
Q. Thank you.
My second question; on the 7 January 1979, at that time, you left
S-21 office and there were security guards from S-21 office who
forced you to go along with them.  Do you or can you recall the
names of those guards and how many of them?
A. Ms. Lawyer, I cannot recall the number of the guards; however,
I clearly remember that I was walked from Tuol Sleng toward the
Chamkar Duong area.
However, when we left Tuol Sleng, we stayed in a house until it
was dusk, then we continued our journey toward the direction of
Chamkar Duong.  I still cannot recall the number of the guards.
I was so fearful at the time I didn't know where they took me.
So I cannot recall the number, but they were armed.
Q. Thank you.
And what about the names of the guards; do you know their names?
A. I only remember the names of the interrogators.  I could not
recall the names of the guards.
Q. Thank you.
My last question:  at that time, you heard the sound of the
trucks coming in and going out, taking the prisoners in and out,
day and night.  When you heard the sound of the vehicles, was it
from the east or from the west entrance?  Please can you try to
recall?  It's okay if you cannot remember.
A. From my recollection, although I must admit I am forgetful, it
was common for the vehicle coming in and going out.  However I
did not know when the car going out -- I'm not sure where it went
to, I only heard the sound.  And at that time I was a prisoner
being detained in the individual cell, and the car sound coming
from the front of the Tuol Sleng prison.
Q. Now, previously I thought that this is my last question, but
now I have another question based on the request from my
colleague.
You said you heard the screaming of the victims -- that is the
screaming of the prisoners at S-21.  When you heard such
screaming, was the accused, the prison chief, was there with you?
A. While I was sleeping in Building C on the third floor in the
common room, at night I heard the screaming.  I think probably
the screaming was a result of the person being interrogated and
tortured.
To me it seems the screaming was echoing and coming from
everywhere at the surrounding vicinity of Tuol Sleng prison,
probably because during that time those houses around Tuol Sleng
were used as the interrogation houses.
But now all those houses are gone, even the house where I was
interrogated behind Building A outside the compound also
disappears now.  I could not recognize it any more.  That's all.
MS. TY SRINNA:
I have no more questions for you and thank you for answering the
questions.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now the floor is given to the next civil party lawyer.  You take
the floor.
MS. JACQUIN:
Good afternoon, Your Honours.
BY MS. JACQUIN:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Bou Meng.  These are my questions to you.
First of all, you stated that in the common room there were
foreign prisoners or people who looked foreign, westerners.  Were
they taken away while you were still in that room or were they
still in that room at the time when you were taken away from that
room?
A. Ms. Lawyer, when I saw them they were westerners or we say
Europeans.  They had light complexion and blond hair.  Of course
I did not know their nationality.  I saw them for only a short
period of time and then they disappeared.  They were there for
probably two weeks being detained on that floor of Building C.
So after about two weeks they disappeared and I didn't know where
they were taken to.  That's all.
Q. Thank you.
You stated that you saw Vietnamese soldiers in uniform;
consequently, you were quite sure that they were indeed
Vietnamese soldiers, beyond doubt.
A. Let me tell you, Ms. Lawyer, those Vietnamese soldiers,
because they wore a different uniform, military uniform,
different from the Khmer Rouge military uniforms, that uniform
was similar to the Chinese soldier uniform.  They had a khaki
colour and they had their rank displayed and they wore the type
of helmet.  That's what led to my conclusion.  That's all.
Q. I'm asking this question because there seems to be something
ambiguous in your response unless I have misunderstood.
Would these Vietnamese soldiers have been soldiers who retained
their uniforms, or were these Vietnamese soldiers partners of the
Khmer Rouge as guards and organizers of the prison?
A. Ms. Lawyer, it is my personal view that they were real
soldiers, they were not fake.  So it was the real military
uniform, although some uniforms were rather old.  That is all.
Q. So you confirm that those soldiers did not have a status of
prisoners?
A. I was wondering, for example, like when Kaing Guek Eav, alias
Duch, said when you were sent there you would be treated as the
enemy regardless you were civilians or soldiers, you were all
regarded as the enemy.
Q. Furthermore, you have stated that you saw a number of guards
who were 15 or 16 years old.  They were mere teenagers.  Have you
seen guards who were younger than that still, who would have
been, let's say, 10 or 12 years old?
A. I did not see any guards who were 15 or under, unless I was
mistaken.  Usually they were 15 or above.  That was through my
observation at the time.  That's all.
Q. Thank you.  And I have two personal questions for you now.
Do you feel bad about having signed the confession that you had
to sign because of duress, whereas you knew that this confession,
the content of it, was false?
A. Ms. Lawyer, at that time my emotion was mixed.  I was fearful,
worried; I could not describe the emotion.  So I just did what I
was ordered to do because there was absolutely no reason for them
to suspect me to be a CIA or KGB agent, and I was tortured
enough.
Some prisoners, when they were tortured and interrogated, they
confessed and finally they were taken and smashed, but for me I
was different.  Of course physically I signed the confession but
inside my heart I of course did not approve the confession.
Q. I'm sure nobody would challenge that, sir.
Another question.  Within the workshop amongst the sculptors,
painters, artists would you amongst yourselves talk at all about
the tortures that you had been subjected to and the confessions
that you were forced to sign?  Did you talk about these things
amongst yourselves within the workshop?
A. Ms. Lawyer, I never talked about that.  The reason is because
I was scared.  Usually there were two or three prison guards who
were there constantly and the door was locked both inside and
outside, so if we whispered or chit-chatted on this thing then
it's so risky.
Q. One last question.  Today how do you feel about the fact that
you are a survivor?
A. Ms. Lawyer, I am so delighted that now my chest seems to be
lighter.  All my statements to the Judges and to the lawyers and
the rest, I felt much better now and I believed through peace and
justice would be done for those 1.8 or two million people who
lost their lives during that regime, and I myself too, I was a
victim and the scope of suffering was incalculable.  I was almost
killed.  My back was wounded severely and still I could carry out
my profession, painting the portraits to satisfy the chief of the
prison.
But it was shameful that I could not save the life of my wife.
I'm not sure if it was my mistake or not and I really want to ask
the accused where was my wife killed.  If I know where it is then
I would go there in order to pray for her soul, and that I am now
being testified before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Court of
Cambodia, only the spirit of the earth would know where the soul
has gone to or where the dead bodies were buried.  So only the
spirits of the wind, of the water, of the earth would know.
And for those who killed the people, they could tell the truth or
they could lie, but only the spirits of the earth, the wind and
the water know where my wife died, so that I could pray for her
soul.  That is all.
MS. JACQUIN:
Thank you, Mr. Bou Meng.
Mr. President, on behalf of all the civil party groups, we have a
request to put to you.  We would like to ask for 10 extra
minutes.  There are seven lawyers present here representing 90
victims.  All of these victims are important.  If we are to share
out this time it would amount to one half-minute per victim, but
we have legitimate questions to put.
Sir, you have been showing tolerance in interpreting the time
allowance and we are grateful for this.  However, we have all
sorts of time management problems.  If you could assure us that
we have could have, if need be, an extra 10 minutes, this would
make it possible for us to work amongst ourselves more
harmoniously.
Thank you.
MS. CANIZARES:
Mr. President, if extra time were to be granted to the
representatives of the civil parties would it be possible to have
extra time, if necessary, for the defence to ask questions?
MR. PRESIDENT:
In order not to complicate the matter regarding the request by
both sides and the civil party lawyers use the time as allocated
by the Chamber, however, the Chamber will not allow extra time
and the time has run out already.
Now I would give the opportunity to the survivor, Bou Meng.
Uncle Bou Meng, do you have any questions that you would like to
ask the accused at the moment?
MR. BOU MENG:
Mr. President, I would like to ask him where did he smash my
wife; whether it was at Tuol Sleng or Choeung Ek or at another
location.
Did you have the authority to relocate her or to smash her?  It
has been so many years already.  I went to her native village in
Tboung Khmum district in Kampong Cham province.   I went to ask
her elder sibling whether my wife has ever returned to the
village and the response was no.  So I presumed that she was
killed while she was detained.
And my question is just to tell me, just to tell me where she was
killed or smashed.  Then I would go to that location and just to
get the soil from that location to pray for her soul because
there was not her document at the S-21 Office.  I used to have
some documents as well, but some of the documents I have I have
lost or are missing.  And I want the matter to be done legally.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Can you verify that your wife, who was detained at S-21 with you,
her name was Ma Yoeun alias Thy.  Is that correct?
MR. BOU MENG:
That is correct, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, the first question is, do you
know Ma Yoeun alias Thy?  If you know her, could you answer to
his question that when you were the chairman of S-21 and that his
wife was taken away to be executed, where was she killed?  In
Phnom Penh or at Choeung Ek?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, thank you, Mr. President for giving me the
opportunity to respond to the question.
Mr. Meng, especially for you I have been moved.  We have lived
together and you were healthy and I was shocked to see you on the
28th of February 2008 before the Co-Investigating Judges.  I
would like to respond to your desire, but it was beyond my
capacity because this work done by my subordinates, but I would
like to presume that your wife might have been killed at Boeng
Choeung Ek.
Meanwhile, to be sure, I would like to ask you to please ask
Comrade Huy who may be able to tell you further detail about the
fate of your wife.  Please accept my highest assurance of my
regards and respects towards the soul of your wife.  That's all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, please control your emotion and re-compose because
the moment is important that it takes time to listen to the
testimony of the survivors who have survived the regime and to
recall the past.
So, Uncle Bou Meng, I hope you have already been told by the
accused about the fate of your wife because his conclusion is
that she could have been killed at Boeng Choeung Ek, especially
when it comes to the time when she was sent in during the year of
1977. 
          19   At the beginning, the killing would take place only at the
premises of Tuol Sleng compound and later on, after 1977 to '78,
then the execution sites had been shifted to Choeung Ek.  So it
could be possible that the fate of your wife would be ended there
at Choeung Ek or she would be killed there.
And to get further information, it is rather difficult because
the people who perished amounted to more than 12,000, and those
more than 1
2,000 were registered and there were still numbers of            2   detainees who are still unaccounted for.  At the beginning, we
know that there would have been 12,300 or something detainees,
but after inspecting the list and compared with other lists, then
we could see more numbers, different numbers of the people killed
during that time.  But I think the actual number of people who
would have been killed would be even higher if all documents
could be supported.
Next, the accused, besides your response to Uncle Bou Meng, one
of the survivors who asked you about the fate of his wife, the
Chamber would like to also know whether the accused would like to
make any comments or observations, testimony, concerning the
remarks or testimony of Uncle Bou Meng.  So you are now given the
opportunity to do so if you would wish.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first, I would like to confirm to Mr. Bou Meng and
the other victims.  He keep asking what kind of mistakes he had
committed; what kind of mistake his wife committed that led to
their arrest.
Frankly, during that time, I already -- I think yesterday I told
Brother Mey already -- anyone who opposed them would be singled
out as the CIA, the KGB, or the expansionist, so on and so forth.
So I would like just to repeat it and to be more precise.
I would like to state that the Cultural Revolution of China would
be seen as the reference.  Although Pol Pot did not follow
exactly that kind of philosophy, he used his own improvised
theory, so he would implicate anyone as an enemy.
And I told Brother Mey already about the CIA.  He asked me
whether CIA or KGB agents have already been smashed and I told
him that anyone who opposes the Pol Pot were those who have
defeated the Pol Pot regime.
And, after all, the fascist political politics ended on January
1979, so the reason why people were implicated or opponents, this
lead to the destruction of the whole regime, and I would like to
emphasize again that this crime is so severe, although it was
committed by the upper echelon.  But members of the Party were
part of the process all across the country, because more than one
million people were executed, and emotionally I am responsible
for all the crimes, although they were committed by the senior
people.
I am responsible in the eyes of the law, and I now would like to
be tried by the ECCC alone, and I don't want my subordinates to
be on trial too.  And I have already dedicated -- I have already
prayed for the souls of the dead people to rest in peace.  I'm
not talking here to evade the responsibility of my crimes but I
want to reveal my frankness.  That's all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the defence counsel to
have the opportunity to put questions to Uncle Bou Meng, one of
the survivors of S-21.
The floor is yours, if you would wish to do so.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Your Honours, my questions here are
first I would like Mr. Bou Meng to clarify on some points because
I have been ambivalent regarding those points.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. When you were detained at S-21 did you hear the cries, the
weeps or screams of people in the compound?  Because this
morning, before we adjourned for lunch, you said that there were
full -- everyone was quiet and people could not even whisper to
one another.  So I think your testimony in the morning seems to
be contradictory to your testimony in the afternoon.  Could you
please repeat or confirm your both testimonies?
A. I said it was very quiet because the doors were all shut when
I left, evacuated.  I did not have a chance to look inside the
rooms because I were at -- I was walked away at gunpoint and I
was not brave enough to even look back to see how many people
would be in the room.  That's why I said it was quiet.
And I think regarding the screams, the cries, I knew that my ears
were too good to listen to those noises because I was also a very
good artist.  Having heard the sound, I could even draft or
sketch a kind of portrait, so I think I was not mistaken to hear
those screams during the time when I was detained.
Q. Thank you.  Could you please emphasize again: you said that
before the morning break, you said that the building was full of
people.  And you said that the building was full of detainees but
it was so quiet because people could not even whisper into the
ears of the neighbours.  But how could you say that you heard the
screams, the cries that people cried for help?  I don't want you
to tell us about the time when you were about to leave S-21.
A. I would like to state that when I was inside the detention
centre, around the compound there were a lot of interrogating
houses.  And inside the room, of course, you could not hear
anyone scream or cry because we would be punished.  But I'm
talking about the people who would be taken away to be
interrogated inside those houses, and we could hear from the
houses.  I'm not here to talk and to implicate anyone.  I'm
talking here, right before the iron genie, and if I talked
something, exaggerating anything, then I would be run over by a
bus.
Q. Thank you.  I would like you to only confirm.  Number two, I
would like your confirmation also.  You said the subordinates of
Duch, who treated the Vietnamese prisoner who did not keep his
promise that he was a sculptor, and that you said Duch ordered
his subordinate to kick or to torture him but later on you said
that Duch was not there when his subordinates tortured him.  So
could you please tell us whether Duch was there when the torture
took place?
A. Mr. Lawyer, I said, my memory is not good.  And I said clearly
that it is because I have had been severely tortured, and I don't
want to evade any responses but if I made any mistake in my
testimony it is resulted from the very poor memory of mine;
resulted, of course, from such torture.  So I think my memory is
now about
to 20 percent good, compared to the 100 percent I           10   could have had previously.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Uncle Meng, could you please control your emotion?  I know
that you have been bombarded with questions, and you have been
answering to those questions for almost the whole day already.
We would like you to please recompose yourself.
And the question is implied as, have you heard that Duch ordered
his subordinates to beat the Vietnamese detainee?  And some said
that he was the Khmer Krom national who pretended to be a good
sculptor.  So the question is whether Duch did order such torture
or punishment to be inflicted on that person, or Duch
subordinates initiated such ideas of punishment spontaneously,
because there was a torture inflicted on that person; so whether
it was ordered or not ordered by Duch.  Could you please verify?
A. I did not see or hear it.  That's why I cannot presume that he
ordered his subordinates to do that.  Or maybe his subordinates
just did that by themselves.  I can say that without any order
from their subordinates I don't even think that their
subordinates could inflict any kind of tortures on them - on
anyone.  So I could see that, after their work, they covered --
you know, like, when they treated their staff, they would cover
the blankets all over their body and walk them away because they
were afraid to let us know.  I don't know, but I think it is just
my presumption.
Q. I think you probably be confused.  You are the survivor of
that regime and that it is,
of course, in your testimony reflecting your emotion and your
story and how you have suffered and, also, you have told us about
your wife's story.
But now we have another matter that we would like to ask about
your testimony concerning the accused because a witness is not
supposed to give a kind of presumption because it is not really
appropriate.  Because in the name of the witness, if the question
is put to you whether you say that you saw it or you didn't see
it, you should just say "yes" or "no" and please try to avoid
giving your presumption or your -- some kind of conclusion
because the term "conclusion" is not aimed to be coming from the
witness.
A. At that time, I'm not sure so I would like to say that I don't
know, but I saw the person was being kicked and beat up.  I don't
know who ordered them to do so.  That's all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could the lawyer put further questions?
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Thank you, Mr. Bou Meng.
The third question.  When you were arrested all together with
your wife from the cooperative to be put at wooden shed right in
front of the prison, were you shackled by your ankles?
A. At that time, they treated me better because they used the
very cold method because there were no cuffs, no chain, no
shackles.  They mislead me. They lied to me because they did not
actually take me to the Fine Arts School.  It was the fine arts
school of Tuol Sleng prison, so they cheated on me.  I could just
easily be convinced to climb onto the truck and then be taken
away and then they did not take me to the Fine Arts School.
Instead, we were taken to the prison.
Q. Thank you.  The reason I asked you that question to confirm
your statement because your statement before the Co-Prosecutor on
the 29 of August 2006 in ERN-00145528, you said you were
handcuffed and shackles; both your wife and you.  And this
morning, you said that only your hands were cuffed and that your
legs were free from being shackled.
And as you said, you are old and you had been tortured; your
memory deteriorating.  I think everyone can forget except the God
who is able to remember everything.  Human being will be
forgetful anyway.  Thank you.
Question number four.  Your statement before the Co-Prosecutors
-- and you said later, "I learned that I was taken -- prisoners
were taken to be executed at Choeung Ek, days and nights".  Do
you maintain that your statement is still confirmed?
A. Mr. Lawyer, I did say that there were trucks which brought
people in and out, but I
did not say that they would be taken away to be killed.  I didn't
say that.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Could you please repeat the ERN number?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
ERN 00145533, the fourth line from down up.
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. "And later on, I learned that they were carried or taken to be
executed at Choeung Ek and the truck would take them days and
nights."
That's why I am asking whether you maintain your statement or
would you like to change it because some witnesses said that they
only saw the prisoner being carried away by trucks at night, not
during the daytimes.  Thank you.
A. When I was detained in Building C, I heard the sound of the
trucks during the
nights and days.  I don't know whatever other people would
testify, but this is what I have heard because there were trucks
coming in and going out.  I don't know where people would be
taken to, but I have heard the noises.  I did not see the trucks.
I think the trucks would have been parked right in front of the
entrance to the east or maybe to the west; let me recall it.
I had been working at the premises for some time.  I still cannot
remember whether Tuol Sleng entrance would be to the east or to
the west, but I think the trucks would be parking somewhere near
the entrance when I was walked into the premises during the first
time when we were approaching the location and, again, I did not
-- or I don't know whether people would be taken away to be
executed.
Q. Thank you.  Question number five.
When leaving S-21, did you go with Vann Nath and Chum Mey or did
you go with other people?  Could you please recall the people?
A. We left with the survivors who were either sculptor, painter,
artist. I paint a black and white portrait while Nath paints
coloured, and we have other artists who also left at that time --
Pha Tha Chan, Oeng Bech -- so altogether about more than 10
people who would be leaving the location but many of whom have
died already, including Grandfather Thuon.
So I, of course, left with several other people and when we
reached the area near Ang Snuol we departed, were separated
because we heard the sound of the trucks of the United Front army
and then there were exchanges of fire between the soldiers, and
then we were scattered and I walked across National Road Number
4.
Q. Thank you.  I just want to know when you left, you left along
with Chum Mey and Vann Nath.
And my next question is I just want the confirmation.  This
morning you said when you fled S-21, one time you said it was at
6 p.m. and the other time you said at 9 a.m.  And when Ty Srinna
asked you, you said you went at about 6 or 7 p.m.  So can you
tell me exactly what time you left S-21?
A. Mr. Defence Counsel, I left Tuol Sleng prison at 9 o'clock.
We left the painting workshop and we were ordered to walk
straight in one line.  We were so fearful, so we walked in one
line and when we reached a house we stopped and stayed there for
quite a while.  I cannot recall the location.  Maybe it's the
Beehive radio station.
Q. I just want to know the time.  So you say now it's at 9
o'clock in the morning.
And my seventh question, which is the last question; when you
were painting the portrait did you ever see Khieu Samphan coming
to visit?
A. Mr. Defence Counsel, I never saw Khieu Samphan come in.  All
those senior peoples, I never saw them.  Even Pol Pot, I only saw
his photo; I never saw him in person.  Sometimes people ask
whether I saw Pol Pot personally because I painted his portrait.
In fact I never saw him in person.  I also had my portrait
painted for a Chinese shop in Shanghai.
Q. Thank you.  So when you painted the portrait at the technical
school did Khieu Samphan ever go there?
A. Mr. Defence Counsel, I can recall when you ask me that
question because I worked there.  At that time I was preparing
the numbers of the pages and Mr. Khieu Samphan asked me, "Do you
have a telephone?" and then I told him and I pointed -- oh, the
telephone was at the corner, because I didn't know that he was
Khieu Samphan.  But when he left, my work colleague told me that,
"That was Khieu Samphan," and I felt rather surprised.  So now I
can recall.
Q. Thank you.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
I have no questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel, if you have questions for Bou
Meng the floor is yours.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you very much, Mr. President.
BY MS. CANIZARES:
Q. Good evening, Mr. Bou Meng.  Judge Lavergne brought up earlier
on the fact that when you were working in the CPK propaganda
service, which was at the Russei Keo, you were somebody who was
very obedient.  And if I've understood correctly, you indicated
that you followed along physically but not emotionally.  Could
you please develop this assertion, this idea?
A. Ms. Defence Counsel, the work that was assigned to me by Hak
to draw sketches of the machines, of the half a machine or of the
new spare parts, or the sketches of vehicle machines, all types
of machinery, I drew all those sketches to include in the book
for the students to study at that time.
My recollection in making that document for those technical
school participants, that was what I did.  Of course I obeyed the
order from the upper echelon and my superior, Hak, assigned me to
make or compile those documents.  That is all my answer.
Q. Could you please tell us why emotionally you said that you
didn't follow along?  I understood that you were just obeying to
an order, so therefore of course you were obeying physically, we
could say, but why do you state that you did not obey
emotionally?
A. On this matter let me tell you, Ms. Defence Counsel,
physically I followed the assignment and, as my skill was in
drawing sketches, I just did it.  But in my mind I did not have
100 percent confidence and trust in the leadership, and the
reason?  Because I saw people being evacuated from the city, and
the city became like a ghost city.  And this is my response to
you.
Q. This will be my last question.  So why, therefore, did you
continue obeying physically?
A. Ms. Defence Counsel, regarding my assignment as a painter or a
sketch drawer, I had to do it.  I had to carry out my task and
even if I completed and carried out my task 100 percent, I was
still being transferred.
So I was transferred to the Ta Lei Co-operative and that act made
me lost my trust in that regime.
Q. Given the answer, would you please give me the leave for
another question?  Therefore, could I understand that it was
because you were afraid that you continued obeying physically?
A. I don't really understand your question.  Can you ask the
question again?
Q. You are telling us that if you did not follow the orders 100
percent that were given to you that you could be transferred.  So
therefore can I conclude from this answer that it was fear that
made you follow 100 percent the orders that were given to you?
A. In fact, that was the case.
MS. CANIZARES:
I no longer have any further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The hearing of the testimony of the survivor, Bou Meng, that has
been for the whole day has now come to an end.
Before I adjourn the hearing, the Chamber would like to inform
the parties that the Chamber has a schedule for tomorrow's
hearing.  According to the planned schedule, the Chamber will
hear testimony of survivor CP1/6.  However, due to the time
calculation and the fact that that survivor was involved, the
duration of the testimony would be not more than half a day or
just a little bit over half a day.
Therefore, the Chamber decides to invite another survivor, E2/80.
If there is remaining time left, then we would hear the testimony
of this stand-by survivor, E2/80 from the civil party Group 3.
So this amendment of the schedule is as I've described and in
fact the E2/61 was to schedule after the survivor CP1/6.
However, due to the distance of the long residence and that we do
not hold hearings on the Thursday and Friday, then we decided to
make this change.
And now today's hearing is adjourned.  The Chamber will resume
tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. as scheduled.
Court Officer, please make necessary arrangements for Mr. Bou
Meng to return to his residence by appropriate means by working
in coordination with WESU.
Security Officers, take the accused back to the detention
facility and bring him back here before 9 a.m.
The Court is adjourned.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1613H)
