P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter the courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court is in session now.  The Court Official, could you
please bring Mr. François Bizot into the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next in our proceedings, we are going to hear the testimony of
Mr. Francois Bizot to be followed from what he already testified
yesterday.  So now, the Chamber would like to ask the Judges of
the Trial Chamber whether they would like to ask any questions to
the witness.
Since there are no questions from our Judges and I have a
question on my own.
BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q.  Mr. Francois Bizot, during the time when you were detained at
M-13 from October to the 25th of December 1971, did you notice
how many staff, including the cadres and guards, in that office
at that time?
A.   Your Honour, I tried later on to figure this out but I
wasn't successful in doing so.  There was Duch, his deputy and
one or two Khmers, I believe, who were in charge; of course, with
a lower level of responsibility, the two younger ones.  The
guards, or in any case those who were assigned to follow me -- to
follow my eventual -- when I was walking around -- they could
have been three or maybe two others for the other prisoners.
Maybe there were five or six guards in total with a few
rotations, but those were rare.  So let's say about 10 people in
total maybe, but I'm not sure.  I'm not sure of this figure.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the
Co-Prosecutors to be able to put some questions to the witness if
you would wish to do so.
QUESTIONING BY CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. YET CHAKRIYA:
Q. Mr. Francois Bizot, could you please clarify regarding the
detainees who came with a child, so where were they taken to?
A. I do not know where the father of the little girl was brought
to.  I have the feeling, however, that he was brought to his
death and the little girl stayed in the camp.  And, as I said to
you yesterday, she was taken in by the young guards and she quite
quickly witnessed or participated in the self-criticism sessions
which also came with songs.  And I remember seeing her not really
answering the questions but at least clapping her hands and
singing along, singing along with these revolutionary songs that
were sung before and after each one's self-criticism confession.
I remember after about two weeks, she became a little girl who
had completely joined the cause in a certain way, you could say.
She completely followed the steps of the guards, we could say,
and then I don't remember exactly, however, but did she stay in
the camp or was I released before she left?  That I cannot really
remember.  I cannot give you anymore details on that, I do not
remember.
Q. How old was that little girl?
A. Nine years old because I had asked her for her age.  She was
nine years old.
Q. Another question, please.  Could you please clarify again when
you were released from M-13 were Son and Lay, your assistants,
released at that time also?
A. My two assistants, my two companions, were not released.  They
were, Duch told me, released but they had to stay on-site.  That
is to say that they were no longer shackled and that they could
participate in -- or that they were going to participate in the
work at the camp.
In any case, they would remain free within the camp, we could
say, in relation to -- they would remain free in this camp in
relation to the zones that were still under government control;
this camp being considered as a free zone.
The explanation to this because I tried in vain to make this
inconsistency clear.  I considered that I was innocent.
Innocent, and on the other hand, that we could not consider that
my two companions could not -- would also not be free, that I
could not understand.
And they answered me that they were Khmer and I was a foreigner.
So, therefore, my place was not in the camp, however, they would
be released in Khmer Rouge-controlled territory which was called
the Liberated Zone.  I know, unfortunately, that that's not how
things went, however, and that they were executed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Petit.
MR. PETIT:
Thank you, Mr. Bizot.  Thank you, Your Honours.
BY MR. PETIT:
Q. A few questions.  First of all, you spoke to us about -- a few
times.  In fact. you said this about the deputy who you thought
was the deputy of the accused who was the first person in the
camp with whom you had contact, the first cadre in the camp with
whom you had contact, and it was a rather unpleasant meeting, you
said.
Were you able back then, or since, with relative certainty to
establish the identity of this deputy, the deputy of the accused?
What was his name?
A.       I have absolutely no memory of this.  I don't remember
his name.  However, I knew it at one time but I don't remember it
now.  I saw several times this cadre, who was indeed a rather
brutal person and who was completely insensitive to others. and
in a particularly remarkable way I must say.
However, not so long ago, having learned that these are not --
this is additional information that I gathered, so it's not
directly related to my memories of M 13 per se, this is
additional information that came from recent information.
Well, one of the deputies of Duch at S 21, if I may refer to S
21, was a certain Mum Nai, Mam Nai -- I think it was Mam Nai, yes
-- and I thought that maybe, therefore, that it was Mam Nai at M
13 who was his deputy as well.  But, at the same time, the
descriptions of this deputy, this henchman, yeah, at S 21 depict
him as being somebody who was particularly tall and albino, or in
any case was very -- had very clear skin, which did not
correspond at all to the physical aspect that I remember from the
deputy at M 13.  So I cannot be sure that it was the same person.
Q. Thank you.
On the other hand, you also said yesterday in your statement that
where you were detained, or retained we may say even, you could
observe -- or at least once you were able to do so -- the accused
interrogating a prisoner, the father of the little girl in
question, after having received a file from the guard who was
accompanying the detainee to the accused.  And as far as I
understood from your statement, that this took place, therefore,
in an open space which was visible to everyone.
So, therefore, were you able to observe other situations of this
kind where the accused was working, we could say, at
interrogating other prisoners, and did you see any other
exchanges of files related to these interrogations?
A. In order to be a witness of this it was necessary for there --
it could not rain.  Duch would set up his table, it was a small
table, a small mobile table, outside under the porch of the
guards' hut, and I saw the interior of this hut only once, and
then it -- there were hammocks inside, so the guards would sleep
in hammocks.  And when it was not raining, therefore, I could see
Duch working behind this table; the accused working behind this
table.
However, this was not visible to everybody, being that if --
because if this barrack -- hut was next to the other huts -- but,
however, the prisoners could not see easily the guards moving
around their huts because the fullest hut was on the right-hand
side of the guards' hut and the prisoners were necessarily and
always lying down.
So the hut that was facing the prisoners' hut that I've just
mentioned could see probably what was happening in -- around the
hut reserved for the guards.  However, it was not the one that
was the most -- where the most prisoners were housed and, in any
case, Duch -- since it rained often when I was in the camp, most
of the time Duch was inside and, therefore, to answer your
question, Your Honour, the only memory that I have of this -- the
only -- that I saw somebody come in and out practically
immediately.  Most times people -- I would see people go in and I
did not see them come out, and if they came out it was after a
long time.  Anyway, he came in and he came out immediately,
practically.
I also saw soldiers arrive one evening and leave the next day, a
big group of soldiers who were not wearing any boots, and this
stirred up the camp because there was -- the number of guards was
not sufficient to face an escape attempt by these soldiers.  They
were --
Q. Thank you.   Now, concerning the other part of the question,
did you have the opportunity to see any other exchanges of
documents or files, except for what concerned you directly, in
the context of these interrogations?
A. I do not remember this.
Q. Thank you.  Now, maybe this was the result of a translation
problem, but yesterday you said to us, in a very eloquent way,
the last meal before your release and, in particular, the
conversation that you had with the accused in which he confessed
to you having himself beaten prisoners to make them confess.
You, however -- and once again I will ask for your indulgence if
this was not correctly translated -- but you seemed to say that
Duch said to you at the same time that this work would absolutely
revolt him, was repulsive to him, would make him puke, I would
actually say.  And I read your book with attention -- and I've
re-read your book, I must say -- and I re-read your written
records of your interview and I noted nowhere that at any given
moment, and even less during this meal, that the accused during,
these few months, expressed to you remorse or any kind of anxiety
in relation to this work, we could say.
So, therefore, could you clarify if indeed you remember today or
if you can still -- this apparent remorse that he might have
expressed to you during this dinner, or if this was just maybe
some kind of form of hope that you might have or some kind of
memory, but that is a memory that you have now that might not
correspond to the reality?
A. Yes, Your Honour.  I am indeed confused concerning this
particular point.
The testifying objectively about what happens is something -- for
what about what I saw and relating this, writing this down, is
something else.  If the exactness of the events and of the facts
that happened there and that I relate in my book does not go
beyond my memories, I -- and somebody would have said might have
said some things differently and seen things.  I did not see
everything, that's true.  And even more so -- and I did not try
to call upon my conscious memory in a certain way to relate 30
years later of what happened because it was not expected for me
to come out of there alive.
So -- and as I said to you, in this book I was speaking about a
feeling and making -- giving an objective statement on what
happened during my three months there 30 years later, is
something that is another story that requires much more from
more, requires much more verbal caution, I would say.
So I must say that in order to answer your question I did not
hear Duch express any remorse.  No, that is true.
I believe remembering the -- I was going to say the extreme
unpleasant -- Duch's extreme embarrassment when he told me that
he would beat prisoners or that had happened, and if he had not
said that to me I would not have imagined that, but having said
that to me I retained that, that he had a lot of discomfort.  The
words that he was using to express this I cannot confirm them,
that's true.  I only remember that it was on some kind of
spontaneous -- in a spontaneous sincere moment and that he
considered that this was something that he had to do and he had
to force himself to do it.  He had to make this into some form of
duty.
If the word yesterday was to say that this made him "puke" well,
I think I don't remember, in fact, what I said yesterday, but I
think that's maybe not the word.  I don't think that that's the
word that he actually used, no.
Q. You agree with me, therefore, that having a duty does not
necessarily mean forcing yourself to accomplish this duty?
And you can correct me, of course, if I'm mistaken, but you said
to me that at no moment during your detention the accused
expressed remorse to you, and that during this conversation that
you relate in your book and in your written record of the
interview -- it's true that 30 years later we understand, all of
us, of course, that your statement is a mirror of these
circumstances but this obligation to perform this kind of work
you do not relate it in this -- in your statement or in your
interview.
So, therefore, would it be more -- would it be better to say that
this was more of an impression than something you actually saw
yourself?  Wouldn't that be more correct?
A. He said to me that it was something that he disliked.  And I'm
afraid of having written something and having therefore emptied
my memory in doing so.  I'm afraid of not being able to recall
the actual memory I had when I wrote this book and maybe my
memory was emptied in a certain way when I wrote this book.  And
I'm afraid also to repeat what I said  -- what I wrote.  But,
however, I think I remember that Duch expressed the fact that he
was doing this job as an obligation, without pleasure, because
the prisoners would not say the truth on their own.
Q. And to be clear, this conversation happens when you were with
other guards or was it you just with Duch?
A. No, this was on the eve of my release.  Not on the 24th but on
the 25th of December.  And this slight delay in my actual
physical release left this kind of empty space, empty time.  And
during that empty time in the evening there was Duch, and I was
there, and I came close to the fire where he was sitting or he
came close to the fire where I was sitting and there was only one
other person, a young guard, who came up at one point and he sang
a revolutionary song at that point.
Q. Thank you.  At the investigation stage and yesterday you have
stated that you yourself had not been the victim of physical
torture; thank heavens, but what about psychological torture?
And more to the point, in your book you mentioned two incidents,
two occurrences.  In one of these the accused led you into
believing that, in the end, you had been unmasked, you had been
found guilty and consequently you would have to bear the
consequences of this.  And this incident, naturally, gave rise to
a reaction in your mind and seeing that reaction Duch says "No, I
was just joking, ha ha."  Can you confirm to me whether this
incident really did happen in the way in which I've described it,
or please correct the description and confirm whether this event
did happen?
A. I can confirm quite unambiguously -- and the accused is also
there and can also remember.  It can be difficult to remember
exactly what terms were used at the time.  It can be difficult to
recall terms used at the time by him and/or by me.  However, that
particular interlude, which happened when I came back from --
when he came back from one of his weekly trips out of the camp,
that interlude is very clearly etched in my memory, and so I can
confirm that there was this kind of joke or that the fact and the
finality, the goal, the purpose of my detention was used by him
in jest when he said that I had been unmasked.  And I think that
was the first time that Duch spoke to me in French.
My reaction was that much more intense that I had known from the
day before that he would be spending the following day discussing
a number of matters with his superiors and that my own case would
be on the agenda of those discussions.  I had been in the camp
for three months and I figured that this state of affairs could
not last very much longer.
So this simulation, this mock announcement of an unmasking of my
-- of me with the charges against me, I broke down and I fell to
my knees, and that is the point when he lifted me up and he told
me that it had all been in jest?
A. Prosecutor, are you referring to what happened once we had --
my two companions had been unchained and I was also free to move
about the camp?  This may have happened at the moment when Duch
asked a young guard to unchain Lay and Son.  So are you referring
to the remark by Duch to Son saying, if I remember correctly -- I
should have reread my book before coming here because I can't
remember what I wrote.
But there were occurrences when Duch would joke saying to Son
that I was very close to Lay.  I had known Lay for five years.
We were all the time together.  We were working together.  Son
was an employee at the Angkor Conservation and had been there, I
think, for only six months.  He was a newlywed.  I had far less
of an acquaintance with him so most of the direct communication
was between me and Lay who also had deeper experience in terms of
professional work.
So Son was told, "Okay, Bizot is going to leave and he has a
choice to -- he can choose either Son or Lay but Bizot thought
Lay would be released and Son would stay here and Lay will then
be released and go away with Bizot.
So of course Son remained quite quiet and then he said, "Do you
believe me?  Do you think this is possible?"  And it was terribly
painful for me to hear Son say, "Yes, I think this is possible."
And Duch said, "Oh, so at last here is somebody who believes me."
And then he laughed.  Son was unchained as well as Lay at the
same time.
MR. PETIT:
Thank you.  No further questions on my part.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to give the opportunity to the civil
parties to put questions to the witness.  First, I would like to
invite civil parties' lawyer Group 1 first.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Your Honour.
MR. WERNER:
Good morning, Mr. Bizot.  I'm Alain Werner.  I represent 38 civil
parties in this trial.  I have just a few questions for you.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY LAWYERS:
BY MR. WERNER:
Q.  First question, yesterday you referred to your privileged
position or status within M-3 (sic) and, to quote you, you said
you enjoyed a favoured privileged treatment in terms of food and
not being beaten.  And from what you told us yesterday and from
what you say in your book, it was quite clear that it is the
accused who granted you these favourable circumstances.
Mr. Bizot, do you know whether the accused had received
permission from his superiors to give you such favoured
treatment?
A. I have no way of knowing.  I can't even surmise.  I can't say
that I surmise or don't surmise.  I have -- I simply can't answer
this question.
Q. Yesterday, you mentioned the fact that the accused did not
talk much.  He was very busy with his duties.  So Mr. Bizot, what
did you see and what did you hear that made you understand this?
A. This was quite clear from the apparent personality of the
accused at that time, and he also had a reputation amongst the
guards.  The young guards had great respect.  They were in awe of
the accused due to the long hours that he worked on files or in
his general duties.  He worked a lot and, consequently, he had a
reputation, the reputation of a serious, very responsible person
and for this he was highly respected amongst the guards.
And I myself could see that my own statements were always matched
with what I had said a week before or two weeks before under this
comparison over time of the different things that I had said and
written; was always done in a very meticulous and thorough
fashion.
And in the two last days at the time of being released, of being
unchained, and when I was able to speak to Lay and Son and to
some other people -- these were not discussions, these were just
dialogues of a few sentences between my co-detained.  There was
always this sense of the accused being a person who was very
committed to his work and very -- and did his work in a very
responsible fashion.
Q. I want to clarify a couple of things.  Yesterday, you said
that when somebody was taken away for execution he was never
informed of this.  And, further, when you answered a question
from Judge Lavergne I had the feeling that you had not been the
witness of any executions.  When you say that when people were
led away to be executed they were never informed so how do you
know this?  Can you clarify this for us, please?
A. I can speak for my own case in the first place.  Indeed, on
the first day after being arrested and before arriving at M-13
when I was judged and when I was sentenced possibly not to the
death penalty but I was blindfolded and led away with a number of
armed persons around me, I asked him where are you taking me to,
and they kept saying -"at oy te" meaning "Don't worry.  Keep your
cool; don't worry."  And this phrase was repeated to me.
Whatever the place they were taking me to I was in the end not
executed but I was certainly under the very strong feeling that I
was about to die and "at oy te" was constantly repeated to me.
And, once again, there is no doubt a measure of anachronism in
what I'm going to tell you in relation to the true sequence of
facts, but it's quite clear that this "at oy te" phrase or
leitmotif which means, "Don't worry.  Just, you know, keep cool,
keep going, don't worry, don't worry."  This phrase -- and this
was confirmed to me later on, in particular when I came back to
Cambodia and I talked to people who had been with the Khmer Rouge
over the four years from '75 to '79 -- it appears that the person
who was doomed, who was going to be killed just with a blow of a
club, this person was never told that he was going to be
executed, in spite of the fact that it was very blatantly clear
that he or she was going to be executed.  I hope I have provided
a satisfactory answer.
Q. Just another clarification.  Yesterday, you were referring to
somebody who was -- who reported on people, and you said that
this informer died in the camp.  How did he die?  Could you tell
us more about that?
A. He died of an acute bout of malaria, and because there was
some empathy between him and me, he was the only person to whom
-- either of his own initiative or upon authorization from Duch
-- would come and find me and talk to me quite freely.
And he told me about his father.  He was very sorry about the
fact that his father, at the time when I was in M-13, had passed
away, and he could not forgive himself not being there with his
father because he had promised his father that he would be with
him on the day of his death, and possibly feeling a very strong
emotion because of the circumstance.
A few days later, or some time later, he experienced like many
other prisoners, an acute bout of malaria and he too passed away,
but before dying he asked to see the Frenchman.  I'm not too sure
now where he was, but I think he was in one of the huts.  I don't
know, anyway, I don't remember where he was exactly, physically.
But the guards specifically unchained me to allow me to go and
pay him a visit and when I arrived -- close to him he couldn't
identify me -- he didn't recognize me, and he died within seconds
of my arrival.
So those are the circumstances that -- in the -- concern that
particular person.  I'm not sure whether he was someone who
reported on others but, as a prisoner, he certainly felt that he
hadn't done anything wrong, and he had been there for over a
year.  He was awaiting his release from day-to-day.  He was
extremely sorry that he hadn't been released prior to the death
of his father.
There was another circumstance, another moment, when I can't
myself say whether the person was an informer or not.  Anyway, an
old man came up to me one evening, I think after dusk, and gave
me half a kilo of powdered sugar.  This old man said to me, "I
was around at the time of the Japanese.  The French prisoners who
tried to run away never succeeded."  And so he actively
encouraged me -- or very clearly discouraged me from trying to
run away because there was just no way for me to get out of
there.  That is what he said to me, "So, here, have some sugar,
it's good for you, you need to feed yourself, but please don't
run away."
I was extremely surprised that this farmer, basically, who was
not a prisoner of the camp, I  was extremely surprised that he
would be taking such -- such a risky -- doing something so risky
to come and bring me some sugar and give me -- and give me his
advice.  And so I was very grateful for that sugar and,
thereafter, I did wonder whether perhaps this person had been
told to come and talk to me to try and discourage me from wanting
to run away.
And I must say that I certainly did want to run away.  Right from
the 1st of January, I had decided that I would try to run away --
thinking that I had not a chance of being released -- if I had
not been released by the end of three months.
Q. I still have just a couple more questions, Your Honour.
One question on the interrogations.  "I could not give any proof
of my being not guilty", you said yesterday, Mr. Bizot, and you
said also that at one point you felt that you would not be able
to prove that you were innocent.  And responding to a point by
Mr. Robert Petit, you talked about the joke.
So, Mr. Bizot, do you think that a Cambodian, somebody who would
not be an educated person like you and erudite, not somebody from
the École Française d'Extrême-Orient, do you think that a
Cambodian being interrogated by the accused under such
circumstances would be capable of proving his innocence in the
same way as you ultimately did succeed in proving your innocence?
A. I don't think this would be possible.  I don't think this
would be possible.  I'm not saying that I know it would not be
possible, but I don't think it would be possible.  I think that
being in a detention camp where there was, basically, no way out
other than being guilty, there was no other option.  I also have
the sense that any attempt to say that charges against oneself
were unjust or not grounded, any such utterance would simply just
make the unavoidable outcome of death, would just postpone it a
little bit.
I'm not sure that I convinced the accused that I was innocent.  I
think this is an idea that he developed himself on the basis of
his own putting together the different things that I said during
interrogations, and what he could understand from Lay and Son
regarding my own activities.  In a way -- and this gives me only
pain in what -- in the memories I have of this, but the presence
of Lay and Son in this camp I think was a fundamental asset
towards my release because everything I said was only, no doubt,
ever -- it was always, I think, confirmed by what they said when
they were interrogated.
Q. One last point, Mr. Bizot.  Microphone, please?
Now, in the many interviews of you in the press over the last
months and years, there is a recurrent theme which is that behind
the mask of a monster one must seek to see the human being, and
it seems that you have successfully seen the human being.
This is your achievement and we respect that on behalf of the
civil parties, but one could say that you've not only been a
victim of the accused, you've been detained by an organization,
the Khmer Rouge -- and you know, of course, what they did
thereafter to this country; this country that you love.  Do you
have the same approach now of understanding, seeing the human
being behind the executioner as regards the Khmer Rouge leaders
who are still alive, who are detained here, and with whom you've
had no interaction?  I'm thinking in particular of Nuon Chea.
Can you see the man, the human being, in Nuon Chea too?
A. Yes, sir.  I haven't finished.  What I want to say is that to
fully understand the full extent and depth of the action of the
executioner -- and you have just referred to Nuon Chea namely --
be it Nuon Chea or the accused here, now, to fully measure,
appreciate the depth of the horror, one can only do this by fully
understanding the humanity in such a person.  If we turn these
people into monsters, a category apart from human beings with
which we can have no identification as human beings -- not
identification with what they've done as criminals but
identification as human beings -- then I think there is no way we
can have any kind of grasp of what they've perpetrated.
If we try to understand that these are people with the same
capacities otherwise as ours, we may feel deep fright.  But there
is this segregation that we need to avoid between people who are
capable of killing and us, who are not capable of killing.
Unfortunately we seem to have a much more frightening
understanding of the executioner, actually, when we look at the
executioner as a truly human being.  On the other hand, to seek
to understand is not to condone.
I believe there is no possible forgiveness.  On behalf of whom
might we be able to forgive?  On behalf of those who died?  I
don't think so.  And the sheer horror of what happened, what was
done in Cambodia -- and this is not exclusive, this does not
belong only to this unfortunate country.  The screams of victims
must be heard and we must never allow ourselves to think that
that scream is excessively loud.  The harshest condemnations that
we can have against the accused can never be harsh enough.
It's not a question of condoning of forgiving what has been done.
In my approach -- and this approach need not at all be that of
the victims.  My approach is simply to try and understand the
drama that took place in the forests of Cambodia, as in those of
other countries and in other circumstances of our history,
including in the most recent history.
MR WERNER:   Thank you for answering my questions.  I have no
further questions, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like lawyer, Group 2, to proceed with further
questions if you would wish to do so.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MS. STUDZINSKY:
Q. My name is Silke Studzinsky.  I'm co-lawyer for civil parties.
Mr. Bizot, I would come back to something you -- well, let's say
your relationship with the accused during your three-month stay
which you described and in the English translation was
translated, "a kind of familiarity."  Could you please tell us
how often and on which subjects, if you remember them, you had
communication and intellectual exchange, as I understood
yesterday, with the accused?
A. I would see the head of the camp, Duch, the accused,
practically every day.  I was unable to hold back my tears, my
suffering and the feeling that -- of injustice that I was
feeling, and this would come across most of the times as -- well,
this would be expressed through anger.  I would express this
through -- my anger was vain, of course, in that I would only
turn against myself.  But during the interrogations and during
the questions that Duch would ask me, I would find a way to
express the unbearable injustice of this accusation carried
against me.  Well, I would find some kind of release by asking
him questions in return.  This would relieve me.
And I must say that he went along and he spoke to me about his
family, so that maybe -- maybe -- I'm adding this -- so that I
could speak about my family maybe, and he spoke to me about when
he used to teach mathematics, for example; maybe also so that I
could speak about what I was doing.  But all of this, however,
did create some kind of regularity in my daily dealings with him
and we would go over the discussions of the day before.  I was
contradicted on certain points that I brought up that did not
correspond to what he had maybe written down in his reports.
So all of this created, I must say, a kind of, let's say,
regularity, habit that built -- well, let's say if I drew from
this experience in the camp, if I experienced a shock that I
could not forget, which was to see the man behind the henchman,
well, I think that he did with me what no henchman should do, in
a certain way.  Let us say that he was -- he also was able to see
the man behind the spy, the man behind the prisoner, and that's
one of the reasons maybe that explains that Duch considered my
case with a special amount of attention, contrarily to the case
of the other prisoners.  It was maybe because these
interrogations that lasted so long were able to create some kind
of bond, some kind of humanity between us.  And therefore sending
me to my death became something more difficult than when you send
people that you have dehumanized to their death or, in any case,
people that you did not seek to humanize.
I don't know if I answered your question, Ms. Studzinsky.
Q.   Yes, thank you.  I come back to one part of my question.  Am
I right that you -- that I can -- or the word to call it also not
only questioning or returning or questioning him, but also did
you discuss -- can it be described as a discussion on matters
like, for example, your work Buddhism but not as an interrogation
but more during the time more a discussion and exchange than an
interrogation?
A. I wouldn't say that.  I think that all of these discussions
were for a given purpose with a clear objective, which was, of
course, to corner me, to bring me to contradict myself.  I do not
know if the consistency of my answers was always satisfactory
but, however, for him a certain amount of elements transpired
from these that allowed him to believe that I was not a CIA spy,
and that's what he expressed to his superiors afterwards.
And I don't think that there was maybe -- maybe except for the
last day when I was released that there was something that was
simply friendly or free or no, the context was too hellish for
that.  We could not speak about -- you could not speak about a
normal relationship between a jailor and a prisoner, especially
in a camp such as M-13.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I would like -- we would like now to invite lawyers Group 3 to
put questions if you would wish to do so.
BY MR. CANONNE:
Q. I am in charge of civil parties Group 3.  With my colleague
Moch Sovannary we are defending 28 people.  And she will ask you
as well two questions later on, but I have four short questions
to ask you.
The first question, I would like to know, Mr. Bizot, if you
became aware during your detention of the number of executions
that were carried out there?  Did you know how many executions
were carried out at M-13 while you were there?
A. I have the impression while that coming up -- that I came up
with some kind of estimate in my book and things are no longer
clear to me, however, in my memory, in my recollection now.
Executions were hard to tell because I always had the impression
that the people who would step out of the camp were brought to
being executed.  So if I came up with a figure it would be too
aleatory I think.  There were about 15 people who died of malaria
when I was there.
So I -- unfortunately I cannot be more specific concerning the
amount of executions that took place while I was at M-13.  I
would add, however, that I had the feeling that all of the
prisoners that I saw come in that I saw while I left as well,
well, I believe that these prisoners probably did die, yes,
indeed.
Q. You told us yesterday that you had seen, witnessed confession
and self-criticism sessions that were held on a regular basis.
You understood Khmer.  You spoke Khmer.  So therefore could you
give us an idea of the nature of these confessions and of these
self-criticism sessions; what was the content of these sessions?
A. Well, they were essentially training, indoctrination sessions,
political teachings; the political training of the young guards I
could say.  And the level of the discussions between the young
guards and the instructors was similar -- well, there was --
there were guards who were about 14 to 18 years old and an
instructor.  It was that kind of level of discussion.  And they
were talking about small little ridiculous mistakes that they
might have made and that they could self-criticize about with the
purpose of correcting them so that they could correct their
behaviour and adhere better to the revolutionary line.
These sessions were called "rien saut".  This was the Buddhist
term that was used.  It's a word used for praying and for
religious education.  So the same term was used for these
sessions and there were a certain number of expressions that the
Khmer used that were, in fact, drawn from Buddhist teachings or
the Buddhist discipline, let's say, the Buddhist disciplinary
mechanisms.  And monks are also subjected to self-criticism as
well, for example.
And the young revolutionaries, therefore, would say, for example,
that they had forgotten maybe to pick up the laundry that was
drying the day before and that it had rained during the night and
therefore that the shirts were wet because of him, and each one
would accuse themselves of small little things to prove their
dedication.
Where it became much more perverse was the second round, when it
was the second round in these sessions where it was the neighbour
who -- well, the person sitting next to you, let's say, who would
-- when one of the young guards was called upon to help his
colleague bring up points that he had forgotten to bring up and
then it became -- everything turned into bickering -- but it
never went that far.  The idea was, let's say, to establish some
kind of moral ground, revolutionary moral grounds to each one of
the people participating in the sessions.
Q. I would like to get back, Mr. Bizot, to your own
interrogations.  Were you ever presented with false forged
documents to try to confuse you that were related to your
supposed guilt?
A. No, at no moment something like that happened.
Q. I would like to step aside from the facts because many
questions were asked to you on these, but I think your -- the
distance that you took deliberately in relation to your events
allows me to ask you questions on your feelings.  Would you
permit me to ask you some questions about your emotional response
to all of this?
So my last question is double, I could say.  During the
investigation and during Duch's detention you asked to meet him.
You requested that and we understood that and I agree with my
colleague, Werner, in terms of our respect for this decision, and
we understand your desire to try to understand the complexity of
Duch.
So I have to half questions.  So today would you -- the remorse,
the regret that were not demonstrated back then at no moment,
well, do you believe that Duch feels this remorse today?
And my second question.  When you leave your -- when he says to
you, "Oh, French Comrade, do not forget us comrades", if these
people were here today what would these people expect from this
trial, from this confrontation, and you understood beyond -- what
do you think the civil parties can expect, beyond the two
companions that were with you, whom you left behind in the camp?
What do you believe that the civil parties can expect from such a
trial?
A. I cannot answer instead of Lay and Son, however, I will not
grant myself the status of victim.  If I'm trying to put myself
in the shoes of the survivors or of those who died under torture
or after being tortured, I believe that the way I would proceed
in order to calm my endless suffering, what I would do would be
to feel even -- to be able to see that in suffering that is
inflicted today upon the accused, that I can say that I am --
even with this -- I am asking myself questions on the possibility
of a kind of relief for the victims.
Today, insofar that it's -- I don't know if it's possible, I
cannot imagine, but if it's possible I would have the feeling --
while the relief would be in a way that I can feel that I have
got even, that I would see that in the suffering of the person
who would have tortured my father or killed my children, well, to
see that the suffering can be tantamount to what he's feeling
now.
MR. CANONNE:
Thank you, Monsieur Bizot.  My colleague will continue.
MS. MOCH SOVANNARY:
I was wondering first, Mr. President, Your Honours, I have two
questions.
BY MS. MOCH SOVANNARY:
Q. One, I would like to go back a little bit to the event that
you testified before the Co-Investigating Judges concerning your
testimony.  You said that when you first was -- you were
arrested, you were kept in a house and interrogated and then you
told the Investigating Judges that later on there was a mock
execution.
So would you please clarify this event, if you still recollect
that fact.  And who was behind that plan to stage such a mock
execution?
A. Unfortunately, I don't know.  I can't give you a very clear
answer.  I'm not even sure it was a mock execution.  All I know
is that I was led amongst armed soldiers, that my body was put
this way and then put this other way.
I heard the triggers, I heard the guns being armed and the shot
as expected -- that was expected did not happen, and eventually I
was firmly picked up by hands that put me in a different position
and then took me.  I was still blindfolded.  They took me along a
path, whereas before I believe we were in a paddy field.
So was this an execution that did not actually materialize?  Was
it a mock execution to make me panic, make me feel frightened?  I
don't know.
Q. Thank you.   My second and last question.  Regarding the
interrogation method, you said you were interrogated -- you said
that all detainees at M-13, while being interrogated, they were
inflicted tortures, but it is an exception to the case regarding
you yourself.
And during the interrogation, you said that there was a close
relationship between you and the accused, and you also mentioned
that the accused told you his background, and that you said that
it was the way that the accused would use to make sure you could
share some information about you.
And I would like to ask you, how do you feel about such a
relationship?
A. I'm very sorry, I don't really understand your question.  It
may be a translation issue.  I don't understand the reasoning,
what you're trying to drive at.
Q. I may repeat the question.  You said detainees at M-13, while
they were being interrogated, torture were applied, but it was
not in your case because you were interrogated by Duch and you
were not tortured.
And during that time of interrogation, the close relationship was
built between you and Duch, and you said Duch even told you in
detail Duch's background.  And you said that this is the way that
Duch would like you to also share this information, the same way
as he shared with you.
My question is that how -- what is, in your view, what do you
think about such a method of questioning by Duch?
A. Well, what I think of this is that he probably tried to secure
answers to the kind of questions that he wanted to ask so that he
could put together a file concerning me, and whilst other
prisoners were tortured.  But I don't know this, I can only
suspect this, imagine this, in order to secure confessions.
But the method that was used with me was a different one, and
what I feel on the basis of this is, well, I don't feel anything,
basically.  I'm rather happy that in the end it was -- the
conclusion of this was that I was not a CIA agent.
MS. MOCH SOVANNARY:
Thank you, and that's all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next I would like to give the floor to lawyers, Group 4.  Would
you like to ask questions to the witness?
MR HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President and Your Honours and other people in and
around the courtroom.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. I am Hong Kimsuon.  I have Mr. Pierre-Olivier Sur in our Group
4.  I have some questions to put to Mr. François Bizot.  If you
do not understand my question, kindly ask me to repeat.
In 1971 until now it has been more than 30 years since you were
arrested, so your memory, as you told the Judges, that sometimes
the memory has been recorded in your notebook, and I would like
you to also tell us besides Duch, who was the chairman of M 13
and that you was detained at M 13, do you still remember who held
the parallel positions as Duch at that time, and what were they?
A. I did not understand.  Could you repeat just the end, the end
of your question?
Q. At M
you said there was Mr. Duch who was the chairman of M 
          13   13.  It was when you were detained for three months in 1971.
Besides him, who were the other people in positions that you
still remember who held parallel positions as Duch?  So who were
they?
A. The only person whom I remember and who had a higher duty was
the deputy or the assistant to Duch.  He was older than the
accused.  I have no recollection of his name, his pseudonym or
whatever.  I knew it at the time but I've forgotten that name.
And I recall that that man certainly was very frightening to me,
and I don't see that the accused had any other deputy, so to
speak, at least in the three-month period that I spent in M 13.
Q. Thank you.  My next question.  Recently you said beside Duch
there was his deputy who was frightening to you, so what do you
mean by being frightening to you?
A. He was a brutal person, he was a cynical man, and I wasn't the
only person who was afraid of that man.  I think if he'd been in
charge of that camp I would no longer be here.  I would no longer
be alive.  And fortunately I was not under his orders, but the
very first hours I spent in the camp under his control and in his
presence were hours of, let's say, initiation for me that were
extremely hard.
For this reason I was extremely frightened at the idea of having
to be under his control for the duration of my detention, and I
was not the only detainee in the camp to feel like this.  The
guards themselves were ambivalent regarding him and talked little
about him and, whenever they talked about him, were very careful.
He was not -- I can't say that he was -- that anybody was loved
in that camp.  He was not loved or liked, but it was well known
that he was an aggressive person.
Q. Thank you very much.  I would like to follow another question
with this.  On the 22nd of January 2008 you gave an interview to
the Co-Investigating Judge, Mr. Marcel Lemonde, and Mr. You
Bunleng, concerning the character.  You can refer to the Document
D40.  In that question you said, regarding the character of Duch,
he is a frightening person, but it is kind of confusing or not.
And in the same document you said the true authority of Duch, he
had a full authority and unlimited power on the detainees.  And
in your book, The Gate, you said that he is the man who means
business, so cruel.  So could you please elaborate this, whether
he is a cruel person like that?
A. I may have said that Duch was cruel.  I don't recall the
context in which I may have said that.  If I am now to refer to
myself and to my testimony here now, I would not say now that I
have been a witness of any cruelty on his part.  Inferentially,
by inference, knowing that he has beaten, has killed prisoners,
this means that he must have been cruel, but I don't remember
when I may have said that, that he was cruel.
He was frightening.  That's another thing.  I don't see how else
he could be perceived.  A person in charge of a camp where
prisoners are taken and interrogated, beaten, executed can hardly
elicit any other feeling than fear on the part of other people.
Thank you.
Q. May I ask you again, in 1971 when Khmer Rouge arrested you,
did you speak Khmer clearly at that time?
A. Yes, I spoke no other language during the whole period of my
detention.
Q. Thank you very much.
You told the Judges yesterday that during your detention at M-13
it sounds like you enjoyed more freedom than the others, and you
did not even regard yourself as a victim or detainee.  Maybe I
did not get the full translation.  And you said you were the
researcher working for the Angkor Conservation and then you
translated a book which contains about 30 pages after you were
released by the Khmer Rouge.  So you translated that document for
the French Embassy.
Do you remember -- maybe I get lost in the translation -- whether
the policy written in that document sent to you, were they
related to any particular matters?
A. I came away from M-13 and rode -- well, first I went on foot
-- first in an old Peugeot, then on foot, then I took a bus.  I
had a long beard and I got to Pach Ontay (phonetic) and got back
to my home and my family where I was reunited with my family.
There were moments of intense happiness that were disturbed by
the presence of these documents in my possession.  My sole
concern at that point having been released was, first of all, the
fact that my two companions were there, over there and I had
left, leaving them behind, and that is -- that's a fact that
remains with me.  It's still a burden on my heart to this day.
And, second, the presence of these documents which could possibly
be put to use to make me leave Cambodia by the governmental
forces if they were to find out about the existence of these
documents.  I did not want to leave Cambodia.  I wanted to stay
in the country with my family and to continue doing my work.
So those documents were, for me, something that I tried to get
rid of very quickly.  I handed them over very quickly to the
French Embassy.  The French Embassy asked me to translate these.
I had no great faith in the official translators of the Embassy
that might -- they might report to higher government officials
the fact that this document existed and that I had brought them
back.  So I translated them myself because I did not want anybody
else to be involved.  This document was absolutely full of new
words, neologisms, that I had the greatest trouble understanding
myself.
Anyway, come what may, I handed over a translation to the Embassy
and I'm extremely sorry these texts have disappeared.  And it
seems to me that very possibly these documents were not sent to
France.  But possibly the Embassy, as I said yesterday, asked the
First Secretary or the Second Secretary at the time to summarize
my translation to produce a summary and that it's only that
summary that was forwarded to France. The summary -- and I
secured a copy of this summary at the archives and yesterday Your
Honour told me that this was in keeping.
THE INTERPRETER:
Mr. Francois Bizot's microphone has gone dead.
THE WITNESS:
That this was under the reference number A27.14, I believe.  So
this document -- I have read this document.  It's extremely --
(Microphone not activated)
So I resume.  So I felt  terribly uncomfortable about the
presence of these documents that I didn't want to keep with me
physically on my person and I didn't want to keep them anywhere
in my house.  So I tried to get rid of these documents as quickly
as possible.  I was asked to do the translation.  I had a lot of
trouble doing this translation.  I did it with the utmost
caution.  And finally, it's only a summary of this document that
was sent to France.  The actual document and my translation are
not at the archive of the French Foreign Ministry.
As to the summary that I have been apprised of, I have found this
summary extremely uninteresting.  It contains very little of any
substance.  So that's what I have to say about this.  I have no
very clear recollection of the content of that text, other than
as I said yesterday.
I dare not use any specific words now because these words come
from more recent layers of my awareness than the older layers of
experience right at that time.  But definitely that was all about
the system, the ideological system and the political system that
was being setup by the Khmer Rouge.  So I do not want to take the
floor to speak specifically as to the content of that document
because too much time has gone by.  There is nevertheless the
summary that you can consult.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. I may move back a little bit to M-13 again.  You said when you
were interviewed by the Co-Investigating Judges that you just
talked about Ta Mok.  Maybe you know -- did you know him at that
time or maybe you learned of his name or him later?
Did you meet Ta Mok at M-13?
A. No, I did not meet Ta Mok at M-13.  However, I have come
across him in a village on the road to M-13 in a house where I
was detained, chained up for one or two hours.  That was a very
brief halt on the way to M-13 and there was an old villager there
who was there with me and he spoke to me freely and he told me
that the Khmer person in charge, whom I had just seen and who
just stepped out of the house when I was now chained to the
central pillar, was Ta Mok.  So that name stayed in my memory
and, thereafter, later, I don't remember exactly when, I don't
think Duch ever namely mentioned Ta Mok or perhaps he did, I
can't -- I can't say that I remember.  That's it.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to adjourn for 20 minutes break, so we
will resume at five past eleven and, Mr. Hong Kimsuon, if you
would wish to ask further questions, then you may do so after we
resume the session.
And we would like to ask the court official to take the witness
to the waiting room, and bring him back at 11.05 to finish his
testimony this morning.
(Witness exits courtroom)
THE GREFFIER:  Please stand up.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1045H to 1110H)
THE GREFFIER:
Please stand up.
(Judges enter courtroom)
(Witness enters courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber is now back in session, and we have our witness, Mr.
François Bizot.  We will continue his testimony.
Before we continue that, we would like to inform all parties who
have the rights to pose questions to either witnesses or experts
of civil parties, I would like to remind all of you, do not pose
repeated questions.  In the case of taking turns to question the
person, you should obtain information from the previous person so
in order to avoid the repeated questions.
Secondly, you are also reminded that don't pose questions which
are not relevant to the facts or which are least concerned to the
facts.  This is in order to ensure proper conduct of the
proceedings.
We also observed some questions are not well prepared.  A lot of
talking, 5 to 10 minutes talking, and then only a question is at
the end of the talk.  So please prepare your questions properly
for any witness, or the accused, or the civil parties, or the
experts, so that they can understand the questions clearly and
respond to the questions accordingly.
Mr. Hong Kimsuon, do you have any further questions or are you
already finished your questioning?   Please clarify.  Make sure
your questions are straightforward and short so that the witness
can understand your questions and can respond appropriately.
Secondly, it is up to his ability to respond because the facts
was over 30 years ago, and you all are aware that you probably
would not recollect what happened to you, personally, 30 years
ago.  So it's up to a certain limit of the recollection related
to the facts that we will have in the future as well.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  As a lawyer, I thank you for your
reminder.  As I have said, sometimes the issue of translation is
not consistent.  Let me put three further questions to Mr.
François Bizot.
Before the break, he said he knew or had heard Ta Mok when he was
detained in a house for about two hours.
Let me put a question to Mr. Bizot.
Q. Besides the name Ta Mok that you just raised before the break
regarding the witnesses with the pseudonyms -- "Do I need to use
the same names or use the pseudonyms?" -- I don't think it is
necessary.  So besides the person you talked, the person was
tall, white-complexioned, was a member in that camp of M 13, was
he in a similar rank to Duch?
A. If I've understood your question correctly, you're asking me
about this person and I specifically mentioned that I believed
that this person was not the deputy of the accused.  I brought
this up but, as I said, the physical correspondence between -- is
not satisfactory, so I don't think that -- only the accused I
think would be able to answer this question clearly, in fact, and
I cannot say anything more about this.
Q. Thank you.  My second question.  Regarding your colleagues,
Son and Lay, you said Duch decided to release them when you were
released, however, they were not released.  Did you know your
colleagues, Son and Lay, were executed or were released after you
were released?
A. It's hard for me to answer this specifically.  They were
detached -- or they were unchained at the same time as me, and I
think I already answered this question when I said that they were
going to enjoy the freedom in the Liberated Zone; enjoy freedom,
so to speak, in the Liberated Zone.
And I don't think that this was the case; not that they were not
unchained -- that I don't know exactly -- but, however, they were
executed a little while afterwards, maybe a year later or more or
less.  But I am unable to specify if they were still chained up
or if they were not -- if that was what you were asking.
Q. Thank you.  After your release from M 13, did you still have
any contact with Duch?
A. No, for the very simple reason that I thought that he was
dead, as so many other revolutionaries.  It was only when he was
arrested that I was -- that I knew, that I had learnt that he was
still alive and then he was detained, and then I had the
opportunity to visit him at a military prison where he was
detained.
Q. Thank you.  My last questions.  You made your statements to
the Co-Investigating Judges on the 22nd January 2008, on
of the 40 document.  You stated that there was an order from the
upper echelon to execute them; "them" means Lay and Son, about
one or two years later.
If you had no contact with Duch how did you know about the deaths
of these two colleagues.  Thank you.
A. It is because Duch revealed this.  It is precisely because
Duch revealed this to me that I was able to know this when I went
to visit him at the military prison.  He told me then.
Q. I have no more questions.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I will now give the floor to the defence counsel to pose
questions to the witness, Mr. François Bizot.  If you have, the
floor is yours.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. Hello, Mr. Bizot.  A lot of things have already been said so I
don't have that many questions, but maybe I have a specific
question concerning this deputy of Duch.
If I give you the name Ho Kim Eng, aka Sum, would that possibly
be the person, this deputy?  Could that be the person?
A. Ho Kim Eng does not mean anything to me, but I cannot say.
Q. So I'm going to ask you a few questions concerning your
comments on previous statements that you made, in particular with
the Co-Investigating Judges who interviewed you on the basis of
your book, and I would like to have your comments on this.
In your book on -116 in the French version, you indicate
that Duch was only executing, only implementing Angkar's
decisions and, in the same way, the Judges asked you
specifications on this and you answered in Index 240:
"I believe that his margin of manoeuvre was absolutely nil and he
did not have anything else to do than to obtain information from
the people who were arrested and concerning whom he would write
reports.  These people were condemned from the start, and the
idea was to make them speak before executing them in order to
justify their arrest and so that their arrest would not be
useless."
So I would like to ask you, do you have anything to add to this
-- and, again, at the end of your statement with the
Co-Investigating Judges you added, I see here, that you are
asking me if, as a conclusion, I have a general observation to
formulate, and I would say simply that the Khmer Rouge regime was
a regime of terror and that it was probably very difficult to
those who had a position in this regime to backtrack.  So do you
have any comments to make, Mr. Bizot, on this?
A. I have nothing to add to what I said during my interview with
the Co-Investigating Judges.  I believe that, indeed, this no
longer needs to be demonstrated.  The Khmer Rouge regime was a
regime of terror, and concerning myself, well, in considering my
release I didn't -- I never saw that these decisions were made at
Duch's level; these decisions were made at the higher level.
Q. Thank you.  So, let's continue.   The question -- this
question of terror, you spoke more specifically about Duch
himself in your book but also with the Co-Investigating Judges,
and you were saying -- getting back to this idea that he was --
that he was just locked up in this terrible mechanism that -- in
his work, Duch, and you had in your book, , also fear was
in him as elsewhere, as everywhere.  He was the -- from the
chiefs that he was dealing with all the way down to the simple
militia men fear was reigning everywhere in the same way in the
pages that were read to you by Judge Lavergne, on .
I would like to go over another passage again.  You write that,
"What I liked about him…"
"What I liked about his being, which generosity had not left, was
maybe this presence of constant suffering that would determine
his features as well as his shadow."
And you're speaking about fear and you're speaking about
suffering, constant suffering, in fact.
And you speak about this again when you make your statement with
the Co-Investigation Judges, on  of Index D-40 and you say
that:
"I wish to stress that if the guards were fearing Duch and that
the prisoners were living in a state of terror, Duch was also a
victim of fear.  In particular, I believe that his contention
with Ta Mok concerning -- over me followed Duch for years.  Duch
was afraid of Ta Mok."
That's what you declared to the Co-Investigating Judges.  So I'd
like to have your comments on this fear, on the suffering, that
you have apparently witnessed.
A. I cannot try to remember, to recollect the images that are --
that are in front of me when I try to remember M-13 without
recollecting as well at the same time this atmosphere, this
terrifying atmosphere of fear and death, nor can I do this
without remembering how much this atmosphere was -- came across
through the accused.
Fear was everywhere and with everyone, and I don't think that
it's easy to imagine that it can be otherwise.  When Duch would
go to his meetings and come back from them, his face -- his
expression would clearly show a great amount of suffering that I
could not disconnect from the topic that he had been talking
about with his superiors during these meetings.
I clearly understood that it was always a question of deciding on
the moment of an execution that had already been programmed and
at no moment in -- they were light topics in the life of the camp
leader as well as his deputies.  So this constant presence of
executions, of killing, and of torture, could not, not have any
effects that you could even see physically on their expressions.
Q. Thank you.
And now I'm coming to your release and to the risks that Duch
took to release you.  And on  in the French edition of
your book -- and you also mention this to the Co-Investigating
Judges -- but I'd like to go back to the excerpt from your book.
"I did not know if he was really convinced of my innocence, but
on behalf of the revolutionary -- in the name of the
revolutionary principles to which he was so devoted, it was
necessary for him to demonstrate his authentic attachment to
justice, and I suddenly understood the enormous risk that he took
by gambling on my innocence.
But even more so than the sympathy he felt for me, what this
resolution betrayed was a passionate quest for moral
righteousness that resembled a quest for the absolute.  Duch was
among these pure of the -- among these fervent idealists who were
seeking the truth above all."
And you translate -- you re-translate, in the same state-of-mind,
the conversation that you had -- or at least in an approximate
way -- the conversation that you had during your release and he
asked you, "Okay, are you now reassured?"  And I answered, "Yes".
It's on  and 225 of the French -- "Yes", I answered,
"Thank you, Comrade, I owe you my life".  That's what you say to
Duch, and he answered to you, "I only acted in agreement with my
consciousness and I acted with complete certainty".  And he adds,
"That in any case, at my modest level, I only gave an opinion
while trying to influence the final outcome of course".
So what you are translating here, Mr. Bizot, does this correspond
to what you experienced back then?  Can you confirm this before
the Chamber; that this is a good mirror of what you experienced
back then.  Mr. Bizot, this is no longer on an emotional basis
here.  Here I am remembering.  I remember this very clearly
indeed.
I remember as well that he was extremely nervous and fearful.  He
was fearing an ambush, in fact.  And on the way, that I had to
follow to leave what probably was a house on the outskirts of
Amleang where this beaten up 403 Peugeot was waiting for me to
bring me away, Duch was worried and he was fearing an ambush from
his superior, Ta Mok, who, of course, was not in favour of my
release.
And I remember clearly that he did not support the fact of having
released me so, therefore, that he had presented to his
superiors.  I remember that he did not -- that Ta Mok had not
supported this.
Q. Mr. Bizot, when you answered a variety of highly relevant
questions by the lawyers of the civil parties and, in particular,
I'm referring to the last question put by my colleague, Mr.
Canonne, you used words that expressed very deep -- deep human
feeling, empathy for the victims.  Furthermore, throughout all
these debates, you have spoken from a very deep sense of humanity
in respect of Duch.
On behalf of the defence, I would like to thank you, Mr. Bizot,
for this major contribution that you have offered here to the
work of justice.
Thank you, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do you have any questions?  Thank you, Mr. Francois Bizot, for
your testimony as summonsed by the Chamber.  The Chamber has no
further questions to ask you.  You can now retire to listen to
the hearing if you wish or you can go back to your residence.
Court Officer, please accompany him to leave the courtroom.
(Witness exits courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
And now we would like to invite another witness, KW-30, to enter
the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Uch Sorn?
A. My name is Uch Sorn.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I am 72 this year.  For this new year, I'm going to be 73.
Q. What is your occupation?
(No interpretation)
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Are you related by blood or by in-law to any parties in this
case, either to the accused or to any other parties?
A. I do not have any direct blood relation.
Q. Now, the Chamber invites you to provide testimony of what you
have heard, have known, during the times you were at M-13 office
in Thpong, Kampong Speu province, before 1975.
The questions are: Have you known the security office M-13's
location in Amleang?  If you know, from when?
A. From the beginning, I never heard of that name.  I did not
know there was an office M-13, but in 1973 I was arrested and
brought into M-13.  Then that's when I knew its location.
Q. Were you arrested and brought into the detention office at
M-13?  How long were you detained there and from when-to-when,
and when were you released?
A. I did rice farming there for about one year.  I was arrested
in 1973 in the dry season in March or April, and I do not really
remember the calendar month, but it was the second lunar date in
March or April -- to M-13 office.
Q. How long were you living there before you were released?
A. I was there for about one year, from my recollection, and then
I was released to Pursat province in 1974.
Q. Can you describe to the Chamber about what you saw, you heard
during the time of your leaving there, from your recollection?
A. I was detained in that prison and saw the torture activities,
ill treatment on the prisoners in all forms.  It's hard to
describe.  I saw both physical and emotional tortures, starvation
on the prisoners.  In each day I saw prisoners died, every single
day.  There was never a day no prisoner died.
Q. How big was the security office?  How many hectares?
A. It's hard to estimate.  It was pretty large.  Probably it was
100 metres square, that was in the detention centre, and there
were square pits three metres deep, about five, six or seven
pits, and it was covered with palm tree leaves and the prisoners
were put in those pits, including myself; we were detained in
those pits.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, do you have any questions to pose to the
witness?  If you have, the floors is yours.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Could we first of all ask the accused to stand up?  Could we ask
the accused to stand up?  Could we please ask the accused to
stand up?  Good.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Mr. Uch Sorn, can you hear me?  I would like to ask you to
look at the accused.  Do you see the accused?  Do you recognize
the accused?
A. I have problem with my eyesight.  I cannot see further; I only
see the shadow.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Now, with the camera, perhaps could you zoom in for the witness
to be able to see the accused on his screen?  Is it possible to
zoom in with the camera?
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Now, I would like to ask the witness whether he sees what --
does he see anything on the screen?  Does he see the person on
the screen?  Can you see?
A. Yes.  I see.
Q. Can you distinguish reasonably clearly?  Can you make out the
features?  Or is this still too difficult for you?  Okay, so just
tell us that you cannot recognize the person, if this is too
difficult for you, if you cannot visually make out the person.
A. Yes, I can see the picture clearly, sir.  It's the witness.
Q. So you're seeing the image.  Now can you recognize the
accused?  Can you recognize that this is the person who was the
head of M-13?
A. Yes, I recognize him; he was he chief of M-13 office.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Can the accused tell us whether he recognizes the witness?  Does
the accused recognize the witness?
THE ACCUSED:
Your Honours, I cannot recognize his face.  With your permission,
to ask the witness just one sentence just about his name?  What
-- his alias.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Mr. Uch Sorn?  Mr. Uch Sorn, did you have  a pseudonym, an
alias?  Did you have another name?
A. I do not have alias or pseudonym; I only have one name.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Duch, you may be seated.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Mr. Uch Sorn, do you recall the circumstances in which you
were arrested, and the reasons for which you were arrested?
A. I was arrested when I went to buy pigs in Knna Ambeus Lake, in
order to have it for the ceremony, but at that time, in that Knna
Ambeus, the village chief arrested me and brought me to M-13.
Q. Were you told what you were charged with?
A. I was accused of being a spy.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have a question for the accused.  I have a question for the
accused.
I would like to say, once again, that Mr. Uch Sorn, who is now
offering testimony in public, earlier on was known as KW-30.
KW-30.
Yesterday, you made a statement concerning the reasons for which
witness KW-30 was brought to M-13.  Do you recall this?  Do you
remember?
THE ACCUSED:
Your Honours, when I saw the name Uch Sorn at Snuol village I
thought of another person with the same name, Uch Sorn, alias
Sum, who was sent to M-13 probably in September 1971.
And later I asked the upper echelon to release him in 1973.  I
invited him to come back to be my guard.  That's why I would like
to ask the witness of his alias.  So the event was that Uch Sorn,
alias Sum that I knew and that I already reported to Your
Honours, however, he was one of the prisoners who were detained
there.  So could you please ask him?  Probably it is my
misunderstandings on my part.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I would like you to remind the Chamber of the reasons that you
mentioned regarding the reasons that got KW-32 to M 13.
Yesterday you talked about specific reasons.
THE ACCUSED:
I mistakened him with another person from the same village, Snuol
village.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q Can the witness tell us whether he lived in Snuol village?
A. I lived in Snuol village.
Q. Was there another person with the same name in this village,
Snuol village?
A. There was named Song (phonetic) in that village; but the name
was Song, not the same as my name.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
So you are telling us that the person you were referring to
yesterday is not the same person who is the witness here today?
THE ACCUSED:
Yes.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
However, I repeat my question.  Yesterday you referred to a
person and you thought that that person was this witness, and you
said yesterday that this person was taken to M 13 for a specific
reason.  Do you remember what you said?
THE ACCUSED:
The Brother Song that I informed Your Honours had the problems
like I described to you who was brought to me, and that I
released him, and later on I invited him to be part of a guard
team.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
You have stated specific reasons for which this person was
brought to M 13.  Do you remember?
THE ACCUSED:
Yes.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
So what were the reasons for which this person was brought to M
13?
THE ACCUSED:
Let me clarify to Your Honours that what the Judge said was about
Brother Song when he was brought in for the first time or when I
invited him to be a guard?  When Brother Song arrived the first
time I still reaffirmed my statement.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Perhaps I misheard yesterday or did not hear correctly, but I
thought that I heard you say yesterday that this person was
brought to M 13 after having had problems of a personal nature --
this is what I understood yesterday -- and that he cut somebody's
head off with a knife.  Is this correct or not?
THE ACCUSED:
That was correct for that Brother Song, like I said at the time
-- not to this gentleman Sorn here.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Okay, I understand.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Now I would like to ask the witness.  Sir, have you ever been
in a position of having to cut somebody's head off with a knife?
A. I never did.  But Song used to cut somebody's neck and the
victim's name was Yem.  The person is still alive these days.
Q. Can you please tell us what were the sanitary conditions at
the camp M 13 in which the detainees were living?  Could they
wash?  Could they go and relieve themselves?  Could they wash,
could they bathe?
A. At that time, yes.  For those who were detained in the pits,
we were unshackled, then we -- they put a ladder for us to climb
up and then to have a bath at the M 13 office, which was next to
the stream, on the south of the stream too, the north of Trapeang
Chrap so we could take a bath at the stream.  Our hands were tied
but we could take a bath.
Q. Can you give us any idea of the number of persons detained at
M 13?
A. I cannot correctly estimate the numbers because I was one of
the prisoners in one pit.  From what I could estimate, there were
a lot of people, could be two to three thousand people there.
Q. Two to three thousand simultaneously, at the same time, or
would that be cumulative throughout the duration of your
detention?
A. From what I saw when they were in those pits at the prison I
do not remember how many pits there were, but all the pits were
full including myself was in one of the pits.  This is just my
estimate because I was one of the prisoners, so I could not make
a correct estimation.  When we were let out for a bath or to do
urine I had a glimpse and so that figure was a rough estimate of
what I saw at the time.
Q. I'm not sure you grasped my question correctly.  Are you sure
there were 2,000 people at any particular point in time, at the
same time, or 2,000 people over a period of time because of new
detainees arriving?
A. When I first arrived at the place I saw prisoners were
detained there, so I estimated there were at least that amount.
Q. Can you tell us whether there were men, women, children?
A. Those who were detained there including female, male, old and
young alike.
Q. Were there many children?  Many children?
A. There were not many children...
There were probably 30 to 40 children.  For the very old people
there were not many as well.  There were a lot of middle-aged
people.  For the prisoners there, some of the Khmer Rouge
soldiers were also detained there.
Q. So there were Khmer Rouge soldiers.  Would that have been a
major proportion?  Were there many Khmer Rouge soldiers?
A. There were some Khmer Rouge soldiers.  Probably they were
defeated from the front battlefield and they were brought there.
Q. You're sure they were Khmer Rouge soldiers, are you, or were
they soldiers from the Lon Nol regime?  Were they Republicans or
were they specifically Khmer Rouge?
A. The prisoners there when they were let out to relieve
themselves or for bath I asked them and they told me they were
soldiers.  And when they went to fight the Lon Nol soldiers, they
were defeated and then they were brought to that detention
centre.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, it's time to adjourn for lunch break and we will resume at
1:30 p.m.
The security guard, take the accused back to his detention and
bring him back before 1.30 p.m. this afternoon.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court Officer, please facilitate the witness to the waiting room
and to prepare for his lunch and bring him back at 1:30 p.m.
(Witness exits courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1206H to 1336H)
(Witness enters courtroom)
THE PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in session.
Next we would like Judge Lavergne to continue putting more
questions to the witness.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Can the witnesses hear me?  Do you hear me?  Can the witness
hear me?  Do you have problems hearing and do you have problems
seeing?  This morning it seemed that you had a bit of trouble
seeing around you.  Has it been a long time that you have these
difficulties?
A. Actually I have not been able to see for a long time already.
Q. When you were detained at M-13 did you also have problems
seeing?
A. When I was detained at M-13 I was still young because it was
in 1973.
Q. So back then you had good eyesight?
A. Yes, I could see.  My eyesights were good because I was still
young at my early forties.
Q. Did you go to school?  Did you receive any kind of formal
education?  Do you know how to read and write and do you know how
to count?
A. I can read Khmer a little.  I did not go far in school because
I am rather illiterate.
Q. Do you know how to count?
A. I can count.
Q. So this morning we spoke about the prisoners who were at M-13.
You spoke to me about soldiers and you told me that these were
Khmer Rouge soldiers, and you told me that these Khmer Rouge
soldiers had been defeated during a battle with the Republican
Army; is that what you said?  Is that true; is that what you
wanted to say?
A. I have learned this information only from the victims who were
having a bath with me and I tried to ask them and they told me
that they were defeated from the battle and were later on
arrested and sent to M-13.
Q. What kind of clothes were these people wearing?
A. They wore civilian clothes, not the pure black clothes.
Q. I did not understand.  Were they wearing black clothes or not?
A. They wore civilian clothes.  I mean, just casual clothes with
colour or with flowers.  When they were arrested and detained at
M-13 and when we were let out to have a bath, then I heard from
them about that defeat in the battle.  I just learned from the
victims themselves.
Q. You also told us this morning that you were detained in a pit.
Could you please describe more in detail?  Well, could you
describe this pit more in detail?  Were there specific problems
with this pit or not?
A. The pit was three metres deep, and I was detained for long and
we did not have a mat to sleep on.  We slept with our back on the
soil.  When we would like to relieve ourselves, then we would be
allowed to climb out of the pit through a ladder and our ankles
were still shackled.
Q. How many people were there in each pit?
A. In each pit, I can estimate that -- I may only give you my
estimation.  There were about 20 to 30 people in each pit.
Q. And how many pits were there?
A. I don't remember; there were probably six to seven pits.
Q. Were all the pits the same size or were you in the largest pit
or the smallest?  Can you give me some details about this,
please?
A. I guess the pits were of the same size.
Q. So you told me that you were shackled.  Could you tell me
specifically how you were shackled?
A. My ankles were shackled and there was a metal bar with rings
and my ankles were attached to that rings -- those rings.  In one
metal bar, five detainees were attached.
Q. Were there problems when it rained?
A. When it rained, we got soaked because the roof -- because the
rain leaked from the roof.
Q. Did you experience any flooding in the pits?
A. When I was detained, I was not affected by that.  We got
soaked wet and we could change our clothes there in the pit.
Q. So you had the possibility to change clothes; is that so?
A. I did not have any pairs of clothes to change, but we only had
the clothes that we were given when we were arrested.
Q. Were certain detainees only in their underwear or did some of
them, or all of them, have clothes?
A. I think I could see that every detainee did not have any new
clothes to change and some detainees were tied next to the pole,
each pole, naked.
Q. Completely naked?
A. When they were arrested they were wearing clothes, but when
they were tied to the poles, when each pole was -- when each of
them was tied to the pole, they were naked because their clothes
was stripped off.
Q. Did you see any prisoners who were ill?
A. The detainees, most of them were sick because we were given
only paddle of gruel, so many died of starvation.
Q. How often were you fed everyday and what did you eat?
A. Everyday in the morning we were given a ladle of rice -- of
gruel, and we were not given enough food.  Many died.  I could
survive and I was -- I had been detained there until -- between
October and November.  In November, Duch released me and sent me
to Pursat Province in 1974 and I had lived in Pursat and had no
idea of what's going on in M-13.  I only knew the situation when
I was detained at M-13.
Q. Do you remember being interviewed by investigators from the
courts?  Do you remember investigators interviewing you from the
courts?
A. Yes, I remember.
Q. In the case file we have a written record of your interview
indexed 78 on .  In the French version it lists ERN
00195537.  And you said, in particular, the prisoners who died
because of starvation were more numerous than those who died
because of torture.  Each day there were about 10 to 15 prisoners
who died because of starvation.  Can you confirm what I just
read?  Does that correspond to what you said to the
investigators?
A. Yes, it's true.  Detainees who died of starvation were from 10
to
people each day and detainees who were tortured to death, I 
 
         15   only saw that 4 to 5 people were tied to the poles.  So those
four detainees were attached or tied to the four poles and with
one pole in the middle and another detainee was tied to that pole
and that person in the middle was shot at, probably to scare the
other prisoners who were tied surrounding that person in the
middle.
Q. So you confirm that everyday there was a high number of
prisoners who would die of starvation?
A. Many detainees died everyday.  At least no less than two to
three people died each day and sometimes 10 to 15 people died
each day.  But regarding the torturing I only witnessed two
detainees who were shot to death.  And as a detainee I could not
see much because that incident that I could see only when I
encountered it accidentally.
Q. So you explained to us earlier on that you were arrested and
then put into a pit where you stayed and then you were allowed to
go out of the pit during the day.  You were not shackled during
the day?
A. When I was let out to clean the place and asked to work I was
not shackled.  But later on they even unchained me completely.
Q. What kind of work did you have to do?
A. When I was let out I was asked to dig the pits and also
carried the timber to make a shelter to protect the pits or the
detainees from bombing.
Q. What was the purpose of the pits that you would dig?  What
were they used for?
A. The pits were that, to be used as the trenches to protect us
from being bombing.  And after I was no longer chained then I was
asked to dig more pits.
Q. Did you see these pits being used to put prisoners in them or
did you see these pits used for any other purpose?
A. The pits were there to hold prisoners and also some pits were
used as trenches.  Then they used big timbers to protect the pits
which were used as trenches to protect it from bombing.
Q. You explained to us earlier on that you saw people tied up to
poles and, I understand, there were four persons attached --
chained up or attached -- tied up to these poles.  Is it correct,
four persons attached to these poles?
A. I responded that it was not done correctly; it was a cruel
act, the killing -- the arbitrary killing on their own Khmer
people.  The other nations they loved their own people but for
us, the Khmer people, they administered it to their own Khmer
people, it's worse than animals.  That was my opinion.
Q. Can you confirm to me that there were four persons attached to
these poles?
A. Let me confirm that they were tied to the post, four -- five
people were tied to the post.  One was shot so only four were
still tied to the post.  The person in the middle was shot so
only the two on each side looked upon the one in the middle who
was shot.  That's what I saw.
Q. How was this person killed?  Was he shot dead and possibly
would you know who used the gun to shoot him dead?
A. The person who shot was called Ta Chan.  He had leprosy.  He
shot the person and I saw him shooting the prisoner on two
separate occasions.  I saw these two incidents with my own eyes.
Q. How old was the person who shot the gun?
A. Duch called Ta Chan as Brother, Brother Chan but I did not
know his exact age.
Q. Was this person a child?
A. No, he was quite old.  At that time he was probably around 45
years old or about because he had already had adult daughter and
son.
Q. On what part of the victim's body did he shoot?
A. He shot the head of the person.  I was the prisoner at that
time when I was sweeping the dust.  I also cleaned the brain and
the blood which was spattered.
Q. Was Duch present?  Did you see him order anything?
A. No, I did not see him there.  I only saw that Ta Chan to came
out and did the shooting.  I did not know where Duch was at the
time.
Q. Did you see any other prisoners being abused, being the
victims of violence, of particular types of violence?
A. Yes, I did.  I saw the prisoners were beaten with the hoe,
with the stick and I was asked to sweep the place, to digs the
pits for them and because I were afraid so I dug the pits for
them.  After they killed those people then they were buried.
Q. Consequently you have seen prisoners being beaten.  They were
beaten with what?
A. The prisoners were beaten with bamboo stick and a hoe -- the
head of the hoes.
Q. Can you repeat once again, please?  The instruments with which
they were hit, I've heard sticks, tubes or pipes and hoe's.
A. They were beaten with the heads of the hoe's; that's what I
saw with my eyes because I was the one who dug the pits as they
ordered.  While I was sweeping the ground I was asked to dig the
pit.
It was about -- the burial site was almost close to the office
and sometimes we saw the dogs carrying away the bones and the
skulls to the kitchen because I saw these things when I swept the
ground.
The burial sites was almost surround the office and they used the
same prisoners to do all these things.  I myself, I would
estimate it at least 200 to 300 of those dead prisoners to be
buried.
Q.  Have you seen other forms of violence being used?  In
particular, did you see prisoners being put in water, immersed in
water?
A. Yes, I did.  Prisoners were held, their legs and their hands
were tied and then they were submerged into the Trapeang Chrap
pond and then they lift them up and interrogated them.  I was
afraid so I only watch it for a short time and then I left.
That's what I saw these mistreatment.
Q. Was Duch, the accused, present at the time when prisoners
immersed in water would then be interrogated; was Duch present?
A. No, he was not there.  The interrogator's name was Meas, who
the one who ill-treated the prisoners.  I knew him clearly.  He
was working closely with Ta Duch but I did not see Ta Duch at the
time, he was working in his office.
Q. Did you ever see Duch participate or be present when there
were scenes of violence?  Have you ever seen Duch hit people,
beat people, strike people?
A. Yes, I did.  One day I saw him beating a female person with a
whip.  It's about the size -- the whip was about the size of the
thumb.  After awhile then the young guards came and beat the girl
-- the woman.  After she became unconscious Duch slap his butt
and he laugh.  He slapped his butt and he laughed because the
girl was having seizure on the ground.
Q. So Duch was laughing as he saw this woman suffering; is this
what you're telling us?
Did you understand my question?  Was Duch laughing as he was
seeing this woman suffering?  Was Duch laughing because this
woman was suffering?
A. Yes.  Duch was laughing at the time.
Q. You have talked to us about people who died, who passed away.
You have talked about corpses.  Have you yourself taken part in
the burial of corpses, in the placing of corpses underground or
in pits?
A. Yes, I participated because each day a lot of dead prisoners.
When I was asked to do it, I would do it but I was very weak when
they asked me to dig the pit, so the pits that I dug were shallow
because of my weak strength.  I have already stated from the
beginning some of the dead prisoners were buried but not deep
because the prisoners were weak, and then the dogs came and took
some bones away and scattered them on the ground.  That's what I
saw.  I just said what I saw.  I did not fabricate it.
Q. Have you ever witnessed people being executed, being killed?
A. Yes, I did.  One day a female person was tied up and a male --
a man was tied up.  They were chained to the necks; both of them
were chained to their necks.  I was used to -- I was asked to dig
a pit and they were brought to the rim of the pit and the male
was beaten with the hoe and he fell into the pit.
Then the female one, who was dark complexioned, they beat him up
but she was unconscious, but they kicked her into the pit and
they buried her while she was still breathing.
Q. Did you know who that woman was?
A. That woman was from Kok village.  Her name was Soy from Kok
village, who was mistreated.  I did not know the woman who was
beaten unconscious.
One day I heard that Duch saying -- asking that woman, when I was
nearby -- he asked that woman, "Who are your parents?" Duch asked
that woman.  And then she told her parents' name and Duch said,
"Yes, I know your parents.  Your father was Monivong".  And he
said, "I don't kill the king's family, I only kill the enemies".
That's what Duch said at the time.
Q. Who was in charge of doing the executing?  Was it the job of
guards?  What was the age of the guards who were in charge of
being executioners?
A. The guards whom also execute -- who also execute and torture
the prisoners, they were quite young, probably 17 to 20 years
old.
Q. Seventeen to 20 years old.  Do you think those people were
still children or would you say they were adults?
A. They were adult.  Their labours can be used because when they
were 18 or 20 they already grown up.
Q. Amongst the guards, were there any children?
A. Yes, there were some young guards about 15 years old.  There
were about four to ten of them in that office, but I cannot
recall their names.  I don't know who their parents were.
Q. Were those children taking part in interrogations?  Were they
expected to behave in a violent way or were they involved in any
execution-type work?  Were they involved in executions?
A. I did not see them executing people.  I saw them beating,
kicking the prisoners.  Yes, they did it at their own free will.
They kicked, they beat, they scolded; all types of abuse.  That's
what I saw, but I did not see them executing prisoners.
Q. As regards types of violence, do you remember seeing pliers,
pincers -- pliers and pincers.  Have you ever seen this kind of
tool?
A. Yes, I saw.  I saw them.  I saw pliers for pull out
fingernails and needles to prick the fingernails.  I had a
glimpse at them and I saw the -- I heard and saw the prisoners
screaming while the tortures was being done on them.
Q. So you have seen these pliers.  Did you see the prisoners
after their nails had been removed?
A. Yes.  I saw the prisoners were having the little pricks into
the fingernails, but whether the nails were pulled out or not I
did not see because I was afraid and I left.  I, myself, was
afraid that they would accuse me of observing and taking the
information out.
Q. What kind of relationship did you have with Duch, with the
Director of M 13?
A. I dare not to have any contact with him.  I was so afraid of
him, I did not even dare to look him straight in his face.  If he
called me to use, then I would go and be at his service.
One day, he said that -- after he stopped imprisoning me, after
he stopped shackling me, he called me to him and said, "Brother
Sorn, you can be my guard here with me.  You don't need to go
home."  And in the morning he told me, "You, Brother, don't stay
here near to these hellish people".  So then he sent me to the
rice farms, and since then I did not hear anything else.  After I
worked in the farm and during November or December he called me
and sent me to Pursat province. Then I boarded a truck at Kan
Seng Sum pagoda to Pursat province and I returned only in 1979.
My family thought I was dead.  Nobody knew that I was still
alive.  Only in '79 when I came to my family and they knew that I
was still alive.
Q. You were extremely frightened, very frightened of Duch.  Are
you still afraid of Duch today?
A. Today I am not afraid of him because he is now a tiger with no
teeth.
Q. Has Duch ever told you one day about what might happen after
M-13?
A. He used to say once that -- from the beginning he said,  "When
you -- Brother, when you finish from here you can go to Phnom
Penh with me."  That's what he just talked but he never asked me
to do that.  And later on in 1974 he sent me to Pursat so I just
keep repeating all this part.  That's all; nothing else.
Q. Do you have an exact memory of what he said to you when he
talked about going to Phnom Penh?  Do you remember exactly what
his words were?
A. That's all what he told me.  That's just a few words; that,
"After we finish fighting the enemy you can go to Phnom Penh with
me."  That's all what he said to me, nothing else, and he did not
talk much on that.
Q. When you were heard and interviewed by the investigators of
the Court -- and this is Document D78.2, still the same ERN
number.  On  you said the following:
"There was once upon a time Duch said to me Brother Son, when we
will occupy Phnom Penh you should be recruited as head of the
prison in Phnom Penh with me."
Do you remember hearing him say this?
A. What he said was to ask me to go to Phnom Penh with him, but
to appoint me as a prison chief or not; it was not.  He just
said, "Brother, when Phnom Penh was liberated you can go to Phnom
Penh together with me."  That's all what he said to me, and he
didn't say anything else.
Q. Did Duch carry a gun?
A. Duch had a pistol but when he went outside then he would carry
it.  Inside the compound he did not carry his pistol.  He kept it
at his place.  I only saw him carrying the pistol only when he
went outside, for example, to the village.
Q. Could you tell us who were the major deputies or helpers or
assistants of Duch?
A. His assistant there was Ta Chan, Meas and Pon, whom I know but
I did not know the rest.  There were some people who was close to
him, i.e. Ta Chan, Meas and Ta Pon whom I know the names.  I did
not know the rest or the names of the rest and besides there were
the guards.  I did not know them all.
Q. Did you hear anybody talk about somebody called Pal or Fal?
A. No, I did not know that.  I did not know the name Pal.
Q. Is there anything else of importance that you wish to say to
the Chamber in relation to what you lived through?
A. That's the truth, that the Chamber is trying to find the truth
for the Cambodian people, to try to find those who are
responsible for the crimes during the three years eight months,
320 days period.  I am very glad that this happens.  I am very
satisfied and nothing else is valuable than this proceeding.  And
I wanted justice to be done for the Cambodian people who survived
from that horrible tragedy of the Pol Pot regime.  No other
humankind was suffered than those who suffered during the Khmer
Rouge regime.
I don't have anything else to say.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Mr. President, I have no other questions to ask the witness.  But
I would like to interrogate the accused, please.
Duch, you have just heard this statement, so first I would like
to hear your first observations in relation to what you just
heard.
THE ACCUSED:
My first observation regarding this witness, I would like to say
that although I have not known him before I just seen him now and
I knew that through his testimony he had suffered a great deal.
He has suffered -- he had suffered a lot at M 13 before he was
sent to Pursat.
My second observation is that his fundamental testimony is true
-- fundamentally.  There's something that's missed out in his
testimony, just a little.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
So fundamentally speaking, you do not challenge the content of
this testimony.  You just are saying that there might be a few
details missing.  So therefore could you tell us what are these
missing details then?
THE ACCUSED:
I can say that the translation is not really accurate.  The Khmer
words that I used that something missed out means it's not really
accurate.  That's what I meant to say.  I mean when something
missed out I mean it is not accurate.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
So therefore what are these inaccuracies?
THE ACCUSED:
He talked more than the truth.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
The witness said specifically that you had beaten a woman, that
you had beaten her on her behind and that this had made you laugh
-- had made you laugh to watch her writhe in pain on the ground.
THE ACCUSED:
I interrogated a woman.  When I did so I never let any detainee
to see it.  That's number one.  Number two, I never beat any
female detainee.  And third, when a detainee was beaten no-one
else was helping me to beat that person.  And when I said,
according to Brother Sorn, I spanked my butt; not spanking the
female detainee's butt.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Can the witness confirm what he said before, that he saw Duch
beat a woman and in particular having laughed as he saw her on
the ground suffering?
A. Yes, I did see it when he grabbed a stick and then beat that
woman, and then later on the other guard, the young guard, beat
her instead.  But then Duch spanked his butt and laughed.  That's
all.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
What do you have to say regarding what the witness said about the
immersion scenes when the prisoners were plunged into the pond?
THE ACCUSED:
That was a dirty person, so when the person immersed then she or
he felt itchy.
Number two, Trapeang Trach pond was used to -- for the purpose of
irrigating the plants, the eggplants -- because of female
detainees planting eggplants nearby.
So no detainee was immersed in that Trapeang Trach pond and other
detainee could see such event.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. I will ask the witness again if he can confirm having seen
prisoners forcefully immersing prisoners in the pond.
A. Yes, I really saw it, but not Duch who immersed that person.
Maybe he did not even know that the person was being immersed.
The person who did that was the person named Meas.  I know him.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Did you follow personally all of the interrogations?  Did you
know exactly which methods were used for each interrogation?
THE ACCUSED:
The interrogation was done separately in a bush and no-one could
see that.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Do you believe that one of your subordinates might have decided
on his own to use the method described by the witness in order to
interrogate a prisoner without you being made aware of this?
THE ACCUSED:
I don't believe that Meas could have done it because at Trapeang
Trach pond, or at the Trapeang Trach area, at the other side of
the pond there were a lot of people so whatever happened, people
could see it.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Another question:  So you heard the witness describing the usage
of pliers to pull out nails, the usage of pins that were pressed
under the nails?  What can you say about all of this?
THE ACCUSED:
I said already there were no pliers, no pins, and no nails were
pulled.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Another question:  You heard the witness describe an execution
scene where four or five prisoners were tied to poles and where a
guard shot one of the prisoners who was tied to a pole, whereas
the others were next to him.  What can you say about this?
THE ACCUSED:
(No interpretation)
THE INTERPRETER:
The interpreter would like to ask that the accused should not
respond directly to Judge Lavergne, because he cannot follow.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Did you hear what he said?  You have to wait a little bit before
you answer.  Thank you.
THE ACCUSED:
Regarding the shooting at the detainee while the other detainees
could see, as testified by Brother Sorn, it's true.  I already
stated yesterday, or before yesterday, to the Judges.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
You witnessed the scenes described by the witness involving dogs
who were carrying away remains of human bodies; is that so?
THE ACCUSED:
He testified that there was a dog that carried away the bones of
the corpse to drop them in the premises of M-13.  I did not know
that happened.  Maybe it carried somewhere else; I don't know.
Through my observation in Trapeang Trach or in that location,
there were not many dogs.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
The court official, could you please take the witness to his
waiting room, and bring him back after the break?
THE GREFFIER:
Please stand up.
(Court recesses from 1445H to 1508H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The court is now in session.
First we would like Judge Lavergne to finish putting questions to
the witness or the accused before we give the floor to parties.
The floor is yours.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Duch, you have heard the witness mentioning the number of
prisoners assessed by him as having been at M-13.  This morning
reference was made to 2,000 or even 3,000 detainees.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Can the witness confirm this figure?
A. When I -- I did not really count the number of the detainees,
it's only based on my estimation.  And as I told you, there were
no more than 30,000 detainees in M-13.  However, I cannot really
tell you exactly how many detainees were there.
Q. I have just heard the figure of 30,000.  Earlier on you talked
about six to seven pits and in each pit there would be about 20
to 30 prisoners.  So looking at this, at the lower end of that
figure, six pits and 20 prisoners per pit, we would have a total
of 120 prisoners at any given time.  Apart from the pits, were
there any other places where prisoners could be kept?
A. I did not see there were other pits.  People who were very
weak were taken to the upper part of the pits but they were in
the premises of that prison that through my estimation that was
the number, no more than that, no less than that.
Q. You say that those who were very weak stayed within the
compound of the camp.  That would be how many people?  How many
people would you think that would be?
A. These people were kept there just for overnight because they
died very quickly.  So that's why the numbers of detainees were
not very regular; people were brought in and then people died and
then more arrests were made.
So I think the people who died may be more than what I could
estimate and people who  were tortured, people who killed without
letting other people to see such a execution and that's -- some
people who were tortured severely when they arrived back at the
location they dropped dead.  I also saw that.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. These weak people who were no longer in the pits, who were
outside the pits, these would amount to how many people; a few
tens of people, more, less?  Of course there was never actually
the same number but what would have been the higher and the lower
estimates of the range.  If you -- do you understand my question?
A. Yes, I understand Your Honour's question.
The people who were weak, and there were about 10 of them when
they were too weak and sometime there were five, sometime there
were 10 but the people who were taken from within the picture
never been brought back because of little food that they died.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. So I'm using your own figures, the figures you have given us,
we have about 120 to 210 persons who are in the pits, plus about
five to 10 persons outside the pits, so we have a total of
between 125 to 220 prisoners.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Now, I would like to ask the accused to tell us whether these
estimates match the reality as he knew it.
THE ACCUSED:
Regarding the figures as Brother Sum already mentioned several
times, I would like to state about the length of the pit, three
metre deep or 2.5 metre wide and there were about three pits.
So in one pit there were only about 10 people, no more than that.
And I would like to confirm that I never let the victims to died
at that location without being executed or smashed because the
smash took regularly, after their confessions were given to the
superior.
Then when they said that it is time, that's complete, that the
victim could be smashed then they were smashed and no -- no high
number of detainees like that, there are only three special
occasions or cases when -- during the fall of Oudong and those
people were only sent to M-13 temporarily and I think maybe
Brother Sum was also sent to the Northwest at that time and then
at another time when Phum O village was evacuated then people
were sent to M-13 and that time Brother Si, Chou Chet the
Secretary of the Southwest, asked me  -- no, asked the other
people to arrest those people so that I can interrogate them.
There were about 60 of them at that time, among that period of
time.  So I think Brother Sum may make a guess when he talked
about the number of detainees during that -- when we had high
number of people.  As I told you already, his figures seem to be
surplus.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. I shall once again ask the witness to confirm to us the number
of people who, according to him, died on a daily basis in M-13.
In M-13, on a daily basis, how many dead -- how many people died?
A. On a daily basis sometimes five prisoners die, sometimes
seven; it's not -- it was not regular, but at least three
detainees died.  So no -- in the pits sometimes five people who
were shackled together, three of them died and then the corpse,
the dead body were taken away.  So I could see that people died
regularly.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
The last question for the accused; the witness has said that
Khmer people have done this to Khmer people, do you have anything
to say about this?
THE ACCUSED:
During the time when I oversaw the M-13, until 1975, I never saw
any other national other than the Khmer except another Frenchman;
the man who was arrested by Ta Mok near National Road Number 5;
Mr. Jacques Rousala (phonetic).
Apart from him no other foreigner except François Bizot, no
Vietnamese, no Americans, so of course there were the Khmer
people who killed the Khmer.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I think the witness was speaking about something much deeper.  He
was wondering how -- how it could possibly be that Khmer people
would behave in such a fashion to their own brethren, to their
own -- to other Khmer people.
THE ACCUSED:
Thank you, Your Honour, for restating the question.  It was about
political issue.  First, as I told you already, it was to smash
the enemy spies and it was the class struggle in the liberated
zone which is the referral base.  And the class line, the
proletariat class line was introduced, that's why Khmer killed
Khmer blindly, because of that principle.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Uch Sorn, I have a question.  You were there for about one
year, so you had opportunity to communicate or contact with the
guards at that location, and later on you were released.  Have
you noticed that, altogether, the camera -- cadres, the staff in
that location during your captivity, how many of them -- how many
there were, including Duch himself?
A. I think maybe there were at least 50 people, including Duch
himself.  I mean, the guards in that office, apart from the
detainees.  So there were about 30 people.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to
put some questions to the witness.  The floor is yours.
MR. YET CHAKRIYA:  The Co-Prosecutor thanks you, Your Honours.
BY MR. YET CHAKRIYA:
Q. Mr. Uch Sorn, where you live, and M-13, how far is it?
A. It's about 10 kilometres.  It's about 10 kilometres from my
home to M-13.
Q. How long have you known  M-13?
A. I never knew that M-13 office before, only when I was arrested
and sent to that location because, at that time, we lived in the
jungle.  We did not live in the villages, because we were afraid
that we would be dropped the bombs on.
Q. When you were arrested, who else were arrested?
A. There were three people, Ta Kul and Ta Phim, who were arrested
at Khmer ambush.  Sou and Ta Kroeng arrested us.  They were the
Khmer Rouge soldiers.  They arrested me after dinner, at 6 p.m.
Q. Where were they sent to, the two people who were arrested at
that time with you?
A. They already died at the office.
Q. Duch released -- Duch unshackles you and let's you work in the
security office.  Was it the intention of Duch, or was there any
request from other people?
A. When I was arrested at the beginning, for three days -- during
the early three days, I saw Ta Lim, Ta Kong, and Ta Kul, who came
to the office.  I did not know whether these people came to
release me or not.  I heard -- they said that, "Sorn, we try to
stop you on the road, but we failed.  That's why you were
arrested and sent to the M-13.  Since you were already sent to
the M-13, you should work your best at the office."
And I, actually, in which society I worked, I felt the society
the best, and I never been a spy.  So when I was arrested and
taken to the M-13, I was so surprised, because I was a very
sincere person, and I was accused of being a spy.  And, actually,
I only was a  - looking to buy a pig for a ritual ceremony, and
that I was arrested.
And then we -- in 1973, we conducted a ritual ceremony and I knew
that, during the Khmer Rouge regime, Buddhism would be
demolished, that's why I had to celebrate such event before it
was too late.  So that's why I was looking for a pig to -- for
such a celebration, and the village chief really arrested me
there.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And Uch Sorn, could you please, for the good record, make it
slower?  Speak rather slowly, thank you.
BY MR. YET CHAKRIYA:
Q. During your captivity, did you notice any witness -- any
detainee who attempted to escape?
A. Yes, there was.  The person name Lon attempted to escape.  He
was arrested at the same time as I was arrested, and then he was
interrogated.  But I was in the prison at that time.  He went
away for some time, but when he came back we could not -- I could
not recognize his face, because there were bruises.
And then, when Lon came back, he told me that he would not live,
so tomorrow he would attempt to run away.  And he did -- he was
not afraid that he would be shot at.  So, in the morning, he
asked the guard to relieve himself.  He was still -- his wrist
was still tied up, and he tried to run while he was still
untying, and then the guard shot him and he died by the shooting.
So that man was called Lon; his wife still lives in Anlong Chrey
to this day.
Q. Could you please confirm whether there were children arrested,
too, and sent to M-13?
A. Yes, there were about four to 10 children who were detained
with their parents.
Q. Where were these children taken to?
A. I don't know where these people were taken to, because we just
lost them and I never seen them.  Maybe they disappeared and
died.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The International Co-Prosecutor, if you would like to make -- ask
some question?  The floor is yours.
MR. PETIT (Speaking in English):
Thank you, Mr. President.  No questions for me, thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to ask whether the civil parties'
lawyers would like to pose any questions to the witness.  The
Chamber would like to remind that civil party lawyers should try
to avoid repeated questions and make sure that your questions are
clear, because the witness is not well-educated and he has to be
able to understand the question clearly before he can respond.
So we should start from Group 1, Civil Party Group 1.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you, the President and Your Honours.  I am Ty Srinna, the
lawyer of the Civil Party Group 1.
First, my sincere respect to the president and Your Honours, and
people in and outside the courtroom.  So I would like to ask a
question to the witness, Mr. Uch Sorn.
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Q. Before I ask the question I would like to remind the witness
regarding his response.  If you feel that my question is not
clear, please ask me to repeat or verify or simply the question.
Or if my questions are difficult to remember, or if you think
that you don't remember any event regarding my questions, you
just say you don't remember or you remember.  So my questions
start as follows.
During your captivity at M 13 did you ever see the guards bury
any detainee alive?
A. As I already told you, there were two detainees, a female and
male detainee who were beaten, but the woman did not die yet but
she was carried into the pit and buried alive.  That's the one
case that I saw.
Q. Next question.  When you were at M 13 and you had a role to
clean the premises and to bury the dead bodies, did you see the
guards meet to discuss the methods of tortures?
A. I have never seen any meeting like that; never.
Q. Another question.  Regarding your statement that you just made
concerning the execution of the detainees, you said that there
were five detainees who were tied to the poles.  Among them four
detainees were tied to the four poles and one detainee were tied
to the middle pole and was shot in the head to death.  So my
question is that where were the other four detainees taken to?
A. I have no idea where the other detainees were taken.  I think
they were taken back to the pits.  Later on these people died,
because I later on noticed that these people already died.
Q. When the tortures were introduced did you know what did those
detainees do, or what were the classification of the detainees?
Were they from the Lon Nol's regime, the former Lon Nol regimes,
or were they Khmer Rouge soldiers who committed some wrongdoing
so that they were tied and punished?  So can you tell us what
kind of people they were?
A. Those people who were not shot at, were just ordinary people
in our village, like us, like me.  They're just normal people,
villagers.  They were not high-ranking officials in the military,
no.
Q. How did you know that they were ordinary villagers?  May I
repeat the question?  Are you sure that the four detainees,
including the one detainee who was shot dead, were ordinary
people?
A. Yes.  It's true.  I even knew their names.
Q. Thank you very much, Uncle.  Another question.  You said when
you were walking on the road there was a person who attempted to
help you.  You call -- you said that the person told you that he
could not save you since you were already brought to M 13 and
that you should work hard so that your sentence could be reduced.
I would like to ask, in such a situation did you have an
opportunity -- I mean when you were arrested -- that as an
ordinary villager, not a spy, did you have an opportunity to ask
the guards or the superiors to tell them that you were not a spy
and that you were just ordinary villager?  Were you given such
opportunity to talk to them?
A. I did tell this to Comrade Meas.  I asked him, why did you not
take me to question, because I was detained for a long time, and
I told him that before I die at least I could be asked any
questions.  And I told him why -- I asked him why he did not ask
me to be interrogated, and Meas told me that, "Why should they
ask you any questions?  Because you were looking for a pig."  And
I asked him this question because I asked him that since I was
arrested I never been questioned until I was released and sent to
Pursat.  So of course I did not have a chance to ask.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Ty Srinna, could you please stay a little bit far from the
mic so that we can hear you more clearly?
MS. TY SRINNA:
I have no more questions for the witness but may I ask through
Your Honours to the accused concerning the roles of the
detainees, the five detainees who were tied to the pole and then
one of them was shot into the head to scare the four other
detainees?  So what kind of offence were they charged of -- why
one of them was shot to scare the others.  Could the President
and Your Honour refer this question to the accused, if you allow?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, do you understand the question?  If you understand
the question please respond.
THE ACCUSED:
Regarding this matter, I already informed Judge Lavergne, clearly
if I am allowed to repeat this to the lawyer then I'm pleased to
do so.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Ty Srinna, could you please repeat or clarify your question
so that your question is not repeated, because we know that
through translation sometimes there is a loss in the translation
itself and that's why the questions may be repeated.  So could
you please ask again?  So what is your actual question now?  I
would like you to avoid beating about the bush because we know
the facts already and we have observed the testimony and
questioning for some days.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you, Your Honours, the President.
The question is regarding my suspicion, my doubt, because when
the accused stated that matter I do not understand in which year
that happened because the witness who was here was detained in
1973 at M-13.
So I don't know for sure whether the action, I mean the killing
of the witness -- the detainee who was tied to the pole, happened
because the accused said that the person who were tied to the
pole was ordinary person.  And I want just to make sure that I
understand correctly from the accused whether those people were
really ordinary people and how many times detainees were tied to
the pole and shot at.
THE PRESIDENT:
We see that these questions or these matters have already been
cleared by the accused and I think the accused may not need to
respond to the question again.
I would like to invite lawyer, Group 2 to put some questions if
you would wish to do so.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes.  Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MS. STUDZINSKY:
Q. My name is Silke Studzinsky.  I'm a lawyer for civil parties.
I have only very few questions.  I would like to know --
THE PRESIDENT:
We cannot hear the translation.  Could the Court officer try to
make sure we can hear it.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MS. STUDZINSKY:
Q. My name is Silke Studzinsky.  I'm a lawyer for the civil
parties, for the victims.  I have only a few questions.
When you stayed at night in the pit did the clothes of the
prisoners touch each other?
A. The detainees were shackled onto the metal bar and we were put
close to one another.
Q. You mentioned that you heard screaming of prisoners who were
tortured.  How often did you hear such screaming?  Was it every
day?
A. I only heard the screaming once.  It was when I was walking to
-- walking past the place where people were tortured, and that
was the only one time that I heard the screaming.
Q. How far were you away from the interrogation and torture
venues?
A. I was about 20 metres from that location, maybe 20 to 30
metres.
Q. And do you know who was the interrogator at this moment and
who tortured?
A. I don't remember that person's name and I did not really pay
great attention to that things because when I heard the screaming
I just turned away because I did not pay great attention, because
I was scared of myself for being accused of an informer who
wanted to know other people's business.  Then I just turned away
-- I turned away so I just did not -- don't remember their name.
Q. And now my last question.  The execution scene that you have
observed, these five prisoners where the one in the middle was
shot, were these prisoners male prisoners or were there also
female prisoners among them?
A. Those prisoners were all male, no female.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Okay.  Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The floor is yours.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Mr. President and Your Honours, I am Kong Pisey.  I would like to
ask a few questions to the witness.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. You said Lon was arrested with you along with another man.  At
that time Lon was interrogated.  And then you noticed that Lon's
face was -- there were bruises on Lon's face.  So do you know or
did you know what happened to him, why he became like that?
A. I asked him but he said he was kicked with a sandal made from
car tyres.
Q. Another question.  You said that there was another man who was
arrested with you.  Was he interrogated at that time?
A. Could you please repeat your question?  I don't understand.
Q. There were three people arrested along with you; Lon and you
and?
A. Kul.
Q. So was Kul also interrogated?
A. At the beginning they were put together but later on they were
divided, separated.  I did not know whether he was also
interrogated because I was very scared.  I did not know whether I
myself would die.
And, after a fortnight, that person died of starvation.  Another
man named Kin also died but, before he was arrested, his father
paid a visit to M-13.  He lived in Svay Muoydoem village.  He
asked why his son was arrested.  And then, his father was also
arrested, and then his father even died of starvation before his
son.  So before I was sent to Pursat, I witnessed that event.
Q. I would like to ask you another question concerning the
detention.  When you were detained in that pit, along with other
people, when you were shackled, were you allowed to dress?
A. Of course, we only had the clothes we brought with us.  So
when we got soaked then there would not be any clothes to change.
We had to wait until our soaked wet clothes dried out.  And
no-one could bring any clothes to M-13 because they could not
come otherwise they would be also arrested.
Q. Thank you.
Now, the next question concerning the rest at night.  Were you
given a mosquito net or light at night?
A. No.  We did not have the mosquito -- we did not even have the
mat to sleep on, so there were some insects but we had to sleep
on them.
Q. Another question:  When you and other prisoners, both at night
and in the daytime, when you had to relieve yourselves, could you
go to relieve yourselves or could -- or you were -- had to
relieve yourselves at -- in the pits?
A. Normally, when we would want to relieve ourselves, then we
would ask the guards, then they would hand in a bamboo pipe so
that we could urinate in that bamboo and then they could carry it
away.
And if we had to relieve ourselves in the toilet then they would
release us to walk to the toilet.  In the pits, people were
untied at night but sometimes the hammock cords ---
THE INTERPRETER:
Excuse me, the interpreter regrets that we cannot really
interpret when the lawyer and the witness simultaneously respond
to one another.  Could you please be -- slow down.
Could you please repeat.  The interpreter would like to -- for
the record, would like to interpret that part again.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
I may repeat that question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please repeat your question because it was not yet in
the record.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. Uch Sorn, could you please repeat your question -- sorry, your
response -- because it was not recorded yet.
A. The detainees who needed to relieve themselves, I was saying
we would ask the guards and they would then drop a bamboo pipe in
the pits, and then we could relieve ourselves.  And then, after
we urinated in that pipe, then we put -- we passed them to the
guards -- to people to take them away.
And if we would like to visit the toilet, then they allowed us to
go to the toilet.  They only unshackled our ankles but they still
tied us onto the wrists.
Q. Thank you.
After you visited the -- after you relieved yourselves then the
bamboo pipe was still left in the pits?  Could you please
clarify?
A. Of course, I can clarify that the bamboo pipes were left in
the pits.
Q. So when the bamboo pipes were left in the pits were there any
bad smell affecting the other detainees?
A. Of course, the smell was not good but what else could we do?
So that bamboo pipes were designed for us to relieve ourselves
in, so things -- they were in the pipes, in the bamboo pipes, so
we had no problem with the pipes.
Q. Regarding the relieving of yourselves when people were
shackled; how could they relieve themselves?
A. Well, we just squat and then put the bamboo pipe under our
butt, and then the detainees who were close by could even assist
us.
Q. Next question:  If the question is not easy to -- what about a
pee?  When you peed, what happened to the pee?
A. Because the bamboo tube was pretty big, there was probably 10,
20 detainees in one pit and not all pee at the same time, so only
one or two prisoners pee and it would not fill up the bamboo
tube.
Q. Another question:   You did not have much to eat, but when
someone was thirsty could that person ask for water?
A. I did not see anyone ask for water, only in the morning or
during the mealtime.  First, when we were detained, we were very
thirsty because that was from our personal experience when our
hands were tied our -- when we were shackled.  They tied our
hands at two segments and also they shackled our feet, and we
were so thirsty -- very, very thirsty at the time.
Q. So when you were thirsty, did you ask for water?
A. Yes, I did.  They gave a glass of water to me, just a small
glass.  That's all.  Even if we were so thirsty, that's all what
they gave to us.
Q. How big was the glass?
A. It was like a three-riel wine glass.  It was a short one.  It
was the one which did not break if we dropped it on the ground.
Q. Any other detainee who asked for it?
A. Yes.  Yes.
Q. And did they receive it?
A. Yes.  The guards gave it to them.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The lawyer for Group 3, if you have any question for the witness.
MR. CANNONE:
Your Honour, I have just one question and very briefly so.
BY MR. CANNONE:
Q. Good afternoon, sir.  I am Philippe Canonne, co-lawyer of
Group 3 of the civil parties.
Mr. Uch Sorn, you talked about the pits that you dug.  I would
like to ask -- and this is my question -- whether once or several
times detainees were brought into the pit or pits to protect them
effectively from the bombings?  Were the pits ever used for
putting detainees in the pits and to protect them against the
effects of the bombings?
A. The pits that housed the detainees, the purpose was to protect
them from the bombing or not, I was not sure, but I myself I saw
the pits were purposely built to hold detainees.  Probably Duch
-- for Duch they probably had their own pit in order to protect
them from the bombing but those pits were built to hold the
prisoners.  If the bombs were dropped then the bombs would even
collapse those pits.  Those pits could not sustain the bombing.
MR. CANONNE:
Thank you, Your Honour.  I have no further question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next the lawyer for Group 4, if you have any question.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, President, Your Honours.  I ask a question to the
witness, Mr. Uch Sorn.  Actually I have four questions.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. Could you clarify that at one time you saw Duch beating a
woman and you said you heard him saying that was the name, the
person belongs to the Monivong, the king's blood, and Duch would
not beat or kill the king's family.  I did not catch it.  It
means he only killed the enemy and not the king's members.  Can
you clarify on this particular point?
A. I heard him saying that -- asking, "What is your name?  What's
your father's name?"  He asked, "Who are your parents?  What is
the name of your father?"  And the woman replied  -- she was a
dark complexion.  She said, "My father was a Vong," and then Duch
said, "Don't lie to me.  You are the daughter of Monivong."  I'm
not sure if he was joking or not at the time.  So that's what I
heard.  Maybe he was joking with her or not.  And he said, "I
don't kill the king's family, I only kill the enemy."  And I did
not stay there and continue listening to it.  But when I walked
past that's what I heard.
Q. Thank you.
My second question to you; I think it is contradictory to Duch's
statement.  Let me clarify.  When you saw the killing of one
person, as raised by other lawyers, who were tied to a post
together with another four detainees, you told the Chamber that
you knew the person who shot that detainee and the name was Chan.
Is that correct?
A. I know this person clearly.  His name was Ta Chan.
Q. Earlier you said Chan, Meas and Pon.  That's the names you
said.  You knew them clearly.
A. Yes.
Q. So you're not confused?
A. No, I'm not.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
May I be allowed to ask Duch?  He said he assigned someone to
killed and I'm not sure if that person was the same person as
stated by the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, you can respond; respond to this question.
THE ACCUSED:
I don't want to say about something that happens in detail but
let me just confirm that the person who shot was not Comrade
Chan; it was another person.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. My third question to you; you informed the Chamber that the
reason for the arrest is that you went to buy pigs and at that
time there was no religion.  How did you know that that society
was a society with no religion?
A. I understood that it was a Communist regime.  That is my
personal understanding.  I did not go and tell everybody that
there was no Buddhist religion because I believe myself that in
the Communist regime there was no religion.  And in the end it
was correct, it means my understanding was correct.  And after
the victory they demolished the pagodas, they made people not to
believe in religion.  So they did not allow to have any Buddhist
religion exist.
Q. Thank you.  My last question to you; when you were released
you said you were sentenced to Pursat.  It means you were sent to
the liberated zone or to a free zone?
A. I was sent to the same liberated zone, not to the Lon Nol
Zone.  It was within the same liberated zone.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you.  I have no more question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next I give the floor to the defence counsel so that you have the
opportunity to pose questions to the witness.  If you have any
questions the floor is yours.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. I'd like to clarify with the witness.  Can you state clearly.
This morning the President asked you, as a witness, that at that
time when you were detained did you see -- because you said there
were male, female and children, and then the President asked how
many children.  As a witness you informed the President that
there were 30 children.  But just then when the Co-Prosecutor
asked you how many children who went with their parents, you said
there were 10 children.  Can you confirm clearly whether there
were 10 or 30 children?
A. The children who were sent there, there were many of them.
When the Oudong area were defeated there were many, and this is a
very long story.  The villagers were arrested and there were
probably 10 of them at a time.  But if I describe about the fall
of Oudong there were many children and it's going to be a long
story.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The defence counsel has no further
question for this witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The floor is yours, defence counsel.
MR. ROUX:
Your Honour, we might have some questions to ask because this
witness may have a little bit of difficulty with figures,
numbers, but apart from the numbers issue, we have no other
questions, no other issues to raise.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Either of you have any particular questions, please rise.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Your Honour.  We can do without questioning.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The proceeding for today is coming to an end and we will -- we
don't have any time for any -- for the next witness.
Mr. Sorn, the Chamber has no further questions for you, so you
can return to your residence.
Court Officer, please facilitate him in co-ordination with WESU
to facilitate his return to his residence.
(Witness exits courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber declares the adjournment of today's hearing and the
Chamber will resume on the 20th of April 2009 from 9 am.
Security guards, take the accused back to the detention and bring
him back to the courtroom on the 20th of April before
am.            9   MR. PRESIDENT:
Likewise, for all the parties and the public who wish to attend
the hearing, please return before 9 am on the 20th of April 2009.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
May I get your attention, Your Honour, if you have any detailed
agenda?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber will notify the detailed agenda tomorrow.
This is the first week of the trial so we had to recalculate the
time and the rescheduling of the proceeding, and tomorrow morning
we will provide you the notification of the detailed agenda.
THE GREFFIER:
Please stand up.
(Court adjourns at 1614H)
