P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now in session.
According to the Trial scheduling, today's hearing is the hearing
of the statement of the civil party.  Due to some changes, the
Chamber will today hear the four civil parties.
The Greffier, can you now report on the presence of the parties
to the proceedings?
THE GREFFIER:
Good morning, Mr. President.  All the parties to the proceedings
are all present and the civil parties who are going to give their
testimonies -- Tioulong Antonya, Hav Sophea, So Soung and Neth
Phally -- are all present.  I have already checked their
identities and they are ready to be called by the Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the civil party lawyer.  You may
proceed.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.
I would like you to let you know that finally our client, that is
E2/77, will not testify.  She was scheduled for this week.  This
is due to a recent incident where she felt badly treated by OCIJ
and therefore for the moment she is not able to testify.  This is
what I wanted to let you know.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, counsel, for the information regarding your client who
is not going to appear before this Chamber; E2/77.  The Chamber
will then try to reschedule the hearings, taking that information
into account.
Court officer, you can now invite Madam Tioulong Antonya to come
before the Chamber.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Antonya Tioulong?
A. (speaking in Khmer) Yes, my name is Antonya Tioulong.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. (speaking in Khmer) I am 57 years old in October.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. (speaking in Khmer) I am French.
Q. Where is your current address?
A. (speaking in Khmer) I live in Drunong in Paris, France.
Q. Please speak again.  You have to wait until the red light is
on before you can speak so that your voice can go through the
system for the proper record on the transcript of what you say.
Please answer again.
A. (speaking in Khmer)   I live in France.  My address is number
1, Ernest Renan, Paris 15eme.
Q. What is your current occupation?
A. (speaking in Khmer)   I work for a friend's newspaper,
L'Express, and I work at a documentary part of the L'Express.
Q. Where were you born?
A. (speaking in Khmer)   I was born in France in Antony.
Q. What is your father's name?
A. (speaking in Khmer)   His name is Samdech Chakrey Nhoek
Tioulong.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. (speaking in Khmer)   Her name is Chum Teav Meas Ket
Samphotre.
Q. How many siblings do you have?
A. (speaking in Khmer)   I have six sisters.
Q. Can you tell the names of the six siblings to the Chamber?
A. (speaking in Khmer)   They are Visaka, Raingsy, Dala, Sohnura,
Keti, and Neara Devy.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The counsel for this civil party, can you provide the Chamber
with a brief information of her identity and the facts relevant
to the facts alleged on the accused and the relevant evidence?
You may now proceed.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Indeed, Antonya Tioulong is coming to testify before you due to
the disappearance and execution of her sister, Raingsy Tioulong,
spouse Kimari, and she will be speaking as a spokesperson of her
family concerning the death, disappearance, execution of her
sister and brother-in-law, Raingsy Tioulong and Lim Kimari.
Indeed, Mr. President, I take the liberty with regard to this
very specific case to ask you to authorize Mrs. Antonya Tioulong
who is speaking here in the interest of her family, family which
is present in the audience and her mother, Mrs. Meas Ket who is
on the bench of the civil parties.
So I beg leave that she can speak concerning the disappearance
and execution of her sister and brother-in-law, being aware of
the fact that in the framework of this trial you have several
civil party applications concerning the Tioulong and the Kimari
families and, more specifically, Case D25/08 relating to Mrs.
Meas Ket, the mother of Raingsy Tioulong and Case D25/28
regarding Neva Tioulong, a sister of Raingsy Tioulong, Case
D25/26 regarding Kimari Nevinka, daughter of Raingsy and of Lim
Kimari, and D2/29, Kimari Visaka, daughter of Raingsy and Lim
Kimari.
It seems to me important indeed to indicate that there is a
connection between these cases that you mentioned yesterday
before the Chamber.  There is a connection between these cases
and I ask your leave, Mr. President, to allow Mrs. Antonya
Tioulong to speak on the suffering and the pain that was felt by
the Tioulong and Kimari families because these cases are
intimately connected.
With regard to documentation, of course, we have produced the
identification documents for Mrs. Antonya Tioulong as well as the
other civil parties.  With regard to the relationship between
S-21 and the case raised on behalf of Antonya Tioulong, as far as
I'm concerned there is no doubt whatsoever that Raingsy Tioulong,
spouse of Kimari, was indeed executed in S-21.
As a matter of fact, we are in possession of her biography, ERN
French 00274780; Khmer ERN 00274785; and English ERN 00274775.
I would like to recall also that the documents which we may rely
on, since the accused himself mentioned the name of Raingsy
Tioulong on the occasion of three depositions, and so the
transcript of 29 April, ERN French 00325977; ERN Khmer 00326082;
ERN English 00325874.
The transcript of 22 June, ERN French 00344341; ERN Khmer
00344440; ERN English 00344212.
And, lastly, the transcript of 16 June, ERN French 00342140; ERN
Khmer 00342030; ERN English 00342808.
With regard to the cases relating to Mr. Lim Kimari, spouse of
Raingsy Tioulong, his biography can be found at S-21, code ERN
Khmer 00088813; ERN English 00344226; ERN French 00211858, as
well as a photograph, S-21 ERN Khmer 00211859; ERN English
00211859; ERN French 00211859.
And in support of the case of Mr. Lim Kimari, we can also refer
to Annex B of D44; a list -- this is a list of S-21 prisoners.
And we only have the French ERN which is 00209848.  I therefore
believe that there are no obstacles to understanding the fact
that Raingsy and Lim Kimari were, indeed, in S-21 and were,
indeed, executed in S-21 and therefore, I do not believe that
there can be any problem with regard to the parentage
relationship between Antonya Tioulong and her family with regard
to these two persons, Raingsy Tioulong and Lim Kimari.
Nevertheless, since Mrs. Antonya Tioulong is coming from France,
we took this opportunity to ask her to communicate to us a
document which we did not have at that time which is her birth
certificate.  We had her identity documentation, but we did not
have her birth certificate.  I therefore ask that the Court file
this document in the framework of its standard process.   This is
what I wanted to say in support of the case for which Mrs.
Antonya Tioulong is going to be speaking.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Antonya Tioulong, could you please describe to the
Chamber the relationships related to the crimes alleged on the
accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, which leads you to be a civil
party?  And can you also describe to us the damages inflicted
upon you physically and emotionally as a direct result of the
crimes?  And let me remind you that the crimes here are those
crimes occurred within the establishment and the operation of
S-21 starting from the 17 April 1975 to the 6th January 1979.
You can now proceed.
A. (speaking in Khmer)  Mr. President, I would seek your leave to
make my statement in French because my Cambodian language is not
fluent as I was exiled and lived in France for almost 40 years.
Q. Yes, you are granted the leave because French is one of the
three official languages used in the Court so you can proceed.
A. Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like first of all to
specify, as my lawyer has
already done so, that I am speaking here before the Court on
behalf of my family.
First of all and above all, on behalf of the two daughters of my
sister, Raingsy, who was assassinated -- and these two daughters
are called Visaka and Nevinka -- as well, on behalf of my mother
who was courageous enough to sit in the same room as the accused
and of course, she was the first one to file the complaint and of
course, on behalf of my other sisters, my sister, Samura, is also
in this room in order to express here the grief of our family.
I also hope that I'll be able to carry my sister's voice,
Raingsy, who is no longer here to express herself in order to
defend her and to be her advocate and to tell you who she really
was and how much her family misses her.
We are therefore seven sisters.  Please allow me, Mr. President,
to describe how our family is made up.  We were therefore seven
sisters.
My father, Samdech Chakrey Nheuk Tioulong, dedicated his entire
life to the state and if I want to specify this is because,
indeed, this will have an influence in the way the facts
unfolded.  So he was mandated by Prince Sihanouk to sign the 1954
Convention of Geneva to protect the borders of his country.  He
was a high-ranking official and then he became ambassador,
minister, prime minister, head of the royal army and with
faultless loyalty to the king father.
Raingsy was the second child and she met her husband, Lim Kimari,
very early.  They got married at a very young age.  They had
three children together:  Visaka, Nevinka and a boy, Metta.  My
sister, Raingsy, was mainly the representative for a German lab
called Merck.  She was also an anchorwoman on French radio and
then she was producing a program.  My brother-in-law, Lim Kimari,
was working for the Commercial Bank.  So I'm going to take the
liberty of drawing up a chronology of their lives.
In March 1970, Lon Nol's republic decreed that the Tioulong
family would no longer be allowed to come into Cambodia because
of my father's ties with King Sihanouk.
My sister, Raingsy, who was called Lim Kimari, remained in France
and we always maintained contact.  Each year, her husband would
come to France to visit us.  She would come two to three months
per year and her husband would come for about a month and between
their stay in France -- between the different stays, they would
write to us constantly.  She would write personalized letters to
her parents and we still have kept -- so we always kept up this
family tie.
In 1973, the civil war becoming more and more intense and the
schools were closing for security reasons, so in order to protect
her children; she decides to send them to Paris to live with her
grandparents.
In 1974, seeing that the civil war was really worsening, we asked
Raingsy Kimari to come join us in France and they answered us --
she answered us, "We have our own profession here in Phnom Penh.
In France, we will have no status.  We have three children to
feed, how could we therefore face the situation?  So therefore we
will remain in Phnom Penh."
And their last stay in France, the last time that we saw them,
the last time that we spoke with them, we enjoyed their kindness.
It was at the fall and summer of 1974 and it was scheduled that
they would come to join us in the summer of 1975.
During this entire year, from '74 to March '75, the
correspondence between them and us continued.  My sister was
getting more and more concerned regarding the schooling of her
children.  When their grades would fall, they would write to us
to in order to encourage her daughter, Nevinka.  She would say,
"I hope the second semester would be better" and she was
wondering if she was eating well at the school cafeteria.  If she
had problems doing her homework, and if she had problems she
would have to address herself to her aunt.  She was interested in
our daily life whereas while there was living under hardship.
They were telling us that more and more rockets were falling upon
Phnom Penh and that they were trying to draw up a map of where
the different rockets had fallen, so that they could avoid them
the following day.  And that they were hiding under the staircase
of their house when they would hear the first rockets fall.  And
they would express their fear and they would limit their
movement.
So I'm asking, therefore, the President the leave to read an
excerpt from a letter of my sister dated March 28th, 1975.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, the Chamber grants you the leave.
MS. ANTONYA TIOULONG:
This is a letter addressed to my father:
"Which advice can you give me?  What do you suggest that I do?
Must I leave as soon as possible or must I stick to my date of
departure as programmed?  I no longer know what to do.  It would
be rather ugly on my behalf to leave my husband behind among all
of these rockets falling, especially with his ulcers.  If you
must write confidential information, well, have Daddy ask the
Quai d'Orsay, the French foreign ministry, to send me the letter
under the cover of the French embassy.  I'm working, as I said,
in the French Audiovisual Office of Co-operation in Phnom Penh."
This was the last news that we received from my sister and from
my brother-in-law.
In April 1975, we learned in Paris that the Khmer Rouge have
taken Phnom Penh and we weren't so much alerted then.  The French
media were saying -- the socialists calling it a socialist
victory, a pink victory in Southeast Asia.  And we thought that a
communist regime was going to settle in a normal communist
regime, so to say.  We were far from thinking that there would be
a tragedy of such proportions.
And between 1975 and 1979, it was a long period of waiting.  We
did not know where my sister and brother-in-law were.  We were
hoping.
We tried to face the worries of their children.  We said that
they would end up coming and my sister said to Nevinka, "Don't
worry.  When you will be 16 we will be reunited again and we will
recreate the family."   My niece, Nevinka, who was trustful, was
waiting for her 16th birthday, saying to herself that she would
see her mummy again.
And we tried to correspond.  My mother showed my sister's
photograph to different international organizations established
in Thailand to tell them that we were looking for her, and she
paid crooks so that they go look for her within Cambodia.  And
she paid rather high amounts of money for this to people who
pretended to having seen my sister in Cambodia.
My father was powerless.  He who had spent his entire life
protecting his country ended up completely caught off-guard.  He
couldn't do anything for his daughter any longer.  He quieted his
concern.  He kept his strength until the end in order to preserve
the well-being of his grandchildren.
And we tried to face the situation.  We tried to compensate for
the absence of these parents, knowing that nothing can replace
the absence of parents for their children.   And they had to grow
up.  They were between the ages of 11 and
in a country that 
          14   they knew little of and they had to integrate welcoming family
but, however, a family that was only punctuated by letters.
There was no Internet.  There was no Skype.  There was no webcam.
And as far as I'm concerned, in 1979, when the Vietnamese boat
people were coming in all over Europe and when the Cambodian
refugees also came into the Thai harbours, in France people were
speaking mostly of Vietnamese refugees.  They were not speaking
about the Cambodian tragedy who were trying to cross into
Thailand and were being blown up on mines and were dying of
hunger.
With two other Cambodians, I carried out a hunger strike of about
12 days in the Buddhist pagoda of the Bois de Vincennes in Paris
in order to draw the French authorities to the fact that it was
necessary to take in many more Cambodian refugees than the French
government had set in its quotas.
I, of course, do not have the pretence of saying that my action
had an influence on Raymond Barre who was the prime minister
then, but a few weeks then the quota of Khmer refugees was
increased in a significant way.  I believed that I had carried
out this action as a citizen regarding my compatriots.
But what I understood later, even more so, is that I did so for
my sister, and I was hoping that she would be among these
refugees.  It was my way to help her.  I did not know that she
had disappeared already.  I was constantly thinking about her
over those years.  I never stopped thinking about her.  I was
maybe naive.  And we are Buddhists in our family and I prayed.
I even was so naive as to think that my brother-in-law was a
swimming champion.  When he was young, he was a karate black belt
-- a karate black belt, and I was saying to myself that he will
be able to train my sister to stand up -- to walk through
Cambodia and escape.  It was very naive on my part.
So, therefore, we were without news and I carried out my hunger
strike in June 1979.
A few weeks later, we received letters that were transmitted by a
French television crew that was covering Phnom Penh, and they met
my cousins -- or cousins who had survived -- and who asked us to
help them leave Cambodia and to have them come to France.  They
were saying that their husband had been killed and that they were
the only survivors and there was no word about my sister.
And I was saying to myself, well, she is necessarily alive.
Maybe they were separated.  Maybe they weren't able to find my
sister.  So she must be somewhere.  Maybe she is ill.  Maybe she
is facing hardship in another city than Phnom Penh and we will
end up finding her.  I was hoping that.
And when my cousins arrived by travelling by ox carts out of --
or they arrived at the Thai border and we are able to make them
come to France.  And we meet them and they are -- they have gone
through hell.  Their state of health is disastrous.  They lost a
lot of their weight.  They lost their teeth, a lot of their
teeth.  They are covered with parasites.  They are going to have
to be treated for several weeks in order to come back to a normal
state of health.
And what they tell us is horrible.  They are the ones who tell us
that Raingsy and her husband were assassinated by the accused.
And one of the three cousins, Mrs. Hiem (phonetic), when the
Vietnamese was in Prey Veng when the Vietnamese arrived in
January in 1979, she went to Phnom Penh and she met Mr. Oeng Pich
who was manufacturing the shackles for Tuol Sleng, and she spent
a few days with him and she told me that she saw piles of clothes
and she saw piles of photographs and piles of confessions, and
she went to Tuol Sleng where she was told that Raingsy had been
detained, and there was still blood in Tuol Sleng.  She saw blood
and by going through these piles she finds my sister's original
confession.  It was written in Khmer and she recognized her
handwriting.  Well, she recognized the Western words such as the
name of the lab she was working for, the name of her French
friends, and she also found her photograph in one of the piles.
And for us it was a tremendous shock.  This was at the end of
1979.  It was devastating and we tried to protect their children
but before this quantity of suffering our cousins gave us the
details of all of what my sister had gone through before her
three children.  She said that my sister had undergone
particularly harsh torture and they gave details that they had
hidden since because it was so horrific.  They said this before
Metta, who was only 11 years old.  Maybe they weren't careful
about this because they needed to share their pain and to share
their trauma, the trauma that they endured during four years
under the Khmer Rouge regime.
And the parents were mute in their grief.  My father took upon
himself; my mother as well.  My mother does not understand.
She's still wondering, even today, why?  Why did they kill her
daughter?  What did she do to deserve this?
My father later on would take it on himself so much, because of
his loyalty to King Sihanouk, he will even be brought to
negotiate with the Khmer Rouge, with Khieu Samphan, and he will
let nothing of his grief transpire.  He will work until the end
-- his work as a state servant.  And nonetheless, he will feel
guilty; guilty for not having been able to save his daughter.
He, once again -- please forgive me for repeating this -- he who
participated concretely in the welfare of his country.
And the children grew up as best as they could, uprooted,
separated forever from their parents.  Nevinka and Visaka are so
devastated that they will not find the courage or the force to
come to this courtroom.  They have designated me to express their
suffering.
Metta, who has died since, in 1999, suffered from neurological
troubles as of the age of 11.  He had fits of epilepsy and
tetany, and I brought him to see a psychiatrist, who confirmed
that the symptoms were directly linked to his trauma and he
received medicine for life.  And one day -- he is the only one of
my sister's children -- well, he decided to come back to Phnom
Penh and to work as a certified accountant.  And one day, when he
was driving over the lunchbreak, he was caught by a seizure and
he bumped into the Independence Monument and he died.
His sister Nevinka is suffering from psychosomatic troubles which
are recurrent.  In her file there is a psychiatrist's
certificates showing that she is suffering from sleep disorders
and from heart problems.  Visaka chose to live in another
country, in Luxembourg, in order to reconstruct her life and
found a family.
Since we have been surviving as we can.  Samura decided to go
ahead, to move ahead, to also participate in the reconstruction
of her country.  Everyone managed his or her grief as he or she
could.  I was hoping that there would be a trial.  I will get
back to this a bit later if you please allow me to.
We tried to stick together but, despite everything, we led our
own lives individually and, despite everything, my sister Raingsy
and her husband are still present.  We bring them up in the
present tense.  We bring up their memories.  Our scenes of joy,
of jokes, our meals, my brother-in-law's jokes, the nicknames
that they would call us, the cakes that my sister liked, her
smile, her affection, her laughter, her joy.
We spoke about her frequently in order to have her participate in
our family life and her granddaughter is also in the room -- she
did not know her.  I believe that it's important for her as well
that we have her get to know her grandmother.  My daughter is
also in the room and she will not be able to meet her aunt.
We are therefore exiled.  In 1994 for the first time I returned
to Cambodia and the only evidence I have about my sister's
disappearance are the accounts that were related by my cousins,
so I will take the liberty of returning to these accounts.
I know what happened between April 1975 and November 1975.  When
the Khmer Rouge arrived in Phnom Penh my sister, who was living
next to the Independence Monument, was chased out of her home
with my cousins and they were able to board three cars with a bit
of food and a bit of clothes, jewels, and they were able to stop
by Chbar Ampov and they camped there under sapodilla trees, ple
lmot, for six weeks.  And there they were able to eat more or
less correctly because the Khmer currency was still being used
and very quickly they had to start bartering in order to obtain
food and rice.
And six weeks later, after having lived under the trees, the
family was chased again by the Khmer Rouge and they had to leave
in their haste and they had to walk for days and days in a very
-- cross over the Tonle Sap in a very, very painful way and they
arrived in the village of Tuol Triey.  And during several months,
up until November 1975, they were able to live relatively
normally, if we can consider the Khmer Rouge regime as being
something normal, and they were given summery huts and the family
was spread across -- scattered in different places in the
village.
My cousin, Mrs. Yung, told me that the Khmer Rouge would often
listen at night to their conversations and they were saying that
they had nothing to eat, that their reserves in order to barter
for food was diminishing, and that they were seeing this as a
sign.  They would see a chicken laying an egg every day in their
hut as a sign from Buddha.  She would lay an egg between all of
the family members.  And one day she was denounced because they
were jealous to see that the family had an egg and she was taken
in but thank God somebody said the guards are coming to spy in
order to investigate about this egg.
And she was able to have enough time to throw the egg in toilet,
in the latrines.  The egg that could have fed ten people.  And
she also said that the Khmer Rouge immediately saw that my sister
spoke French often.  She did so in order not to be understood and
they saw immediately that she could not do anything with her
hands, that she spoke French very often, too often in order not
to be understood.  And therefore they wondered who she was and
she was sent to work out in the fields in the harshest manner
possible like my cousins and she proved herself to be very
efficient.
She was taught the right movements.  She learned very quickly
even though she was a city person.  She, who was representing
what the Khmer Rouge hated -- she was able to adapt herself very
quickly.
And after several weeks they were brought to a building that was
at the edge of the village and they were told that they were
going to be interrogated and that they were obliged to tell the
truth, the entire truth.  The family members were interrogated
one after the other.  They were blindfolded and they were brought
into the building one by one and when she came out of the
building my sister said -- not to myself, she said to my cousin:
"They told me to tell the truth.  I told them that I was called
Raingsy Tioulong, that I was the daughter of Nhoek Tioulong who
was the head of the army and that I was waiting for his return as
well as for the return of King Sihanouk."  And she said that she
felt that something was wrong, that the Khmer Rouge became stiff.
But my cousins, one after the other, gave the details of their
identity and then they spent two to three days together in Prek
Po, in the village of Prek Po.
And one day they were all gathered and they separated the men
from the women and they brought away the women.  And they called
out my sister's name, they cast her aside as well as the name of
one of the Norodom princesses and my cousin, Mrs. Yung said that
my sister was trembling like a lamb when she left.  So therefore,
my cousin's testimony stops there.  She gives no longer any news
of my sister.
The only traces that you will find of my sister will be in the
summer of 1979 when they will come to Tuol Sleng and when they
will find the photographs and my sister's confessions.
In 1994 I returned therefore for the first time to Cambodia and I
only have my cousin's account as an evidence that my sister
disappeared.  We do not have, as we normally should have, a tomb.
We did a sautmon, which is a prayer ceremony for her soul to rest
in peace.  We did this in Paris, but however this was not a real
funeral ceremony.  I wanted to have a tangible proof of my
sister's detainment.
I went to Tuol Sleng and the archives were not yet completely
organized, and I looked for the photographs first on the walls of
Tuol Sleng, and of course I was struck by horror by seeing all
the photographs of these people who had disappeared, photographs
of children, of women who doubtlessly were innocent and I was
lucky enough to find the photograph of my sister.  I say lucky,
because it was however, extremely, extremely difficult.  In the
second room it is as if I had caught her glance as soon as I
walked into that room.
And then I went through several folders in order to have a
written trace of her detainment and I saw a yellow sheet that was
written in Khmer but unfortunately I cannot read Khmer fluently.
But thank God, a French professor, Henri Locard was there by
chance and he translated what was in that sheet.  And the sheet
was drawn up for us in the name of Raingsy Tioulong, not Raingsy
Kimari which was her family name.
And it was drafted that she died on the 31st of April 1976 which
is a date that does not exist -- I do not know if this was a
typing mistake.  And there were the reasons for her death; she
was beaten to death.  "Reasons for death:  beaten to death."
That was what was written on the sheet.
And later on I asked an American photographer to take a picture
of my sister on the walls of Tuol Sleng in order to be able to do
a sautmon for the first time, by being able to put my sister's
photograph next to the statute of Buddha with candles so that her
soul may rest in peace.
Her son, who was living in Phnom Penh, did not have the strength
to come to Tuol Sleng.  It was something that was too traumatic
for him.  I saw on his face his grief but also the relief that
was on his face when he saw his mummy's photograph that I was
able to find there at Tuol Sleng.
So therefore, for the first time, we were able to pay our respect
and our homage to our sister through prayer and to conduct a
suitable ceremony even if this was not a complete funeral.  We
did not know where to recollect ourselves on her tomb as well as
on my brother-in-law's resting place.
And later on we will find interrogations that were much more
detailed written in French, interrogations and for which it
transpires that my sister was leading a CIA network.  And that
she would have been hired by the CIA in 1969 and that she was in
charge of spying and that after April 1975 she was in charge of
mobilizing the population in order to claim land and oxen and to
have a private plane and to encourage the village population to
oppose its supreme authority, the Angkar, the devil -- the devil
in person, and to instigate the population outside of Phnom Penh
to return to Phnom Penh and to take over the capital, and to
organize demonstrations and to ask for salt and food and clothes
and rice.  And the same thing is being held against her husband.
So in the interrogation sheet it is mentioned that he died in
1976, in May 1976.  So my sister survived, between November 1975
and April 1976, long months of torture.  Thus our horror.  Thus
our despair.  Thus our grief.  Thus our pain, the pain to know
what she went through day after day, these long months.  Maybe
she survived her injuries too long.  We are disgusted, revolted.
We are asking why there was so much cruelty, why so many inhumane
methods?  Why what happened under Nazi Germany was able to happen
again in an even more amplified way because here we're speaking
about Khmer killing Khmer without any reason?  Khmer who may --
day after day Khmer suffer, who would not just stop at killing
them with a bullet in the head; who killed their fellow citizens.
They enjoyed it.  They had fun in having them suffer.  My sister
and my brother-in-law endured this and this is unbearable.
You know, Mr. President, what is haunting us?  It is that during
this entire time when they were still alive, they must have been
asking themselves why they were not being helped by the family.
They might have cried for help, maybe out loud or maybe silently.
They must have asked themselves why the French, who up until then
were so much present who were our closest friends, why they were
not able to come to chase the Khmer Rouge away.
This is a feeling of guilt and of powerlessness that is -- I
imagine that the psychological -- the stress of my sister and I
also imagine my brother's incomprehension.  This is unbearable
for his children and I believe that they express this through
their illness, even today through their ill health.
My sister was eliminated for nothing and I would like to express
my sister's personality to you.  I'm here to defend her.
She was not a CIA agent, she was Francophone.  She had no
connection with the Americans.  I had, so it's true, I worked for
four years in the American embassy as of 1977 in Paris.  It's
true.  She had no link with the Americans.
Her friends were members of the American embassy, the French
doctors -- her friends were members of the French embassy.
That's why she asked us to write to them through the embassy.
Her friends were colleagues from the French radio.
And, by the way, in the interrogation she included in her network
Paul Amar, a French journalist -- Paul Amar, a radio journalist.
And they also -- he also said he was never part of the CIA and,
on the other hand, her true profession was mainly to represent
the Merck Sharp & Dohme Laboratory and also to present the news
in French.  And then she managed a French entertainment
programme.
She had no connection with -- and I will repeat this -- with any
kind of spying intelligence organization, the KGB, the CIA, the
French Intelligence service.  She was just leading her life as a
Khmer citizen, and the same thing for her husband who was a
banker.
The feeling of revolt that we have is even stronger that when we
think about who they. were we cannot say to ourselves that it was
anything else than the most extreme form of injustice.
My sister was somebody who was joyful.  They represented, with
her husband, the ideal couple.  It was a united couple, maybe the
most perfect couple that they can be, whereas it was not --
whereas Khmer couples do not generally demonstrate their
affection they would not deprive themselves of this, would not
deprive themselves of showing.  They were always smiling.  They
would sometimes quarrel.  It was an extremely united couple -- a
couple that was very much in love.
They were mindful of the well-being of the people around them and
they would behave like a brother and an older sister as in the
traditional way in the Khmer -- in society, where the older
siblings must take care of the younger ones.  My sister always
took care of me as well as of our sister, Samura.
In 1970, when the family was exiled, I was taking my
Baccalaureate exam at the Quai d'Orsay and I ended up alone with
her in Cambodia, and it was agreed that when I was going to take
my Baccalaureate in June, I would join my parents in France who
were there since 1969.
My sister, even though that she had fallen under the exiled
decree of Lon Nol and having been the spouse of Lim Kimari, she
was able to stay in Cambodia and we shared -- we spent several
months together and I must say that in a way she was all to me --
all to myself.  We were tighter than ever.
We were not living in the same house but we would see each other
very often.  We were the daughters of somebody who had been
banished, but we stood up proud.  My grandfather, His Excellency
Meas Nal, who himself was a (inaudible) in the country, told us
that in honour and in grief you have to stand up tall.  We did
this.  We were both of us -- we were the daughters of Nhoek
Tioulong and we were proud of this.
And then she would take care of me.  She would come pick me up
and we would cook and follow the cooking recipes.  This is the
way we could -- during the civil war and we were suffocating.  We
were doing what we could to air out our minds.  We would spend
afternoons together.  We would go see the rare films, the rare
French films that were being shown, and I cherished these moments
that I spent with her and her husband.
She took care of my grandfather until the end as well.  My
grandfather died in 1974 and she watched over him at the
hospital.  It was someone who was watching over the well-being of
the people around her.  She protected her children by sending
them to live in France.
And she protected me because in 1970 when I received -- when I
got my Baccalaureate, I tried to get an exit visa to come to
Paris and the police authorities back then took their time to
give it to me.  They called me up practically every week to ask
me what my father was doing and if he was still with the king, if
he was in Beijing.  And I would answer always. "No, no, no.  He
is in Paris."
And after each police interrogation -- I was not even 18 years
old back then -- my sister would come with me or my
brother-in-law they would come with me. They would always
accompany me all the time. All the time, they were always
present.
And when finally in November 1970 I obtained this exit visa, she
came -- rushed over to Air France to buy my aeroplane ticket and
I left the next day.  She also protected me, but she was not able
to protect herself.
As I was telling you, she was a radiant personality.  She
protected us all the time.  Her role as a protective elder sister
haunts me even though I am today in a position to protect others.
I believe that my sisters and myself we try to do what we could
for her children, but we were never and would never be able to
replace the presence of their parents and we feel guilty because
of this.
I wish also to insist on the fate that was reserved for her is
particularly unjust.  I am not ashamed to say that, being
aristocrats, we were amongst the privileged and in these layers
of society people were perhaps pretentious.  My sister was humble
and simple.  She never put herself forward.  Though we were
riding in a Mercedes car with driver, she continued to drive her
deux chevaux.  You saw her everywhere in town working with her
medicines at the back of the car, in the deux chevaux.
She never introduced herself as Tioulong, she always introduced
herself as Mrs. Kimari, and this is what is making us suffer.  It
is the fact that the only time that she claimed her name she
should not have done this.  Perhaps it would have saved her life.
She died for having given her name as Tioulong.  It's the only
time when she gave her maiden name, and this is what hurts as
well.
During all these years we hoped -- we hoped that a trial would
take place.  As far as we are concerned, there was a genocide and
war crimes.  We learned in the history books that atrocities were
committed in the world:  gas chambers, the extermination of
children, medical experiments of Dr. Mengele -- terrible things.
And we learned what happened in Tuol Sleng and we found that it
was the same thing; perhaps worse for some of the prisoners,
because sometimes gas chambers managed to kill people after only
a few days but here my brother and sister survived six to seven
long months.
It was worse than what the Nazis imposed on the Jews.  It was an
indescribable, barbaric act and I dare say that the accused has
committed an indescribable act of barbary.  When we read the
interrogations, they are Machiavellian, where we find a mixture
of the truth -- which was the identification of my sister, my
parents, the age of her children; all of that was accurate.  But
it was mixed in with pure invention:  the fact that she was
alleged to have belonged to a CIA network, that she was spying,
that she was inciting the population to rebel.  This mixture,
mish-mash of reality and invention, is a Machiavellian technique.
The Nazis didn't encumber themselves with such precautions.  This
is a highly-refined attitude in order, until the end, manage to
decree that the victims were guilty, to torture them, to make
them confess under duress and torture.  And therefore, for a long
time, we hoped for a trial.  We told ourselves there were fair
trials for the Nazi war criminals and there was an international
criminal tribunal for Yugoslavia, for Rwanda, and we saw nothing
emerging on the Khmer side.
Is it the case that the Khmer, that the one million -- the over
one and a half million Khmer victims -- is it the case that they
are so insignificant that there is no will to put their torturers
to trial?  Are they so insignificant that justice not be
required; that their assassins not have a finger pointed at them;
that everyone is entitled to such a trial except us?  So in our
family we were waiting, waiting, and we saw nothing coming.
In 1999 the Chilean General Pinochet, travelling through London,
was taken into custody by British justice.  A foreign court
succeeded in charging him, and so I thought perhaps there is
hope, perhaps something can be done in France, and with a
Khmer-French friend I decided to file a complaint for illegal
detention followed by tortures and war crimes against Duch,
against Khieu Samphan, Chea Sim(sic), Nuon Chea and Ieng Sary.
I was heard by Jean-Paul Vaillard (phonetic), the investigating
judge, and after two years the case was thrown out with the
reason that the victim was not French.  But I corrected that and
said that the victim had been born in a French protectorate.
This led to nothing.  I also expected that the International
Criminal Court of the Hague would seize on this.
One of the presidents, Louise Arbour, had in fact committed to
come in person to Cambodia in order to raise this issue of
impunity of the Khmer Rouge leadership.  Unfortunately she was
not in her position long enough in order to be able to achieve a
result.
Today, when last year we heard that an international trial was
being created, we finally became hopeful again.  Please allow me,
Mr. President, to express my thanks for this opportunity to be
heard as a civil party, to have the opportunity to say that our
family is relieved that this extraordinary international chamber
has finally been created to try the Khmer Rouge leadership even
though they will not all be appearing before you.  At least today
the person who ordered the torture and extermination of my sister
is sitting on the bench of the accused.
By authorizing the hearing of civil parties this Tribunal is
opening the way to hearing civil parties in future international
tribunals dealing with war crimes.  It's a tremendous step
forward for us from the outside and we appreciate rightly the
value of this.  Cambodia, which until now had been considered a
very small country, is going to be opening the way, setting an
example for other trials of this type where civil parties can be
heard, and I find this all the more important because of that.
The verdict which will be handed down by this tribunal, for me
and to my mind, goes far behind the Cambodian problem.  The Khmer
genocide is not simply Khmer.  It is a global massive act of
killing which is of concern for the people of the entire world.
It must not reoccur.  It must not be possible for persons such as
the accused to have the ability in the future to repeat their
ignominious behaviour.
We must teach future generations, the Khmer youth which is
lacking information, that crimes -- that this type of a crime,
which is absolutely intolerable, cannot remain unpunished.  It is
not enough to say "I'm sorry" to gain absolution or to be
absolved.  A sentence must be handed down and I wish that the
Tribunal -- and I beg the Tribunal to hand down the most fairest
possible judgment which will be commensurate with the crimes
committed by the accused.
I am not a judge myself.  I am simply a civil party representing
one of the victims.  I have an idea as to what I would like the
accused to be sentenced to and I will state that later on.  What
I wish at this level is that my sister, Raingsy, and my
brother-in-law, Lim Kimari, be recognized as victims.  Until now
all we have is a picture posted on a wall; an interrogation where
they appear as CIA agents.
I wish that they'd be formally recognized as the victims of a
genocide perpetrated against them; that their assassin, their
murder be designated as such.  I would wish that justice be
handed down and given to my sister and brother-in-law.  I hope
that the Court will hear me.  I hope that I will have been a good
enough lawyer in my pleading for my sister and my brother-in-law.
You know, in the 40's people were accused and were tried for
crimes of this kind in the West, and these people said, "All we
did was obey orders.  We did our duty in order to build a
country."  Well, they were sentenced to death.  That happened in
Nuremberg.  Their names were Goering, Speer, Hess, and I cannot
avoid drawing a parallel here.  I believe that the responsibility
of the accused is as important, perhaps more important even, than
these persons who came before the international tribunal of
Neremberg, as far as I am concerned.
The accused expressed his wishful forgiveness.  He expressed
remorse.  I would like to remind him in concrete terms about who
my sister was.  Please allow me, Mr. President, to show him the
picture of my sister which we found in Tuol Sleng and the picture
of my sister as she was when he probably never then met her.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Mr. President, if you will allow me.  Mrs. Tioulong in fact is in
possession of these two pictures.  Would it be possible to show
them on the retro-projector?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, the Chamber allows it.
The Court officer, can you project those two photos on the Court
projector, please.
The counsel, you may proceed.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
As the picture of S-21, which is going to be shown by Mrs.
Tioulong, is the very small picture that is found in the
biography.  She had someone take a picture of her sister by an
American photographer, as she indicated earlier.  This explains
to you why we have now an enlarged version of the picture.  That
picture was with the mother of Mrs. Tioulong.  It is in her house
and, therefore, Mrs. Tioulong accepted to give us this picture so
that we could show it to you today.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer, can you take the photos and have them
projected on the slide.
Please show the second photo.
MS. ANTONYA TIOULONG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I wanted to show the accused who he had destroyed by his own
hand.  This picture is one of the last pictures we have of our
sister when she came to visit us in France.  She's looking at us,
and this is a picture which represents a question for me, and
this is why I am thankful to the Court to have allowed me to
speak and to bring her voice to you.
And I was speaking about forgiveness and remorse, which was
stated by the accused, and I wish to tell him by way of the
President of the Tribunal, that I do not believe in forgiveness
in his case.  I do not believe that he feels remorse.  That it
will never be the case that our family or myself will forgive
him.  I know that he doesn't care.
I know that in February when he officially sought forgiveness, he
said, "I submitted to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may do with
it what it wishes".  He expressed this through the voice of
Maitre Roux.
I know that he doesn't care about what I'm going to tell him but,
nevertheless, I wish to say that given the horrific treatment he
had inflicted on my sister and my brother-in-law, he should never
expect that I could forgive him.
What I wish for him, if it is the case that he feels if only an
inch of remorse, I wish that the remorse be as great as the
totality of the physical, moral and psychological suffering that
he inflicted upon his 17,000 victims.  That, in fact, is the
punishment that he deserves.
I believe that the accused is fortunate.  He is standing here in
front of a tribunal, an international tribunal for a fair trial.
His victims did not have that chance.  Had his victims been
fortunate enough to come before real judges, to sleep on a
mattress, to be fed and clothed normally, to not be mistreated;
the accused sleeps every night on a good mattress, is dressed
adequately, is fed adequately, has an adequate life, and is
probably going to spend the rest of his life in a comfortable
surrounding.  His victims were martyrs and suffered as such and
so never, never, will I forgive him.
Thank you, Mr. President, for having listened to me.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since it is now an appropriate time to take the adjournment,
we'll take the adjournment for
minutes.           20   The civil party may now take a little bit break and then you can
return to the courtroom later after we resume.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1032H to 1057H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESDIENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
We would like now to allow the civil party to proceed with her
remaining of the statement, and of course she is here for the
purpose of the civil party claims and accounts.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.  As far as I am concerned, I have no
additional questions for Mrs. Antonya Tioulong.  Her testimony is
particularly striking and she has, I believe, expressed the
suffering and the pain of her entire family caused by the
execution of Raingsy and Lim Kimari.
However, Mr. President, if you will allow me, I do know that Mrs.
Tioulong would like, through you, to ask a question from the
accused and I would like to seek your permission so that she may
ask that question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber allows the question to be asked.  The accused is also
reminded that you should try to understand the question that is
going to be put to you by the civil party through the President
of the Chamber, that is through me, so that if the Chamber asks
you, you can respond directly to the question.  It is the same
procedure as we did yesterday.
Madam Antonya Tioulong, you can now proceed with the question.
MS. ANTONYA TIOULONG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  We now know, or rather it has been
established that my sister was subjected to several months of
torture before she died.  This family, as we would like to know
what were the orders of the accused?  Was she singled out for
special treatment and why did he decide to eliminate her?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, you have listened to the question.  Can you respond
to the question?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to respond to the question as
follows.  Because Madam Antonya is here representing her whole
family, especially her mother, and I would like to respond
sincerely to this question.
Raingsy arrived at S-21 since I was the deputy chairman of that
office, so the confession was extracted quite some time ago.  And
when I rose to become chairman, the confession was completed but
I did not pay my attention to that confession.
From the surviving documents I would say Raingsy died of illness
and Lim Kimari, regarding her I did not know about her.  I
thought actually Lim Kimari was the child of the Mr. Lim and I
thought they were cousins.  So this is my frank response.  And I
only learned of these facts at a later stage.  However, I
recognize that both of them died at S-21 when I was the deputy
chairman and later on when I was the chairman.  And this is my
response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
There is another question that you need to respond, that is, what
is the reason for selecting her and why she was detained and
killed at S-21.  So can you respond to the questions, the reasons
for her selection and her in-law to be killed at that centre?
THE ACCUSED:
The arrest of people and brought to S-21 were the policy of the
CPK after the 17 April 1975, and it actually commenced before I
arrived in the centre and even before the establishment of S-21.
In the countryside they started arresting people and sent to S-21
according to the policy of the CPK.
Regarding the smashing or to let them die naturally, it is the
principle of S-21 that anybody who was arrested and sent to S-21
had to be smashed.  As I have repeatedly told the Chamber,
whoever was arrested and sent to S-21, S-21 would smash them.
This is my response.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, do you have any more questions to be put?
THE WITNESS:
No, Mr. President.  Thank you very much for having allowed me to
do so.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, do you have questions for this civil party?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours.
As yesterday, the Co-Prosecutors are voiceless before so much
suffering, before so much dignity and before so much courage;
whose statement is so complete that it does not require any extra
questioning on our side.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now would like to give the floor to the defence
counsel to put questions to this civil party.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
The defence counsel do not have any questions for this civil
party.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the opportunity to the accused to
make his observations regarding the content of the statement of
this civil party, Antonya Tioulong, in addition to your responses
to the questions already put by the civil party.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all I would like to seek your permission
to express my deep respect and gratitude to Chum Teav, who is
here in the Chamber.  This is an honour for me.  Chum Teav Meas
Ket is three years older than my mother and I am thankful for her
presence here.
Aside from that and Tioulong from the time that I was the deputy
chairman I could recognize the voice of Raingsy since I was in
prison.  I heard the voice on the radio.  Therefore, at S-21 I
did not go near where he was detained.  At that time I only
thought that only Raingsy was detained as he arrived from France
but then there was another person detained together with him and
I was speechless.  So this is my personal knowledge of this
matter.
Regarding the testimony of Antonya Tioulong, it's a live
historical documentary event.  It is a family who lost two
members and this is going to last forever and it is going to be a
legacy for the next-generation researchers who is going to study
the impact of the loss upon each family and the suffering
inflicted upon that family.
I personally still maintain my spirit of responsibility for those
crimes and this is my frank and sincere speech to you, Madam Chum
Teav and Mrs. Antonya.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Antonya Tioulong, the hearing of your testimony as a civil
party has come to an end now.  You are now excused by the Chamber
and you can return to your seat.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Next the Chamber would like to call Madam Hav Sophea, a civil
party from group 1.
(Witness enters courtroom)
Please come to the seat before the Chamber.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam, is your name Hav Sophea?
A. Yes.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I am 33 years old.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. I am Khmer.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I was born in Meanchey Balang, Kampong Thom.
Q. The Chamber would like to remind you that please do not speak
until you see the red light on the microphone is on, so that your
voice can go through the system for proper record on the
transcript.
And where is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. I live at Chey Mungkul Balaing, Kampong Thom, and I am a rice
farmer.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of counsel Alain Werner.  You may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
I apologize for interrupting.  I have just noticed that my client
does not have her headset and I was wondering if she could
properly hear you.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What is the name of your father and is he still alive?
A. His name is Chen Sea, alias Han.  He is deceased.
Q. And your mother, what's her name and is she still alive?
A. Her name is Nhem Sophat and she is living.
Q. How many siblings do you have?
A. I do not have any.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Hav Sophea, you are a civil party from group 1.  The
Chamber would like now to invite the counsel for civil party
group 1 to make a brief presentation on the identity of the civil
party and related events and facts which lead to her application
to be the civil party to this case and all the evidence connected
to the facts and crimes alleged on the accused.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.
My client, Hav Sophea, is as she told you, the daughter of Chen
Sea also known as Han or Hav Han.  Chen Sea  was detained and
killed at S-21.  His name appears on the revised S-21 prisoner
lists, document E68/1, .  His name also appears on the
second prisoner list which, according to the DC-CAM database, is
also an S-21 prisoner list and both these lists show that the
father of my client was killed on the 15th of May, 1976.
We did file the second prisoner list and the attestation of the
database of DC-CAM with our motion last week.  Now, what we did
also is to provide a birth certificate of our clients and on that
birth certificate the name listed as her father is Hav Han.
And as we explained in detail in the filing last week, the reason
why the name of the father of my client on her birth certificate
is Hav Han and not Chen Sea also known as Han, is that this birth
certificate was made in 1982.  And at that time the mother of my
client, the wife of Mr. Chen Sea knew her husband to be Hav Han.
It's only later through family members that the name, one of the
names of her husband, was actually Sea.
We also have a prisoner biography of Chen Sea and on this
prisoner biography he has mentioned the name of the wife of Chen
Sea.  This name is Nhem Phat and Nhem Phat is the name that the
mother of my client used during the Khmer Rouge regime as her
name.  Today, her name is Nhem Sophat.
So in our submission, and I do not believe that this is
contested, there is no doubt whatsoever that Chen Sea also known
as Han or Hav Han, is indeed the father of my client Hav Sophea.
So with this explanation we do believe that we answered the
preliminary questions.
And may I just inform Your Honours how we would like to proceed?
My client doesn't wish to make a statement.  I will ask her
questions to go with her through her evidence and at the end she
-- we would request the leave of Your Honours for her to ask
three questions to the accused.
Thank you.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is the statement of your counsel correct; that is, you reserve
your right to make a statement before the Chamber?
Can you respond to this question, Madam Hav Sophea?
A. That is correct.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now then to give the floor to counsel,
Alain Werner, who is representing the civil party group 1, to put
questions to your client.  You may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Your Honours.
First, I would request that one picture that I have here, if I
could give that to your officer, for that picture to be put on
the screen?  It is a picture of the father of my client.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you take the photo from counsel and have it
shown on the projector?
MR. WERNER:
This picture is a picture which appeared on the biography which
was filed with our application as a civil party.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. WERNER:
Q. Madam, can you confirm that that is a picture of your father?
A. Yes.
Q. Thank you.
Madam, could you tell this Court what your father did during the
time of Democratic Kampuchea?
A. My father was a soldier in the Unit K-92.
Q. And according to what you know, what happened to your father
during the time of Democratic Kampuchea?
A. In 1975 his unit transferred him from Kampong Thom to Phnom
Penh.  He stationed in Phnom Penh at the Boeng Trabaek base until
the 15th of January 1976 when he was arrested.
Q. And is it correct, madam, that at that time, at the time of
his arrest you were not born yet?  Can you confirm that?
A. Yes.
Q. And can you tell us, if you can remember, according to what
your mother told you, if before his arrest your father said
anything to your mother about what your mother should do in case
of arrest, of his arrest?
A. Before the arrest of my father he told my mother that she
should strive to leave and survive.
Q. And if you can remember, did he say anything else to your
mother?
A. He told my mother to marry another man.  And one day there was
a meeting but the Vietnamese language was spoken and my mother
was behind him and he was not aware of that.  In a meeting people
talking about a split within the Party and that his group would
not survive if that happened and they would die under the flag of
the Party.
Q. Madam, how long after the arrest of your father were you born?
A. My father was taken away and I was born 21 days later.
Q. And according to what you learned later, do you know why your
father had been arrested?
A. My mother never knew the reason for his arrest.
Q. Now, Madam, concerning your date of birth; is it correct,
Madam that your date of birth which figures on your birth
certificate which is September '76 is not correct?  Can you
confirm that?
A. In my birth certificate the month was wrong.  In fact, I was
born in February.  In my voter registration card, the month was
correct but it is a mistake made by the registrar.
MR. WERNER:
And Your Honour, we did make effort to get that document, the
election card, and we have it now, with the correct date of birth
and I am proposing, as I was proposing yesterday, to coordinate
with your Greffier and to file it for it to be placed on the case
file.  And I'm proposing to do everything at the same time -- the
document of yesterday and the document of today -- with your
leave.
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. WERNER:
Q. Madam, can you explain to this Court what happened according
to what your mother told you?  What happened after the
disappearance of your father?
A. When I grew up, my mother always tells me about his
disappearance.  She told me from the time that they were living
happily together until the day he disappeared forever.
Q. And Madam, can you tell this Court how long after the arrest
of her husband, how long did your mother wait for him?
A. My mother was waiting always for my father until the day she
learned that my father was killed at Tuol Sleng in 1976.
Q. And when was that, Madam, if you can remember?
A. She had waited for my father since 1976 until she delivered
me, and then we moved to live at Kbal Chroy.  She carried me in
her hand and waited for my father near the river bank.   I was
born for nine months and then Angkar said that -- Angkar told my
mother that her husband was smashed.
She had been waiting from 1976 and cradling me to search for the
news of my father. And in 1991 there was a repatriation process
and my mother could be seen waiting for the news of my father but
to no avail.
She could only see the relatives of hers but she never came to
see my father again, although she knew that my father could have
been killed, but she could still have hope, hope that one day he
could be reunited with the family to give the warmth, the love,
to the members of the family.  But our dream and expectation
failed.
Later on we learned that my father died at S-21.
MR. WERNER:
Your Honour, her mic is not activated.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to assist her with her
microphone because we have found it difficult to listen to her
testimony or statement.
BY MR. WERNER:
Q. Madam, can you repeat the last few sentences please, for the
Court?
A. My mother had waited for my father's returning home from 1976
until 1991 and during the time when there was a repatriation
process, then she could be seen waiting, expecting his return.
And later on it was shock to learn that my father was executed at
S-21, the notorious death camp.
Q. Madam, you mentioned the date, beginning of 1990 and the
repatriation.  Did your mother had still some hopes after 1991,
-2 or -3?
A. Yes, she had lived with hope and expectation.  She believed
that one day she could see her husband again but her expectation
and dream failed.  And later on, after learning that her husband
died at S-21, she was deeply -- and she had been deeply
depressed.  When she learned of the news that her husband died
she burst into tears.  She came home with so much distress.  She
really missed her husband, the very loving husband and father who
died without any guilt.
Q. And, Madam, can you confirm for the Court that it is only in
2006 that when DC-Cam and that you learned during the -- seeing
the confession, that your father had been at S-21.  Is that
correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Madam, can you tell this Court why your mother today is not
even a civil party in this case?
A. The main reason that she is not a civil party in the process
is that she does not want to face the accused.
Q. And can you tell this Court if your mother got married again?
A. No, she has not married.  No, she had not married and she
never wants to get married with any other man.
Q. Now, Madam, if I may, I would like to ask you some questions
about yourself.  Can you explain to this Court what for you how
was -- what was the effects of the absence of your father in your
life, if you can, Madam?
A. I have become an orphan and life was not or is not as happy as
the families in which they can live with their father.  And
during this kind of hardship and with the absence of my father
and against all odds -- and we have been struggling to hold onto
life.  And financially, physically, emotionally we are in a very
desperate position.
I try to study hard, as I was advised by my mother repeatedly,
because she kept telling me that when my father returned then
life would be better, but my father never returned and we did not
really have the money to financially support my further
education, so life of hardship intensifies and we are in a deep
suffer.  I can only deal with life by way of doing a very small
business.
Q. Is it correct, Madam, that you stopped school at grade 7?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. And can you explain to this Court quickly why did you stop
school at that time and how old were you when you stopped school?
A. The reason I stopped school, because we had no money to
continue my schooling because the family was in big poverty.  She
did not even have 1,000 riel in the house.  How could she afford
to send me to school?  I had to stop school and I could remember
crying all days and nights because I really missed the school
playground, the moments we enjoyed at school together with my
peers.  I missed my teachers.  At that time I was about 16 and 17
years old.
However, with my perseverance I would like to continue my
education.  I stopped school at grade 4 but because I was really
loved by my teacher then the teacher asked that I could study
without paying extra money for the extra classes, then I could
continue the education without the teacher support.  I could
never have come that far to grade 7; I could already drop the
school at grade 4.  And life is hard.
Q. Can we continue or do you need a break?  Do you need me to
request a break?
A. I'm fine.  Please proceed further.
Q. Can you confirm the fact that your dream indeed was to become
a teacher?
A. I dreamed to become a Khmer literature teacher because I
really loved this field of education, but it was just a dream
because I stopped school and I never, ever returned to school
because of financial difficulty.
Q. Now, Madam, can you tell this Court the fact that in 2006 you
learned that your father was detained and killed at S-21 -- not
somewhere else, at S-21 -- what does that mean for you; can you
tell this Court?
A. Upon receiving the news that my father was detained at S-21 I
was so moved.  I was about to cry all days but I had to compose
myself.
I really missed his loving and affectionateness and he was a
great father, and my mother kept telling me about his affection
toward the family and, having heard that, I really missed him.
And I really miss him because he died in a place which was very
cruel.
Q. Madam, is it correct that yourself and your mother came to
Phnom Penh and visited Tuol Sleng?  Can you confirm that?
A. On the 9th of January 2007 my mother -- having heard that my
father was detained and executed at S-21 -- came to Phnom Penh
and asked my uncle to take her to the S-21 compound and she paid
a visit to the Building A and the room in which my father could
have been detained.  She was so shocked and moved, she could be
seen standing full tears in the eyes and we could do nothing but
to hug one another to just console each other in such a moment.
Q. And Madam, if it's not too difficult for you -- only if it's
not too difficult for you, can you tell this Court what happened
at Tuol Sleng when your mother saw the place where the clothes
are in a pile?  Could you tell this Court what happened then?
A. When she reached the building in which the rag clothes were
stored, she was so distressed that she asked if she would be
allowed to really ransack those clothes so that she could really
locate the clothes which could have been worn by my late father,
but she was not allowed to do so.
Q. And Madam, if it's possible for you, could you tell this Court
about the dreams that you had in the two months following the
visit of Tuol Sleng?
A. Having paid a visit and witnessed the view of the Tuol Sleng
compound, I wanted to file a civil party application and I went
to DC-Cam so that my father's original photo could be copied and
I could obtain the copies to support my application form because
I have learned that the hybrid Court has been established and
that I know the brutality and the barbaric acts that could have
been inflicted on to the victims at S-21 and that my father was
among them.  That's why I had to file such complaints.
Q. Thank you for this answer, Madam.
Is it correct that after the visit of Tuol Sleng, for some time
at night you had dreams about your father?  And if it's possible
for you and if it's correct, can you describe these dreams to the
Court please?
A. After returning home from the visit to Tuol Sleng, I find it
extremely distressing and at night I had dreams -- dreams of my
father because although I never seen his face when he lived, I
just could see him through the photo and I -- in my dreams he was
holding my hand, running away from the S-21 compound -- running
for life -- and I then woke up.
Q. Madam, is it correct that the picture that was displayed is
the only one that you and your mother have today of your father?
Can you confirm that fact?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. And is it correct, Madam, that that is the case because the
Khmer Rouge ordered your mother to burn all the photos and
pictures she had?  Can you confirm that?
A. Yes, the Khmer Rouge, when it came to the time when the
Vietnamese was about to invade Cambodia, then they asked my
mother to burn down all the documents and photos of my father and
otherwise she would be killed.
Q. Madam -- and that would be my last question -- can you confirm
to this Court that you are happy to leave your claim for
compensation to your lawyers?  Could you confirm that?
A. Certainly, yes; I will give the opportunity to my counsel to
work with the claim for compensation on my behalf.
MR. WERNER:
Your Honours, we do not have any further questions for our
client.
As I mentioned earlier, our client would request the leave of
this Court to ask, I believe, three questions to the accused
through you, Mr. President.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, do you have any questions to put to the civil
party?
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The prosecution does not have any
questions to put to the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, would you wish to put any questions to the
civil party?
MS. CANIZARES:
No, Mr. President, the defence does not wish to put any questions
to the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Hav Sophea, do you still want to put three questions
through the Bench to the accused?
MS. HAV SOPHEA:
Yes, I do, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now proceed with your questions, but please put one
question at a time.
MS. HAV SOPHEA:
Question number one.  Who were the masterminders who actually
took my father to S-21?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, we hope you have already heard the question.  Now
you can respond to it.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, Boeng Trabaek was under the supervision of the
S-71 Committee.  S-71 Committee was under the supervision of the
Party Centre.  So Mr. Chen Sear, who was the former cadre from
Hanoi, was decided to be sent to S-21 by the Central Committee.
It was not the authority of the S-21 to do that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Civil Party, could you please put the next question to the
accused?
MS. HAV SOPHEA:
The next question is where did my father die?  Was he killed at
S-21 or Choeung Ek?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, could you please now respond to the question.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, Mr. Chen Sear was executed, obviously, but I don't
know whether he was killed at Boeng Choeung Ek or at S-21.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Hav Sophea, could you please proceed with your last
question?
MS. HAV SOPHEA:
The third question:  the accused has already acknowledged and
expressed his feeling that he is responsible for all the crimes
he committed, legally and emotionally.  My question is how can
emotionally he can really heal the wounds of the victims who lost
their loved ones?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, if you are able to respond to this question, you
take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, my psychological responsibility, as I already have
expressed, I will exhaust the capacity to actually use -- to be
responsible for all the dead souls of the people who perished at
S-21, because those people died under tortures and hardship.
And I am solely responsible emotionally for these barbaric acts
and the very unfortunate deaths of those people.
The civil parties, including Madam Bou Thon and the later civil
parties, are here to express, to share their accounts of
sufferings with the Court and the suffering which I
psychologically and emotionally be responsible, and I really
recognize all the sufferings.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next the Chamber would like to give the opportunity to the
accused to make his observation in relation to the statement by
civil party Hav Sophea.
You take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the victim named Chen Sear, the former cadre from
Hanoi and who was also the former cadre of K-92, and later on he
was detained at Boeng Trabaek before he was sent to S-21, and I
really acknowledge that he was detained at S-21, without any
denial.
I would like to also tell the Court about the brief account of
the school called K-92, because when my former chief or boss was
still there, he was in charge of the location.  And the reason
I'm telling this is to just indicate that Mr. Chen Sea was
actually killed at S-21 and I am emotionally and legally
responsible for his death and crime committed at S-21.
However, when it comes to whether Hav Sophea is the daughter of
Mr. Chen Sea or not, I would like to leave it to the Chamber to
consider this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The proceedings to hear the statement of civil party Hav Sophea
comes to an end and it is also convenient to take the adjournment
for lunch break, so we will now take the adjournment and resume
at 1.30 p.m.
Madam Hav Sophea, we have already heard your statement fully, so
this afternoon onwards you can either participate in the
proceedings in the courtroom or you can feel free to go home or
anywhere you would wish to go.  It is your right to do so.
(Witness exits courtroom)
The security personnel are now instructed to take the accused to
the waiting room and bring him into the courtroom by 1.30 p.m.
The Court is adjourned for lunch.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1201H to 1335H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We are continuing to hear the testimony of another witness,
another civil party.
I notice the presence of the civil party counsel group 2.  You
may proceed.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.
Given that the testimonies of the civil parties so far went
faster than expected, I would like to inform the Chamber about
our civil parties and the situation if and when they can testify.
Tomorrow morning, Mr. Seang Vandy could and would be able to
testify.  This is on the last schedule number 18 and D-25/13.
Ms. Chhin Navy feels at the moment dizzy and expects to go at
least tomorrow or today to check her health state and is perhaps
expected to be able to testify on Thursday this week, but of
course dependent on her health state, which is at the moment not
so well.  She was this morning in the courtroom but I spoke just
during lunch with her and as I said she feels dizzy at the moment
and could even not attend the session here in the afternoon.
Regarding Ms. Im Sunthy and Ms. Phung Sunthary, both of them have
not yet finalized the final statement so that they prepared it to
be able to do it on 24th of August which they cannot get before.
Mr. Chum Sirath is not in town before Monday, but could be
flexible then on Monday or Tuesday but he only would like to
start his testimony in the morning.
And so far from our civil parties and their availability -- and I
would like to add, as explanations for all of our clients, that
this is a very exciting moment for them to testify before this
Court.  And of course it is also very difficult for them to
prepare a statement and when they get back to all these memories,
they are not able to work, as I would say, or to elaborate on the
statement that they want to present, in a manner that is
feasible, let's say, with a flexible court schedule.
That means they are overwhelmed within preparing their
statements.  They cannot continue as they want.  They have times
in which is also the consequence of their suffering and shows and
demonstrates their suffering that they are not able like a
healthy person to continue in a normal working schedule when they
are going back to their memories of their beloved.
That is the reason why the first schedule or the last schedule,
let's say, where the civil party statements were expected to be
next week, was that what the civil parties prepared on and
therefore this information I went back to them to try to get
another solution but this is what I can so far inform the
Chamber.
I further would -- this does not concern our clients in group 2
-- but inform the Chamber that my colleague Hong Kimsuon had an
operation on his teeth and I am not exactly aware which day, but
it's already a health problem or a problem what has been for
several days, two weeks around -- I'm not sure about the exact
date -- and told me this morning that he got now an infection and
is at least today or in the coming days not able to work and
cannot say or predict until when, but is just not available.
What it means for group 4 that the assistant, Jessica Finelle,
who has to be present for group 4 during the video-conference on
the schedule for the 20th of August in the afternoon, is there
present in Paris and comes only after, or can start from Paris
only after this conference, can also not be available during this
week for this Court schedule.
So far that -- what it means that during or due to this problems
for lawyers or assistants of group 4 and health reasons, I do not
or cannot predict if the civil parties from group 4 are able to
testify this week without being represented by their lawyers who
of course also ought to or should be present and when their
clients testify.
So far, the information from our side, mainly from group 2 and as
far as I know from group
for the Chamber, and to be considered 
           4   and of course I think in the interest of the health situation of
all civil parties who have to testify, and to deal with them
sensitively.  I think the current health situation or current
preparation status should be taken into consideration.
Thank you for your attention and, of course, I'm prepared for
further questions if I could respond.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Cartwright, please take the floor.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Yes, thank you for that lengthy explanation of the problems faced
by the civil parties that are represented by civil party group 2
and, of course, I am concerned by the difficulties that are
faced.
However, I'm not quite sure you propose by way of a solution to
the problems.  Are you able in a few words to give us a solution
to the various problems that you face, Ms. Studzinsky?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
As I said, I don't want to repeat.  Tomorrow, Mr. Seang Vandy is
prepared and would testify in Court at nine if there is nothing
else scheduled so far.  I don't know if the civil parties from
today will finish today or not. but then Mr. Seang Vandy is
prepared.  There is only one maybe small problem that we
submitted yesterday, a supporting document which as far as
lunchtime was not yet notified, but I think it can be explained
and it's only the translation of a confession; but that only to
announce it may be until tomorrow it is -- although the -- will
be notified.
Then I think the other time that could be used for either the
challenges by the defence or -- and additional information that I
announced to give to the Chamber about our client, Nam Mon, and
to use the rest of the time for other matters that also should be
covered or  -- and discuss them -- brought before the Chamber.  I
think there are still -- except for witness or civil party
statements -- other items that must be brought before the Chamber
where the leaving time in this week could be used.
I have no other concrete proposition or proposal to submit.  I
hope very much that Ms. Chhin Navy, as I said, who feels at the
moment not so well, but that she is prepared on Thursday morning
to testify although she also thought she will testify next week.
But at the moment when she is feeling better, she could do it
this week so far.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you.  So, in summary, you are able to have D25/13, Seang
Vandy, tomorrow morning and possibly Ms. Chhin Navy -- is that
right -- on Thursday morning?  And it's proposed by you that we
spend the rest of the time on unknown topics.
Are there any other civil party lawyers who can bring forward
civil parties?
MR. WERNER:
Your Honour, good afternoon.
As far s group 1 is concerned, we had only four civil parties.
We expect the third to be heard today by Your Honours. The last
one, which is E2/86, as you are aware, is an American citizen and
arrangements have been made by WESU for him to arrive.  My
understanding is that he should arrive on Sunday or Monday in
Phnom Penh.
As you will understand -- I mean, I was not able to meet my
client before, so I would need at least -- I would say at least a
day.  I don't know if arrangements could be made for him to
travel before, of course, we could be ready to -- we could make
sure to be ready very quickly, but that's the best we can do,
Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much for the information in regards to the
participation by the civil parties who are supposed to be
providing the testimony or statements before the Chamber.
And thank you for the civil party counsel of group 2 as well as
group 4, however, it is the Chamber's decision to hear the
testimony of the civil parties, and in that respect, yesterday's
hearing and today's hearing of those civil parties, the Chamber
is now in a position to amend the scheduling order for the civil
parties.  And there are certain civil parties who waived their
rights to appear before this Chamber, as announced by their legal
representative.  Therefore, the scheduling of the civil parties
as issued by the Chamber is going to be amended.
Since the proceedings are more expeditious than we expected,
therefore, the Chamber will make its best effort to further
expedite the proceedings.
And due to the time constraints yesterday morning, the Chamber
made an announcement regarding certain applications to become
civil parties which have been affected by the defence counsel,
and we do not yet have a fixed time allocated for such a debate.
And the Chamber has a view that if the hearing of the testimonies
of the civil parties as scheduled is more expeditious than we
expect, then the Chamber will inform the parties to the
proceedings tomorrow, or after tomorrow, the amended scheduling
and the debate on the contested civil parties by the defence
counsel, so that we would not waste time in our proceedings.
And the Chamber is hopeful that the civil party counsel
understand the situation and can coordinate with their clients to
have them participate in the proceedings.  The Chamber believes
this is the opportunity the civil parties have been waiting for
so long to appear before this Chamber to express their sorrow,
their sufferings, which have been hidden for so many years and
the Chamber is still hopeful that the civil party counsel can
facilitate with those civil parties so that they're able to
appear in person before this Chamber as scheduled, due to the
aforementioned reasons.
Next the Chamber will put this matter aside and during the break
or tomorrow morning, once the Chamber receives concrete
information regarding the participation of the civil party, then
we will inform you accordingly.
Now we are going to hear the statement of the civil party So
Soung.
Court officer, you are instructed to bring the civil party before
the Chamber.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Civil Party, is your name So Song or So Soung?
(No interpretation)
Q. What is your name then?
A. My name is So Soung.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 55 years old.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. I am Khmer.
Q. Where is your place of birth?
A. I was born at Chang Chaek, Chakkrei Ting, Kampot, Kampot
province.
Q. What is your current address?
A. At present I live at Phum Pir, Sangkat Muoy, Mittapheap,
Sihanouk.
Q. What is your occupation?
A. My husband was a construction worker and I stay at home.
Q. What is your father's name and is he alive or not?
A. Both my parents are deceased.
Q. How many siblings do you have and what are their names; can
you describe to the Chamber?
A. I have two siblings, my elder sister and myself.  We both live
together.
Since I was seven years old my parents separated and I started to
live with my uncle, then my other sister got married in 1967 so I
came to live with her and, in 1970, during the time of the
fighting between the Lon Nol and the Khmer Rouge soldiers then my
brother-in-law asked me to live with my mother at the Liberated
Zone.
Q. What is the name of your elder sister?
A. Her name is Em Saun.
Q. You just indicated that your sister got married.  What is the
name of her husband?
A. His name is Meas Sun.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the civil party lawyer,
group 3, to briefly tell the Court the identity of the civil
party and the grounds and the reason why the civil party has
joined as the civil party and also the damages that the civil
party has suffered from the alleged crimes.
You take the floor.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Indeed we are dealing here with a particular case, it is case
E234 involving Ms. So Soung, who joined as civil party because of
the disappearance of her brother-in-law -- that is to say the
husband of her older sister -- and he disappeared at Tuol Sleng.
And she joined as civil party in this case, given her sister's
inability to face this process because of her illness.
And Ms. So Soung is perfectly legitimate in joining as a civil
party, as she's going to explain in her testimony, as since she
lived with her sister from the age of seven she was protected and
brought up by her sister and she continued living with her sister
when she got married.
So in these conditions she can consider her sister as her mother
and her sister's husband as her father.  So she lived with her
sister, and she will explain this to you, after the events in
1979 and she is still helping her sister.
In the documents that we have I'm just saying here that it seems
to me that her joining as a civil party is perfectly admissible,
given the practice directions of 2007, Practice Direction 2
involving the participation of victims that notes in Article 3
regarding the joining as civil parties.  The Article 3-2, part C,
is that psychological harm can involve the people who have been
victims of these crimes.
So Ms. So Suong has lost her brother-in-law at S-21 and we were
able -- she found Mean Suon's (phonetic) photograph at S-21.  It
is -- the photo was included in the case file under ERN 00282315.
And lastly, we filed -- very recently -- new documents that
apparently have not been notified to the parties yet, but we
decided to officially transmit these documents to the defence so
that we can respect the adversarial hearing.  And we have also
presented these documents to the Chamber.
These documents -- it is the certificate of the mayor of the
commune where her older sister lives, which certifies and which
proves the kinship between Ms. So Soung and her sister and the
kinship between Ms. So Soung and her brother-in-law, Meas Sun and
in the same way, the mayor of this commune has -- with different
witnesses stated his -- officially, his acknowledgement of Meas
Sun's photo at S-21 that was given to him and he's stamped this
photograph and, therefore, he gave it to us.
So this case allows me to speak about an important difficulty
here; that is to say the cases of the people who are -- who have
the least amount of means and who do not have the possibility of
providing registration documents because they do not exist or
because they no longer exist.  We no longer have her sister's
marriage certificate with her marriage with Meas Sun.  We do not
have any registration documents from her, therefore, the only --
the major of this commune, who knows the family well -- for
years, in fact -- was able to officialize (sic) this testimony
and stamped the documents.
So if you give me the leave, Mr. President -- because you have
not yet received notification of this document that was filed --
we can eventually present it through the screen so that you may
become aware of it.  We can display it on the screen, if
necessary.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court official is now instructed to take the documents from
the civil party lawyer and put them on the projector to be on
display, so that the defence counsel is able to look at them and
share their observations.
The defence counsel, could you please look at this document which
is new before the Chamber?  And the civil party lawyer of So
Soung has requested that the document be put on display.
The Court official is now instructed to take another available
copy of that document to be given to the defence counsel so that
they can see a better view of the document.
The civil party lawyer, group 3, you may proceed.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
These are the documents that I gave yesterday morning in two
languages.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, we note you're on your feet.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Indeed, these documents were given to
us yesterday in order, indeed, to respect the principles at
adversarial hearings.  And the defence indicated yesterday that
-- regarding this particular civil party -- well, that it was no
kinship that allowed us to link this person with this victim.
And my esteemed colleague indicated that there is no birth
certificate nor marriage certificate, however, the civil party is
putting before the Chamber an affidavit that was established by
the mayor of the commune that is relating facts that happened
more than 30 years ago.  So the defence has no specific
observations to formulate regarding the probatory (sic) value of
such a document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I must confess that I don't really understand Cambodian
legislations in terms of registration papers, but I know that in
France a mayor is considered as being an official civil servant
or, in any case, he is in charge of registering and he is able to
provide copies of registration papers.
So can the defence tell us if they verified these documents or if
they are able to tell us what the mayor's power is in this
regard?  Is he -- like in France -- is he an official officer --
civil servant or is it just the simple affidavit of some kind of
preferential witness here?
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
We have not considered this as the certificate of a simple
witness because, indeed, it is an act that has an official value
because he is a state officer.  This is why we asked for this
affidavit.  That's why we asked the mayor to provide this
document to us and he was the one who took the decision to
include -- with this affidavit -- the signature of three
complementary witnesses who would confirm what he is stating.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyer, group 3, you may proceed further.
We note that civil party lawyer, group 3, is on her feet, so what
you wish to do?  Would you wish to make any comments?  So if you
wish to do so, the floor is yours.  And we would like to make
sure that this matter is settled now as scheduled and we don't
want this problem to be left unresolved.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Yes, Mr. President.  Yes, indeed.  I believe that it is indeed
very important because, as we are part of these proceedings and
given the hardship that we are facing right now in order to
obtain these registration papers from some of our civil parties
or from the victims of S 21, it is indeed extremely important
that decisions be taken in a proper way and if it is -- indeed it
might be necessary to refer to the mayors of the communes where
people are who have the power to give the official guarantee of
these documents, whether it be in France and it is the same thing
in Cambodia.
The co-Cambodian lawyers here have confirmed that it is possible
to do so in Cambodia and it is under the circumstances that I
believe that it's important that the Chamber can let us know if
we can continue in this direction and, finally, allow through
this the officialization of the documents which would certify the
kinship link between the civil party and the victim.
It is extremely important that the people who may not have these
papers -- and these are generally people without any means, the
poorest people in Cambodian society -- these people should be
able to have access to justice and should be able to have also
access to your Court, and this is why we want Ms. So Soung to be
heard today.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We note Mr. Kar Savuth is on his feet.  You take the floor.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours.
Regarding the civil party, we the defence counsel have found it
difficult to prove whether she is really the member of the family
of the dead person at S-21 because, if we refer to document E2/34
with ERN 00274461, there has been some discrepancies in the
document itself because she stated that Bakan was in Pursat
province and then she stated in the same document that Ms. Soung
lived in Trapeang Chrab in Kampot province.
So there has been a lot of discrepancies in the document, which
makes it difficult for the defence counsel to accept that she has
established a kind of proved kinship link.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We have not heard the statement of the civil party and we seem to
have already concluded her statement.  I think it should be the
other way around, that we should have listened to her statement
first and then we can make our conclusion later as to whether the
statement is genuinely true or not.
After only having heard the statement of the civil party, then
the parties to the proceeding can come to the conclusion based on
the statement.  So the Chamber will now decide to hear the
statement of the civil party first.
Mrs. So Soung, could you please briefly tell the Court the
relationship of your story as opposed to the accused; the reason
that makes you join as a civil party to seek civil claims for
reparation?  So you may be now given the floor to tell the Court
those damages and the affects of such damages, physically,
emotionally, the sufferings of course that endured during the
entire period of S-21 starting from the 1975 to the 6th of
January 1979.
So please, if you are able to tell the Court about this, you now
take the floor.
MS. SO SOUNG:
Yes, of course I can, Mr. President.
In 1975 he lived in Chakkrei Ting, Kampot, and I lived in Srae
Ambel, Koh Kong.  And I actually lived with him when he was the
chief of the commune in Chakkrei Ting.  Later on he was
transferred to the north to Pouk district in Siem Reap.  That was
the last time we saw each other and we could see one another
again only later years.  When I met my sister again she told me
that her husband was already killed and that he had been detained
for 10 days in Siem Reap and then detained in Battambang before
he was transferred to Phnom Penh to be detained further and
executed.
In 1980 Uncle Ny (phonetic), who already died actually back then,
saw the photo of Brother Sun at Tuol Sleng and then he told about
this to my sister.  But she would not want to pay a visit to Tuol
Sleng because she would be afraid she could not stand seeing the
photo of her dead husband.
Later on we had to struggle to hold onto life and in 1987 I got
married and I departed from her and I lived in Kampong Som and I
could manage to set aside some of the income I earn from my
business to support her.  And after 1979 because of the poverty
ridden in the family itself, brother Sun's family and kids could
not manage to go to school and they had no one to support their
education.  So there was no school for them.
When she was encouraged to file an application to join as a civil
party at the Court she was reluctant to do so because she was
afraid she too would die but I was strong enough to act on her
behalf to file an application to join as a civil party.  I dare
no -- I was afraid of no death.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Does the civil party lawyer, group 3 -- would you wish to put
questions to the civil party to support her civil party
application.
MR. MOCH SOVANNARY:
Mr. President, thank you for giving me the opportunity to put
questions to my client.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. MOCH SOVANNARY
Q. Good afternoon, Aunty So Soung.  I have some questions to be
put to you on top of what you have already stated before the
Chamber in relation to the death of your brother-in-law at S-21.
In the case file there appear to be two names used by your
brother-in-law.  Did he have two names or did he only use one
name?
A. There are two names.  I was told that his photo was found at
Tuol Sleng and then ad hoc organization asked us whether I
belonged to the family of the dead person and whether I would
like to join as the civil party.  I did not know whether he
changed his name to Teng Sun because his original name was Meas
Sun but his father's name was Teng.  I think he could have taken
after his father's name as Teng Sun instead of Meas Sun when he
was detained at Tuol Sleng.
Q. Thank you, Aunty, for giving the clarification in relation to
this matter.
Just now when the person asked you in relation to your account
when you were seven years old and that you had lived with your
sister until the day you got married, could you please tell us
more about the situation in the family?
I mean back in the early days when you started living with the
family until your sister got married to your brother-in-law?
A. I had lived with them since I was seven years old because my
father allowed me to live with them.  And then my sister got
married to brother Sun and I Ioved them very much because they
were the caring or loving brother and sister.  So they supported
me financially, they supported me for education and for
everything.
And I treated them as my real brother, my blood brother, although
he was my brother-in-law, and I treated -- I have treated his
family and relatives as those of mine.  So this is how I could
tell the Court about my account when I lived with them.
And the reason that I filed this application to join as a civil
party because I really missed by brother-in-law because he and my
sister had been working very hard to support the members of the
family and even though I am now working at Srey Ampel I still
have to manage to financially support my nieces and nephews.
However, with the absence of my brother-in-law my nephews and
nieces cannot go far at school because the family is very poor
and desperate.
So all my nieces and nephews are illiterate and I am very sorry
for them.  It has been the cause of the loss of their father.
That's why they have suffered such a phenomenon.
At present my other sibling built a hut for my nephews and the
nephews have been supported by the money that he earned.
And I myself also has been supported by my other sibling.  I'm
also from a poor background.  So both my cousins and myself are
in poor conditions.
And my other sister saw the photograph of my brother-in-law.  She
kept crying and she was speechless.  And during the time that I
lodged my application to join the civil parties she was not well.
She has been sick for more than a year.  I actually wanted to
lodge her application as well but due to her poor health I
decided not to.
My current situation as well as the situation of my cousin and my
other sister is very poor.  We regard ourselves as living under
one roof.  We share what we have and we take care of each other.
Thank you, Aunty, for providing the information to the Chamber.
Let me go back a little bit.  During the time that you had lived
with your elder sister and your brother-in-law you would have the
image of the close relationship between you and them and you were
a part of their family.
As you have described to the Chamber you had your parents but at
the age of seven they were separated and you and your other
sister were sent to live with your uncle and aunty.  So you did
not have the comfort of the parents.
And later on when you started living with your sister and your
sister got married and they provided good treatment to you, they
provided you with the comfort and they were treated as parents to
you.
Is this a fair assumption of your regards towards them?
A. My sister as well as my brother-in-law I loved them and
treated them as my real blood brother, or I regarded them as my
parents.  I was provided with everything: clothing, schooling
fees, books, study materials.  Although I was an in-law to him, I
was well treated, and only in mid-1970 when the situation was
chaotic and difficult, we moved around quite a bit as the place
was lived was borderline to the Liberated Zone.
So then I -- due to such difficulty and he was afraid that the
Lon Nol soldiers would arrest me.  That's why he sent me to live
with my mother and I loved him as my father and I treated him so.
Q. Thank you.  You said in 1970 he sent you away to live with
your mother due to his concern that you would be arrested by Lon
Nol, and what would happen if you were arrested by the Lon Nol
soldiers?
A. In 1970, there were examples of what happened, but they're all
dead.  On one side, there was the Liberated Zone; on the other
side, there was a zone controlled by the Lon Nol soldiers.  So
during those times, when the Lon Nol soldiers saw any girl or
woman, regardless of their status, they would rape that girl or
woman, and my brother-in-law was very concerned regarding this
matter.  That's why he sent me; he was afraid that the soldiers
would come up and arrest me and he sent me to live with my
mother, so that I do not have to run here and there because the
Lon Nol soldiers dared not to go into the Liberated Zone.
Q. Thank you.  After you left his family in 1970, what happened
to you?  What was your living condition upon your departure until
the Liberation Day of 7 January 1979?  Did you maintain contact
with his family or what happened?
A. After I went to live with my mother in 1970, I still kept my
contact with my brother-in-law; I kept coming to visit him.  He
was still involved with the Lon Nol soldiers.  I still kept
coming to visit him and the situation kept going on until
mid-November 1974, when Angkar assigned me to Srey Ampel in Svay
Tong subdistrict, Kampong Trach district, and then I lost contact
with him during that time.
However, in 1976, although at the time I was still living in Srae
Ambel, I had a disease and I requested Angkar to come home for
the treatment and then I met him, and in 1977 he was transferred
to Siem Reap by Angkar.  So I lost contact with him since then
and in 1979 I met his wife and I was told that he's dead.
So we kept crying upon hearing the news and we tried our best to
raise the cousins until later I got married in '87 and went to
live in Sihanoukville.
Q. Thank you.  You said when you reunited with your other sister,
you tried to raise your cousins.  Can you tell the Chamber what
job did you have in order to earn enough money to support those
cousins -- or nephews?
Let me ask you again.  During the time that you tried to earn
money to feed that family, what did you do?  Can you tell the
Chamber?
A. At that time, after we left the forest, I went to dig potato
or manioc in order to earn the money to feed them.  Sometimes I
dug the banana stumps to sell them.  And we tried very hard and
sometimes we could not find anything, so I had to grind the trunk
of the banana in order to feed my nephews.
And when there was an opportunity for me to work in the salt
field I wrote my biography and I lodged my application, and in
the village at the time there was an announcement for people to
work in the salt fields, so I and my other sister applied for
that job.
First, once we started the job, we were not given any money yet.
We were given rice and with those rice we fed the nephews.
Although my parents did not live with us, we supported them
financially and materially.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party counsel, you only have two more minutes, and
please try to put questions to the exact facts of the reason for
her to be a civil party to this case, as you are well aware of
the facts alleged on the accused.  And if your questions do not
point directly to the facts, then it's a waste of time for you.
MS. MOCH SOVANNARY:
Thank you, Mr. President, and I would use these two minutes to
ask my last questions.
BY MS. MOCH SOVANNARY:
Q. After your brother-in-law died and now, what is the situation
of your other sister and your situation?  Is the sufferings gone
or still living inside your heart and your mind?
A. After he died and after we learned of his death and when we
saw the photos -- let's put it this way.
After 1979, her living situation was deteriorating and the
children could not go to school because there was no breadwinner
in their family, and I tried my best to support the family.  And
the suffering inflicted upon my other sister, the nephews and
myself are still ongoing, and everybody just hoped if he was
still alive then the situation would be different.
And now in a situation in a family where there is no father to
support the family, the situation is just hopeless.  We all just
feel regret and that we would not be able to forget it for the
rest of our lives for the loss of a dear husband, a dear father
and a dear brother.  During that time, we just could not imagine
the suffering inflicted upon him before he was executed.
Before we saw the photo we did not cry much, but after we saw the
photos every one of us just kept crying, weeping.  Even the
neighbours, they all kept weeping, feeling sorry for him and the
suffering he received.
And Ta Choy, who was the village chief, also cried for the loss
of this dear person.  He was a very humble and docile person and
he never mistreated anybody or said any strong words to anyone.
Everyone was just missing him and felt sorry for the loss.
Although we were living in suffering stage, our mind is still
with him.
And even at present we do not have a house to live in; we are
living in a hut.
MS. MOCH SOVANNARY:
Thank you.  That is the end of my questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now appropriate for a break and the Chamber will take 20
minutes break until three o'clock when we will continue to hear
this civil party.
The civil party, you may now have a break for refreshment and
please return to the seat by 3 p.m.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1452H to 1510H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
Next we would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to put
questions to the civil party if they would wish to do so.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Thank you, Your Honours.
We have two to three questions to put to Ms. So Soung and I
believe that I understood that this civil party has a photograph
of her brother-in-law which was taken at S-21, so I would like to
ask for the leave to display this photograph so that we may form
an idea of who her brother-in-law was.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, could you please assist the
Chamber with the ERN reference number so that the AV Unit can be
instructed to put the document as requested up on the screen.
Without any proper reference to the document we are afraid that
such a document cannot be put up on display.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Indeed.
The index of the photograph, ERN 00282315, and since I have here
a copy I do not know if it might not be a better idea to use the
slide projector.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court official is now instructed to put this document on the
projector so that it can be put on display.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. I would like to ask, Mr. President, if the civil party can
recognize the photograph of Mr. Meas Sun.
A. Yes, of course, I recognize his photo, the photo of my
brother-in-law.
Q. Thank you very much.  I would like to put two questions to
you, two other questions, which are not linked to this photograph
so I think now it is possible to remove it, with your leave, of
course.
Ms. So Soung, did you obtain in any way information on why your
brother-in-law was arrested on the reasons why he was arrested?
You said that he was a member of the Pouk district.  In any case,
you mentioned this in your application.  Were you able to gather
any information regarding the reason why he was arrested?
A. I don't exactly know the reason he was detained or arrested.
Only after when we came back from Pouk district and we met at our
home town, and my sister told me that my brother-in-law died at
S-21.  And I learned that, of course, his photo is in Tuol Sleng
and I was confirmed by an uncle.
In 2007, ADHOC seek information in relation to the relative of
the dead persons so that anyone who would like to join a civil
party can do so through them.  Then we filed the applications and
then we were taken to pay a visit to the Tuol Sleng Prison and to
see that photo.  I was so shocked and moved to see the photo.
I actually loved and treated my brother-in-law like my father,
and wherever he lived or whether he perished already, I could
still feel that he be close to us because he was the very loving
person.
Q. Do you know during which period he was arrested?  Do you have
any information regarding this specific period, this period when
he was arrested?
A. When my brother-in-law was arrested, it was the time when my
sister did not have any information of his whereabouts after he
was off duty at work.  She asked where he could have been but she
did not remember the date.  But she actually wrote with a
charcoal that moment, the moment she did not see him come home,
which was on the 28th of November 1978.
Q. Ms. So Soung, I have a last question for you.  After the
announcement of the death of her husband, did your sister -- was
she still the same?  Was she able to confront life or did she
completely fall into deep depression?  Basically speaking, how
did her suffering and how did her sadness manifest itself on a
daily basis?  Thank you.
A. My sister, having heard that my brother-in-law was taken to
attend study session, she could not stop crying and weeping, but
she did not make this known to others because she was afraid that
she too would be arrested.  After she gave birth to her child,
for a few months then she was made to carry the pigs' waste until
the 1979.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the defence
counsel to put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, thank you.
Mrs. So Soung, could you please clarify for us whether your
brother was the member of Bakan district and if he was so, when
was he the member and when he became the member of Pouk district
committee?
A. He worked in Pouk district, Siem Reap.  Bakan district was the
location when we were evacuated to, so I was the one who went to
Bakan district and my brother-in-law did not go there.  He
actually worked in Pouk district.  I am sorry if I made a mistake
by making this unclear.
Q. Thank you, because in your application you said Meas Sun was
the member of Bakan district committee and, later on, you stated
that he was the member of Pmar (phonetic) Pouk of Siem Reap
province.  That's why I would like to ask for further
information.
Thank you for your clarification, and I would like to share the
floor with the international co-colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel international colleague, you can take the
floor.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MS. CANIZARES:
Q. Ma'am, a few moments ago at the request of the Co-Prosecutor,
we saw a picture of the person that you have stated as being your
brother-in-law.  Could you tell us under what conditions and
circumstances you obtained this picture?
A. I obtained this photo in 1999 because after I have lodged my
applications then I was taken by the TPO to Tuol Sleng and then I
saw the photo then.
Q. Excuse me, Ma'am, you received this picture in 1999?  Who gave
it to you?  Could you tell us who gave you this picture at that
time?
A. No, I didn't want to say 1999.  I could have said 2009.  I'm
sorry for making this mistake.  I saw the picture in 2009 and
that's the date when I found the photo, not 1999.  Thank you.
Q. But you tell us that this picture is a picture from S-21.
That is a statement that is challenged by the accused.  Did you
undertake other research in S-21 in order to find the name of
your brother-in-law?
A. Having heard that we could file our application to join as
civil party and that we would be able to find our lost relatives,
of course, I asked the human rights organization in Phnom Penh,
including the ADHOC organization,, to assist me with the
searching of this photo because I heard that my brother-in-law
died at S-21, and I asked them to do me a favour by searching for
the photo because I could not afford to come to Phnom Penh to see
the photo or to search any information.
But with the assistance of the people and my lawyers, then I
could locate the picture and then gave it to my sister and my
nieces and nephews.  We were happy actually, although moved, to
see the photo.
Q. This will be my last question.
May I conclude, Madam, from that statement that in fact the
picture is the only means you have of ascertaining that your
brother-in-law was detained in S-21?
A. Yes, that is the only evidence to prove that my brother-in-law
did perish at S-21, and I took the advantage of obtaining the
photo to produce it before the chief of the commune to help
certify that my brother-in-law -- the person in the photo -- was
actually my brother-in-law and that later on I got the affidavit
to prove it.
MS. CANIZARES:
The defence has no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, we would like to give the opportunity to the accused to
make his observation in relation to the statement by the civil
party.
You take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first I would like to talk a little bit about the
historical event.
In 1977, there was a purge of the central cadres at the Special
Zone in Siem Reap, Angkar Wat.  At that time, the Central
Committee ordered Ta Mok to do that and this is a very convincing
historical event.
Number two, I would like to make comment in relation to the
photo.  My position is still the same.  I never accepted the
photo before having seen the documents before me, otherwise the
photo cannot be used to prove; for example, in the case of E2/80
in relation to the person named Chin Met.
I also would like to ask the permission from the Chamber to put
Document ERN 00329839 -- be put on the screen, please.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to put the document under ERN
00329839 up on the screen or on the projector -- on the screen;
not on the projector.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, there are two names of Meas Sun.  One is Meas Sun,
alias Sao, a soldier of Battalion 450; and, number two, Meas Sun,
deputy secretary of Krous in Svay Rieng East Zone.
So the complaint by this madam is the Meas Sun who was a deputy
secretary of the Pouk district, and there are two Meas Suns
received by S-21 as they were arrested per order of the upper
echelon, Angkar, and that they were smashed.  And this case is
different from the case of the complaint made by the civil party.
]
My observation is based on the surviving documents of S-21, with
respect, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam So Soung, the hearing of your statement has come to an end.
You can now return to the seat reserved for the civil parties and
you can either participate in the trial proceedings or you can
return to your residence or wherever you wish.  You are now
excused.
(Witness exits courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to invite the civil party, Neth
Phally, to come before the Chamber.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Mr. Civil Party, is your name Neth Phally?
A. Yes, my name is Neth Phally.
Q. How old are you, Mr. Neth Phally?
A. I am 52 years old.
Q. Where is your place of birth?
A. It's Tuol Trach, Kong Chey, Ou Reang Ov, Kampong Cham.
Q. Where is your current address and what is your current
occupation?
A. Currently I live at the same village, Tuol Trach, and I am a
farmer.
Q. What is your father's name and is he still alive?
A. My father's name is Neth Chhaet.  He is deceased.
Q. What is your mother's name and is she still alive?
A. Her name is Nguon Touch.  She is living.
Q. How many siblings do you have?
A. I have three siblings.
Q. Can you describe the names of your siblings to the Chamber?
A. My other brother, Neth Bunthy; two, Neth Phally, that's
myself; and my younger sibling, Neth Raly Aun.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor now to the counsel for
this civil party to make a brief statement regarding the
identification of this civil party, the reasons for the seeking
of reparations which are connected to the facts and crimes
alleged on the accused, as well as any evidence and the damages
inflicted upon this civil party.
MR. WERNER:
Good afternoon, Mr. President, Your Honours.
The brother of my client, whose name is, as he just told you,
Neth Bunthy, was detained and killed at S-21.  Last week with our
filing we provided both his S-21 biography of Neth Bunthy and a
declaration from Chey Sopheara, head of Tuol Sleng Genocide
Museum, certifying that the original copy of the prisoner
biography of Neth Bunthy is to be found at S-21.
Last week in our filing also we provided a copy of the Carnet de
rsidence, that's the name on the book, Carnet de rsidence, of
my client.  Now, his name on this Carnet de rsidence appears as
Chhaet Phally, not Neth Phally, and I will ask my client to
explain to you why on his Carnet de rsidence his name is Chhaet
Phally.
But in any case, if you look at the Carnet de rsidence that we
filed of my client, on this Carnet de rsidence you can find his
father exactly as he told you, which is Neth Chhaet and his
mother, who is Nguon Touch, and this name exactly exactly match
the name listed as the father and the mother of Neth Bunthy
contained in Neth Bunthy's biography.
So our submission is quite simple.  These documents independently
verify that both the civil party Neth Phally or Chhaet Phally and
the deceased S-21 detainee Neth Bunthy share the same parentage,
the same father and the same mother, and therefore they are
brothers.
So having explained that, we do believe that we have answered the
three questions, Your Honours, that are requisite.  And can I
just tell you that we intend to proceed as follows.  I will ask
questions to my client and then at the end of these questions, my
client would have one request that he would like to express
himself and one question, through Mr. President's leave, to the
accused.
So that's the way we are proposing to proceed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Does it mean that your client Neth Phally waives his right to
make his statement?  Is this correct?
MR. WERNER:
Your Honour, he will talk, answering my questions.  But of course
you can verify that with him.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Mr. Neth Phally, is the statement made by your legal
representative appropriate and correct?
A. Yes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber then would like now to give the floor to the civil
party group 1 counsel to put questions to their client, Mr. Neth
Phally.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. WERNER:
Q. Good afternoon, sir.  My first question.  Can you explain
briefly to this Court why on your documents, your identity card
and your Carnet de rsidence, why is your name not Neth Phally?
A. Regarding the name, during the time that I studied up to the
year 1975 I used the name Neth Phally, and after the liberation
of 1979 I was busy trying to earn my living and my wife was not
really that literate when she responded to the authority for
making the family book.  So she used the names as she knew and
therefore she put the name Chhaet Phally as my name.  However, my
original name is Neth Phally.
Q. Thank you, sir.
Sir, can you tell this Court what you did yourself during the
Democratic Kampuchea regime?
A. During the regime of Democratic Kampuchea, especially in 1974,
I was a soldier in Sector 22 in No 124 in the East Zone.
Q. Could you tell this Court what your older brother -- during
the same time -- during the Democratic Kampuchea regime what was
your older brother, Neth Bunthy, doing?
A. During the DK period my brother had served the army since 1970
in the zone until the day he was detained and killed.
Q. And during the -- starting in '75, do you know more precisely
what was his assignment?
A. In 1975 I myself was in Phnom Penh.  Also in 1975 my brother
was in the same military unit.
Q. And what about in the years later; '76, '77?
A. In 1978 I received the news that he was still in the military
unit and he went to the battlefield and he was wounded.  He wrote
me a letter and it was sent to me through the soldier who was
wounded and who was sent to hospital.  I received that letter
then with the permission -- with that letter, I went to the chief
of the unit to seek permission to go and visit him.  Then the
chief of the unit authorized me to go and visit him.
Q. And sir, could you describe what happened when you went to the
hospital to visit him?
A. When I arrived I saw him as a wounded patient.  I saw that he
was seriously wounded.  One of his jaws was broken and he could
not say anything much to me.  And I was so pitiful of him that he
went to the battlefield to serve the nation and he was wounded
and that he could not speak much to me due to his serious wound
on his jaw.
After I spoke a bit with him I could not say much because of the
seriousness of his wound.  About an hour later I said goodbye to
him and I returned to my unit.
Q. And is it correct, sir, that this hospital was the 17 April
Hospital, today called the Russian Hospital in Phnom Penh?  Is
that correct?
A. Yes, it was the 17 April Hospital, which is currently known as
Russian Hospital.
Q. And after this first visit did you see your brother again?
A. I met him for the second time when I -- while I was working in
the unit.  I lied to my unit.  That day, the 10th of the month,
was a resting day and that we had to do labour production in the
Kambol area, and I pretended to be sick and I did not go.
So during that time I took the opportunity to secretly go to
visit my brother.  If I were to ask for the permission I would
not be allowed to visit him.  During that time the contact
between family members was very, very limited; that's why I
decided to lie to them in order to have a chance to visit him for
a second time.
During this visit I spoke quite a lot with him.  I told him that,
"You were seriously wounded and your jaw was broken.  Once you
are discharged from the hospital you should ask permission from
your unit's chief to be in the handicap unit."  We also talked on
the second point and he said that he would do it when he returned
to his unit.
He also told me a new point, that he would get married with Seang
Lorn, a woman who lives in the neighbouring village.  He talked
about missing that lady quite a lot.  He talked about his misery
and suffering and that he was thinking of his future wife.
He also told me that upon his return he would get married with
that woman, Seang Lorn, because the biography that he already
made and left with my mother -- Angkar would permit him to get
married, based on that biography.  So I talked for about one and
a half hours with him then I returned to my unit.
Q. And sir, did you see your brother again?
A. Later on I went for the third time and I, of course, secretly
went to visit him and that happened 10 days later.  I pretended
to be sick again and I could not go and do the labour and I went
to visit him.
When I reached his room I did not see him and I asked the medics
there where he was; whether he was discharged or he was relocated
to another room.  The medics there told me that he was relocated
but the person did not know where he was.
At that time I had suspicions.  First, I thought that he was
relocated because his wound became better or that he was sent to
Samrong.  Or the third option, I did not know where he was sent
to.
Q. And is it correct, sir, that you did not see your brother
again after that.  Can you confirm that?
A. That is correct.  Later on, I tried to observe and tried to
find my brother, whom I had been missing him for so long.
Q. And before the end in January 1979, before the end of
Democratic Kampuchea regime, can you tell this Court, if
anything, what you did still during the Democratic Kampuchea
regime to try to find your brother?
A. After the Liberation Day of 7 January 1979, I tried to locate
my brother in various locations.  I went to Amleang and down to
Leach District, Bakan District, Moung District, Koh Krala
District, Pade Mountain, Veay Chab Mountain, Samlot Mountain, et
cetera, and despite my efforts to try to locate him by asking
people, I was not successful to locate him or to know his
whereabouts.
Q. And you told us where you went or the locations you went for.
How long, sir, did you look for your brother actively, for how
many months or years?
A. I tried to find my brother gradually and persistently.  I
moved to various districts in order to find him.  It took me more
than 10 months.  It started from February '79 and I returned to
my village in October '79.
Q. And at that time, sir, after that journey, did you still have
at that time some hope that your brother could be alive?
A. In trying to locate my brother I, myself, am still hopeful
that I could find him and that he was still alive because during
that time family members were scattered everywhere.  It was my
idea that he was still alive and that he probably joined the
Khmer Rouge Army or joined another military unit of another
section at the time or faction.  Because at that time, there were
many political factions and probably he was concealing himself in
one of those factions, and it was still my hope.
Q. And, sir, can you tell this Court, until when did you keep --
did you maintain this hope?
A. My hope ended in 2004, in June 2004.  It happened after the
Documentation Centre of Cambodia brought me a copy of his
biography.  That was the time I realized he died at the Tuol
Sleng Prison.
Q. So is it correct, sir, that you genuinely -- for 25 years you
hoped that your brother could be alive.  Is that the case?
A.  Could you please repeat your question?
Q. Of course.  Of course.  Is it correct then, sir, that you
hoped for more than 25 years that your brother, Neth Bunthy,
could still somehow be alive.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, it is correct because I had hoped he could be living
somewhere.
Q. And could you tell this Court how did you react when in 2004
DC-Cam came to your place and told you that your brother had been
killed at S-21.  How did you react?
A. At that time my family, my parents and I myself, were moved
and deeply depressed because we learned that our loved brother
was detained and tortured at S-21, and we know for sure that
people would endure great suffering before they were being taken
away to be killed.
All kinds of tortures were known to have been used at S-21,
including having the finger nails of the detainees pulled out,
detainees being drowned, plastic bags were being used to cover
the detainees to suffocate them, and electrocution.  So having
heard that such tortures had been employed at S-21, and knowing
that my brother died at this camp, we felt that it was very
unfortunate for him to die at the location because he had to
endure so much pain before he was killed.
Q. And is it correct, sir, that you knew of S-21 before DC-Cam
came in 2004 to tell you that your brother had died there.  Is
that correct?
A. I learned from the radio broadcast and through people who came
to Tuol Sleng to search for the information of their loved one,
and I heard of this location before I saw the photo of my
brother.  And they told us about the brutality and what happened
at the location and because of these I am so much depressed
because having learned that my brother's life ended up being
tortured and killed at that location.
Q. Sir, you told us about how you yourself reacted when in 2004
DC-Cam came to tell you that.  Can you tell us as well how your
own father reacted when DC-Cam came?
A. After we were given the biography of our deceased brother at
Tuol Sleng by the DC-Cam my father -- my parents actually were
broken and they fell seriously ill afterwards because they had
been missing their son and they kept expressing their sorrow and
sadness and sympathy towards my brother who unfairly was treated
as S-21.  They couldn't believe that such a nice person and loyal
person who joined the revolution, devoted his life for the
revolution, after all ended up being detained and executed at
S-21.  His illness could never recover and a few years later he
died along with my brother.
This suffering intensifies with time and this is, of course, the
brutality of the Democratic Kampuchea regime and I myself took
part in the army.
But after all we were betrayed and my brother died and we had
nothing left except sadness and sorrow.
Q. So it's not the first time today that you're in Court.  And
over the past few months you have been a few times sitting behind
me in the civil parties' seat for civil parties and you were
there where some of the former S-21 interrogators came and told
this Court about what was happening over there and the inhumane
torture and condition of detention.
Can you tell this Court how you felt when you are sitting there
listening to these witnesses?
A. Having heard this testimonies of the former interrogators of
S-21 I had come to realize that tortures were severely inflicted
onto the detainees at S-21, including my brother.  It really
makes me feel so emotional for the people who had suffered from
such brutal acts because we have even learned that some of the
detainees were burned alive, a kind of very barbaric act.
Q. And am I correct, sir, that end of last year you yourself went
to Tuol Sleng?
A. Yes, it is correct that I paid a visit to Tuol Sleng.  I
walked from the left building to the middle building and I
witnessed the scenes which used to be the place where detainees
could have been tortured.  And I was so moved.
I saw the instruments of torture being put on display.  It's a
kind of terrifying moment because it recalls the moment -- the
last minute that my brother could have been crying or be dying
while having been inflicted such kind of torturing techniques on
him.
And I am very angry for such brutal acts that have been inflicted
onto detainees including my brother.
I climbed upstairs to Room 33, the room in which my brother was
detained.  It was more like a pigpen, a place where animals could
have been kept, not a place for a human being.   It was like a
place where a human body could have been used for human -- you
know when the dead body was -- the crematorium and people could
be shackled to the wall.
And I could imagine how difficult anyone could experience when it
comes to having a wash, for example, or relieve themselves.
Q. Thank you, sir.
Sir, before you told us that the last time you saw your brother
alive in the hospital in Phnom Penh he told you that he was in
love with someone called Seang Lorn and then he was sending his
biography hoping that the regime would allow for him to get
married to that woman.
Could you tell this Court what happened to that woman?
A. My brother talked to me about the woman he had been in love
with.  The woman had to wait for him for one month -- for one
year hoping to be able to get married with my brother and her
hope was not realized.
The woman was heartbroken.  She had to remove herself from social
interactions because she had to isolate herself for this kind of
effect and that she remained inside the home being very quiet
because she expected that she would be able to get married with
the person whom she loved.  But after all she could never ever
see him.  And her hope was fractured.
And she has been in deep sorrow and depressed ever --
(Microphone not activated)
For me, I personally have been affected by this regime.  One day,
I went to work at the rubber plantation to chop down the rubber
trees.  At about 9 a.m. we took a break.  During the break, the
workers exchanged conversation and they told us that people would
have been executed en masse at that location, and I was moved to
hear that because if it was the place where people would have
been smashed, it would be the same as the place where my brother
was killed.
After a few minutes then we could resume our work as usual.  Then
we started to chop down the rubber trees and I could not hold
back the memory of my brother who was killed at the S-21, and
when the rubber tree was falling then because of -- I was
thinking too much of my brother.  I could not really run away
from the falling tree and it severed my left arm, so I am now
forever handicapped.
In my whole life I never forget the moment.  I have been living
with great suffering.  My father died, my brother perished and I
am becoming an amputee and very helpless.  So I have been living
with this great suffering and with the hopelessness.
Q. (Microphone not activated)
A. Yes, I confirm now.
MR. WERNER:
(Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, would you wish to put questions to the civil
party?
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Neth Phally.  Having met your brothers on
several occasions, did you learn that what was actually the
reason behind the arrest of your brother and detention at S-21?
A. No, I didn't.
Q. Thank you.  Who actually introduced your brother into the
revolution?  Did you know that?
A. The commune chief, Im Thorn, who introduced him.
Q. Thank you.  Do you know the person named Sao?
A. I know Chhouk Sao, of course.
Q. What is the relationship between Chhouk Sao and your brother?
A. Chhouk Sao had no relationship with my brother, but in 1970 or
'71 my brother actually stayed in a village and then they made
friends.
Q. Thank you.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, we would like to give the floor to the defence counsel to
put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MS. CANIZARES:
The defence has no questions to put to the civil party, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Just now we have already heard from Mr. Alain Werner and Mr. Neth
Phally in relation to the request -- one request and one question
that the civil party would like to put through the Bench to the
accused.
Does the civil party want to proceed with the question and
request?
MR NETH PHALLY:
Yes, I do.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now you are allowed to put this question and request to the
accused but please be reminded that, as a civil party, be ethical
and professional as a civilized person.  Please avoid using this
venue as the place where you seek vengeance.  Do you understand
this?
MR NETH PHALLY:
Yes, I do, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You now may proceed with your question and request.
MR NETH PHALLY:
I would like to ask a question to you, the accused.
What did my brother do wrong or what was the mistake that led to
the arrest of my brother?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, you can now be conveyed this question to you through
the Bench.  Are you able to respond to the question?  So you can
now take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to talk about the historical nature
of the Democratic Kampuchea in relation to the armies from the
east.  The DK regime did not trust those soldiers.  Chann
Chakkrei was removed from the division and was put idle at the
General Staff for quite a long time, and it is one of the matters
to be considered.  And the people from the east were arrested
gradually, and after the incidence of a grenade thrown near the
royal palace, then until the date of Chann Chakkrei was being
arrested, more and more people were being arrested from the east
to be smashed at S-21.
They were sent en masse and executed en masse.  This is a
historical event that I need to reiterate.
Having reviewed the card produced at S-21 in relation to the
person Bunthy who entered at S-21 on the 24th of December 1978,
it was the final phase in which the DK conducted the purges of
the east soldiers.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Phally, would you wish to proceed with further questions or
requests?
THE WITNESS:
I would like to show a photo of my brother.  Here it is like he
is now sitting close or next to me.  I hope he is now with me and
knowing that the accused is being trialed, and I believe that my
brother will be at peace, having learned that justice is achieved
through this Court.
And may the dead soul of my brother who perished at S-21 realize
that and know that now justice is done for you.  At that time you
were taken to S-21 while you were being blindfolded and when you
were taken out to be killed you remained blindfolded.  Now the
Court revealed the faces of those people who committed the
atrocity.
So please, the soul of you be here with me and in the photo
forever so that I can pay homage to you and dedicate the
offerings whatsoever to you.  I can never find the dead body of
you and this is only the photo, the photo which really represents
the ashes and the body of you.
So that's all, Mr. President.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer, could you please take the photo from the civil
party and put it on the projector so that it can be put on
display so that the parties and the public can view the photo.
The picture has been shown to the parties and the public.  Let it
now return to the normal screen.
The Chamber would like now to provide the opportunity to the
accused to make his observation regarding the statements of this
civil party.  You may proceed.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all I would like to reiterate that I
acknowledge that Comrade Neth Bunthy suffered and died at S-21.
He entered S-21 on the 24th of December '78 and that is the fact.
The historical movement and policy between the CPK and the
military from the east, I had provided a summary on this just
then, so I did not have to touch up on this.  The suffering of
the cadres and combatants who were in the operation at East Zone
was in a large scale.  And the suffering inflicted upon Neth
Phally alias Chhaet Phally before this Chamber is a portion of
the greater sufferings inflicted on the combatants from the East
Zone.
From the 17th April 1975 until the 6th of January '79 I have
observed the testimonies for those periods are fundamentally
correct.  However, the testimony of Mr. Neth Phally is hearsay
and it's not direct and this is another matter to be considered.
In conclusion, the testimony of Neth Phally is in that two
portions as I just stated, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Neth Phally, the hearing of your statement as a civil party
has come to an end now.  And as a civil party, the Chamber would
like to inform you that you have the right to participate in the
trial proceedings from tomorrow or you can return to wherever
place you wish.
Before the Chamber adjourns today's hearing we would like to make
an oral announcement on the amendment to the scheduling of the
hearing of the testimonies and statements of the civil parties
who have been selected by the Chamber to appear before this
Chamber to make their statements.
Due to the progress in the last few days of the proceedings of
hearing the testimonies of the civil parties, it has been
expeditious in comparison to our pre-scheduling of the sitting.
In addition, certain civil parties have waived their rights to
participate and appear before this Chamber to make their
statements in order to expedite the proceedings as well as to
inform the parties to the proceedings and the public of the
changes to the Scheduling Order of the hearing of the remaining
civil parties to appear before this Chamber regarding their
statements and the expressions of their sufferings.
So the changes are as follows:
For tomorrow's hearing, the Chamber will hear three civil
parties:  one, Seang Vandy; two, Im Sunthy; three, Phung Guth
Sunthary.  They are civil parties from group 2, so they will be
summoned to appear before this Chamber to make their statements
before the Chamber.
And on Thursday the 20th, that is the day after tomorrow, the
Chamber will invite civil parties as follows:  one, Chhin Navy;
two, Chum Sirath; and the third civil party is Ou Savrith.
This is going to be a videoconferencing which will be held in the
afternoon on the 20th of August.  For next week's scheduling, on
Monday the 24th the civil parties as follows will be invited.
One, Touch Monin, Ros Men and Chum Neou.  They are from the group
4.  And another civil party, who is American, the Chamber will
also hear that statement.  That is Jeffrey James on the 26th of
August 2009.
Accordingly, may the parties to the proceedings and the public be
informed of the amendments to the scheduling order of the hearing
of the civil parties and the Chamber hopes to receive full
co-operation and facilitation of the civil parties by their
counsel for their appearance before this Chamber as scheduled and
amended by the Chamber.
The Chamber is now going to adjourn and it will resume tomorrow
morning and we will hear the testimonies or statements of the
civil parties as announced.
The security guard, take the accused back to the detention
facility and bring him back at 9 a.m. tomorrow morning.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1635H)
