PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0901H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber continues to hear testimony of the witness
Ieng Phan and, after its conclusion, the Chamber will begin
hearing testimony of another witness, 2-TCW-1065.
Ms. Chea Sivhoang, please report the attendance of the parties
and other individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present except Mr. Pich Ang, the National Lead Co-Lawyer for
civil parties, who informs the Chamber that he will be busy this
morning for personal reasons.
Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell downstairs. He has
waived his right to be present in the courtroom. The waiver has
been delivered to the greffier.
The witness who is to conclude his testimony today, that is, Mr.
Ieng Phan, as well as his duty counsel, Mr. Mam Rithea, are
present in the courtroom.
The upcoming witness, 2-TCW-1065, confirms that, to his best
knowledge, he has no relationship, by blood or by law, to any of
the two accused, that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any
of the civil parties admitted in this case. The witness will take
an oath before the Iron Club Statue this morning before he
testifies, and he has Mr. Chan Sambour as his duty counsel.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Ms. Chea Sivhoang. The Chamber now decides on the
request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 1st
November 2016, which states that, due to his health, that is,
headache, back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long. And
in order to effectively participate in future hearings, he
requests to waive his right to be present at the 1st November
2016 hearing.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the accused at the ECCC dated 1st November 2016, which notes
that, today, Nuon Chea has a lower back pain and feels dizzy <and
cannot sit> for long and recommends that the Chamber shall grant
him his request so that he can follow the proceedings remotely
from the holding cell downstairs, based on the above information
and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber
grants Nuon Chea his request to follow today's proceedings
remotely from the holding cell downstairs via an audio-visual
means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies for the whole day.
I now hand the floor to the Defence Counsel for Nuon Chea to
continue putting further questions to the witness.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE RESUMES:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Yours Honours. Good
morning, counsel. And good morning again -- good morning, Mr.
Witness.
Q. There are three more subjects that I would like to discuss
with you. Let me start with following up with something you said
yesterday. I'm having in front of me the draft transcript from
your testimony. At 15.29, you say the following, and let me
repeat it so that it is clear to you. This is what you said.
As introduction, my question was about Khmer forces assisting
Vietnamese military forces. You said:
"What I know is that amongst Vietnamese troops, there were Khmer
soldiers who were trained in Vietnam and who fled from the East
Zone. I learned more concretely after the reintegration. Some of
those who were first or second star generals spoke about their
training in Vietnam, and that's how I learned about it clearly."
And a bit further:
"Some of them told me that they had left Cambodia since end of
1978, and some of them went in late '77, early '78, and they are
still military commanders at present."
Do you remember how long after your reintegration in 1997, you
spoke to those first or second star Generals about their training
in Vietnam?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. Indeed, I spoke to them regarding this matter <> during meal
times or sometime during our chitchat. They said that they went
for training in Vietnam in early '78, while some did in mid-78.
And that's what they said.
And as I stated earlier, I became known of this matter only after
the reintegration.
Q. Yes, that is clear to me.
Are you willing to disclose the names of those first or second
star Generals that you spoke to during meals or chitchatting, or
is that something that you would like to keep privately, rather?
A. I cannot tell you as who was who <because that was just> the
chitchat, and I don't think it reasonable to <report this> in the
Court.
Q. I understand that. That's why I was asking this question
rather carefully.
But without explicitly mentioning the names of the Generals that
you spoke to, do you remember concrete details as to things, such
as where they had their trainings, where they had meetings in
Vietnam? Is that something that you recall talking about?
A. <Allow me to tell that,> I did not speak into details into
these matters. What is said was that they went for trainings in
Vietnam in 1978, but they did not delve into details, for
example, as to the locations.
Q. Did they go into details as to which Vietnamese forces from
which military region they were cooperating with or received
training from? Did they tell you these kind of details?
A. People who told me went from the East Zone, so they were from
Svay Rieng province.
Q. I understand. But did they tell you who the Vietnamese
military forces were that they received the training from or with
whom they were cooperating in 1978?
A. If you would like me to clarify as to whom the Vietnamese
troops cooperated with, I do not have that knowledge. I could not
have the knowledge about the Vietnamese plan.
Q. I understand. One last question in this respect. The 7th
military region of Vietnamese military forces, does that ring a
bell?
A. I do not know about which region. However, Vietnamese troops
who attacked into Cambodia were from various divisions<.
Divisions that fought against us were> 330, 339, and 7. So I did
not know whether they were from the <> region. <> I do not know
whether it belongs to the 7th region <or it was a division>.
Q. Vietnamese General Dong Van Cong, does that ring a bell? Was
that name ever mentioned in your conversations?
A. No.
Q. Let me ask you -- let me read to you, rather, an excerpt from
a book from someone who has been testifying here in the trial of
Duch as an expert, Nayan Chanda. His book is E3/2376, ;
English, ERN 00192524; French, 00237170; and Khmer, 00181682.
I will read it slowly for the benefit of the interpreters to you,
and my question would be if, from the details that I'm -- I will
be mentioning, something might pop up in your memory.
Chanda talks about a very important meeting between former Khmer
CPK East Zone combatants and military forces from Vietnam. He
refers to a meeting, which took place on the morning of December
2, 1978, a meeting in the middle of a rubber plantation east of
Snuol. And this is what he said, and let me read it to you
carefully and slowly:
"The site chosen for unveiling the newest Cambodian Liberation
Front, the Kampuchean National United Front for National
Salvation, was two miles inside Cambodia. It was a small clearing
in the middle of a rubber plantation east of the Cambodian
township of Snuol. On the morning of December 2, 1978, several
thousand Khmers gathered in the bright sunshine to witness the
formal launching of the Kampuchean National United Front for
National Salvation."
He goes on, and then a bit further, he says:
"A newly written national anthem was sung as dozens of newly
fashioned red-and-yellow front flags fluttered in a gentle
breeze."
And then he says:
"One after another, fourteen members of the front Central
Committee were given bouquets of flowers brought from Vietnam as
they were introduced to the cheering crowd. Front chairman Heng
Samrin read out the KNUFNS program as those assembled shouted in
approval with raised fists. After the meeting, Heng Samrin walked
up to thank Le Duc Tho, who had watched the ceremony from a
distance like a proud mother hen. 'I did not think you would have
done things so perfectly,' a beaming Samrin told Tho."
There are more details, Mr. Witness, but this meeting on
Cambodian territory in December '78, close to Snuol, thousands of
Khmer, the launching of the Central Committee, etc., is that
something that those Generals told you about?  Were they present?
Can they confirm what Chanda writes?
A. Regarding the arrangement in the East Zone to establish the
Front, I am not aware of it.
Q. Then let me ask you one -- one other detail. That is something
-- that is something that someone referred to who was also
present at that meeting and who, very unfortunately, died two
days ago, so he will never testify any more.
And this is what Chanda says about him. I'm talking about the
secretary of the New Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party, Pen
Sovan.
Mr. President, I'll be referring to  of Chanda's book,
E3/2376, English, ERN 001925 -- 00192558; French, 00237196;
Khmer, 00191719.
Chanda talks about the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party.
He says:
"The new party, renamed the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary
Party, KPRP, with its 800 members was, in effect, the revived
pro-Vietnamese wing of the Cambodian Communist Party that had
almost been destroyed by Pol Pot. The new secretary of the Party
was Pen Sovan, a stern, hollow-cheeked Khmer Issarak exile from
Hanoi. The new Party restored the Indochinese unity broken by Pol
Pot. Unlike Pol Pot, who had denied Vietnamese parentage of the
Party, Pen Sovan acknowledged that the KPRP was carrying forward
the glorious tradition of the Ho Chi Minh founded Indochinese
Communist Party." End of quote.
In your conversations with the one or two star Generals, did they
mention the founding of the KPRP? Did they mention what Pen Sovan
had said, what Pen Sovan's role was, anything that you recall in
this respect?
A. No, they did not talk about this issue.
Q. That's unfortunate. The Tribunal refuses to call the people
who were present, so I have to ask hearsay questions to you.
Having said that, let me move on to my next subject, and that is,
Mr. Witness, going back again to testimony from Chhouk Rin. And
before I will ask you some questions about what he told
investigators, let me ask an open question to you first.
Is -- do you recall any fighting before 1975, between forces from
the CPK, Khmer Rouge, on the one hand, and Vietnamese or Vietcong
forces on the other hand? In other words, clashes between
Communist forces of Vietnam and Cambodia before 1975.
A. Regarding all the points that you raised, I do not have any
knowledge, that is, in relation to the CPK or the Vietnamese
Communist Party or their conflict. I <personally> do not have
that knowledge.
Q. Let me see if I can maybe refresh your memory through reading
what Chhouk Rin told investigators, E3/361; English, ERN
00766449; Khmer, 00194463 and 64; and French, 00268880.
He's talking about the period before '75:
"The CPK refused to cooperate because the Vietnamese wanted to
govern us, and we wanted independence, so that is why we were in
conflict with Vietnam, whose mission was to grab the authorities
and dominate us. The major dispute between the CPK and Vietnam
started from this point on. Internal disputes inside the CPK were
created by the group which supported Vietnam and the group which
opposed Vietnam."
And then a bit further:
"When this movement began, the group which supported the Vietcong
was uncomfortable, and they began to create their own army. The
Vietcong opened the Ho Chi Minh Trail to supply material for
their war against the Americans in Vietnam. This factor pushed a
short period of cooperation between the Khmer Rouge and the
Vietcong.
In 1973, the fighting against the Vietcong began, led by Ta Mok
from against -- from amongst the Khmer Rouge. These bad relations
created problems within the CPK, and I did not understand
anything at all about what happened." End of quote.
Let me first ask you about military clashes between CPK forces
and the Vietcong. You said you didn't really know anything about
this. But Chhouk Rin talks about Southwest Zone forces clashing
with Vietnamese troops, and you, yourself, were a ranking
commander within the Southwest Zone forces.
Were you ever involved in clashes, military clashes, with
Vietnamese forces in the Southwest Zone?
A. Regarding the statement by Chhouk Rin, Chhouk Rin at the time
was a military official in Kampot, while I was in Takeo province,
that is, in 1973. Therefore, the fighting between the Vietnamese
troops and the Kampuchean troops did occur in Kampot province,
and for that reason, Chhouk Rin became known of it. However, such
fighting between Vietnamese and Kampuchean troops did not happen
in Takeo province. And if this fighting happened in Kampot, I do
not have its full detail<; I only heard about that>.
So I can say that Chhouk Rin was aware of these issues because he
was in Kampot province.
Q. I understand.
Another -- now let me ask it differently. Are you in a position
to say anything about the frequency of those clashes before '75,
between Vietnamese troops and Cambodian troops -- Communist
troops?
A. I cannot say about the clashes or how frequent those clashes
occurred, between Vietnamese and Kampuchean troops since my unit
did not engage directly in the clashes. I only knew that there
were clashes in Kampot province and, in particular, in Chhuk
district.
At the time, I was in Takeo province and only heard about these
clashes.
Q. Another Court's expert, Stephen Morris, speaks in his book
about, "frequent clashes", and there's Vietnamese evidence that
suggests that before '75, there were, in total, a number of 174
military clashes. Frequent, these numbers, is that something that
could be accurate?
MR. BOYLE:
Just the citations, please.
BY MR. KOPPE:
The frequent clashes from Morris I will provide shortly. The 174
is not on the case file, but it is coming from a book written by
Engelbert and Goscha, which I believe is on the shared materials
drive. I'm not sure. But strictly speaking, of course, I can't
use it. But let me reformulate.
Q. Below 200 military clashes, is that possible?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. Allow me to repeat it again. Regarding the clashes in 1973,
between Vietnamese and Kampuchean troops, my unit was not
<directly fighting>. For that reason, I cannot say <for sure>
about the frequency of those clashes. And as you stated, this
document came from Vietnam, <that was not from Cambodian side,>
so they could write anything. They could write about those
hundreds of clashes. So it is not within my knowledge since my
unit was not involved.
Q. Now that, with you, I fully agree that they could write
anything, Mr. Witness. Thank you for that clarification.
Let me move to my last subject, and then I'll be finished with
asking you questions, and that is about the commander of all
forces on the battlefront with Vietnam, Ren.
We spoke briefly about Ren yesterday. I believe you were saying
that he wasn't someone of many words. He was a son-in-law of Ta
Mok, is my understanding as well.
There are a few documents on the case file which are either
signed by someone called Ren or documents which are copied to
someone called Ren. And I would like you to have a look at these
documents.
I understand that you are not familiar with these documents, but
I would, nevertheless, like you to have a look at this and see if
you can somehow confirm that the Ren is, in fact, your commander
when you were sent to Svay Rieng.
Mr. President, this morning we sent an email to the senior legal
officer intending to use four small documents with Ren -- with
Ren's name on it.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President.
A small point of clarification. Since our colleague is telling us
that the documents are not known by the witness, maybe, then, he
could tell us what he wants to do with these documents. Does he
intend to present a name and a signature for the witness to
identify it?
I don't really understand what the purpose is of presenting these
documents because, as my colleague said, the witness does not
know these documents, so can we have a little bit more
clarification about what our colleague intends to do with this
document<, so we can follow>.
MR. KOPPE:
In all fairness, I completely agree with this objection because
if documents are not either sent or received by the witness, then
obviously the witness cannot say anything intelligently about
this document. However, the practice in this Court is that
witnesses are being shown S-21 documents all the time, documents
that they certainly have no knowledge of whatsoever, but I'm just
continuing this practice.
So fully knowing that he is nor -- he's not the sending nor the
recipient, I would, nevertheless, like to show the document to
the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now proceed, Judge Lavergne.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes, counsel Koppe. We can present documents sometimes to try to
refresh the memory of a witness, but are you intending on
refreshing this witness' memory? What's the purpose?
That's the only question that we're asking you.
MR. KOPPE:
A very interesting question, Judge Lavergne.
I want to ask him whether, from the document that he will be
shown, he can confirm whether this is the Ren that was his
commander, whether that is -- I mean, he can look at the context
of the telegrams, see how Ren is spelled because that's one of
the issues as well. It's not always clear whether Ren is, in
fact, "Ren". There are a few Rens.
It also -- especially from the copied documents, I think the
witness potentially would be in a position to confirm whether Ren
typically was copied on military documents just like Ta Muth or
Son Sen and others.
Just to inform the parties, of course, the documents that I'll be
showing, with your leave and if you agree, Mr. President, that
will be document E3/1044, document -- I will later say the ERNs
-- document E3/1151, document E3/1079 and document E3/992, four
contemporaneous telegrams.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You can do so.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. The first document, let me cite the ERNs first so that the
witness can have a look while I'm reading this. English, ERN
00875624; Khmer, 00020881; French, 00324864.
It is a document from 30 October 1977, signed by Ren and it's
called "Request for the removal of bad elements which were
divided into three categories".
Mr. Witness, let me start with document E3/1044. On -- at the
bottom of that document, you can see "Ren". I have highlighted it
for you on your document, so for duty counsel, E3/1044,
"Fraternal revolution, 30 October '77, Ren".
Mr. Witness, is that the Ren who was your commander?
JUDGE FENZ:
Sorry. This question is certainly too general. I can see how one
can use documents to figure out if this is the person, but -- you
can ask him if this is the way he was written, if the contents of
the document show it, but, frankly --
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Fine. Mr. Witness, "Ren" you see at the bottom of the page. Is
that the way Ren, your division commander, was written? Is that
the same spelling?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. Yes, it is the correct spelling of Ren. <Allow me to clarify
that in> the army, there were two Rens. One was at Anlong Veaeng,
and another one was based in Samlout. The two names, Ren, had the
same spellings.
So regarding the Ren in <this> document, <is Ren from Along
Veaeng or from Samlout>?
Again, there were two Rens <but here their family names are not
stated and they are> under <the> <same> leader <>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, please review the document. This document was from
the Revolutionary Army of Kampuchea from general staff <office>.
The date is 30th October 1977.
You stated that there were two Rens. Were the two individuals
from the same staff office or they worked in different offices?
So upon your review of the document <in general>, you may be able
to answer the question since you know <these> two Rens.
MR. IENG PHAN:
Regarding the content of the document <> is related to Division
117, which was based in the north, that is, Anlong Veaeng.
<Within this document,> there is <another> division here, 164,
which was <> based at Kampong Som. And I have seen <Division>
801, 801 was based in Anlong Veaeng as well, to my understanding.
And I could see that the three documents state about the Anlong
Veaeng area, and there is one indication here is about Kampong
Som <164 - Koh Kong and Kampong Som>.
So, it is my <view according to these documents,> Ren here was
not from Samlout. This Ren was part of 801 -- Brigade 801 in
Anlong Veaeng. It is my understanding after my review of the
document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Which document have you reviewed? Did you review the document
E3/1044?
Please review one document at a time.
Now please read or examine document E3/1044 before you move to
other documents.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you for that intervention.
Q. And Mr. Witness, the first one -- the first document I showed
you is signed by Ren, but the other three that you also refer to
now are only copied to Ren, and not coming from Ren.
So let's move slowly. Let's only concentrate on the first
document, E3/1044. Don't look, please, at the other documents.
Is this the Ren that became your commander while you were in Svay
Rieng?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. This Ren was the son-in-law of Ta Mok, the <Division>
commander <in> Svay Rieng <according to this document>.
Q. I will come back to that document, but let's finish the other
three documents first.
Have a look at --
MR. BOYLE:
Just --
JUDGE FENZ:
Sorry for interrupting, but can we ask him shortly how he comes
to the conclusion? Then we have it on record.
MR. KOPPE:
I was coming back to the document. I just want to briefly refer
to these other documents where he was copied, and then I will
come back to Ren, because that's the important document that I
would like to discuss. So --
MR. BOYLE:
And if we could also get some clarification on dates because Ren
also moved from Southwest to Svay Rieng, so while he may be the
individual in Svay Rieng, he may not have been in Svay Rieng at
the time.
BY MR. KOPPE:
You're all going ahead of me. I was -- I was moving now to the
three documents.
Q. Mr. Witness, with the help of your duty counsel, please have a
look at the other three documents.
The first one is E3/992. That is a request to report to the
general staff. It's dated the 2nd of March 1978. It's coming
from, indeed, Division 117.
And this document is copied to Brother 89, Son Sen, Brother Nat,
to the Office of Documentation and to Brother Ren. So this
document from Division 117, signed by Rom, R-O-M, is copied to
Brother Ren.
Is that the Ren who was the division commander? And if yes, how
do you know?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. After I looked at the document, it is my understanding that he
was the commander of the division <but it was copied to Ren>. And
this document, he, in this document, was referred to as part of
the staff office. <I do not know whether he was promoted or not,
I am not sure; and if he was a general staff,> usually military
or soldiers <within the DK> had to report to <the general> staff
office. And <these three> document was <truly> sent to Ren
<because he was part of the general staff>. <But as far as I
know, he was a division commander. I also did not know if he was
promoted to the rank of general staff along with Son Sen.>
Most of the documents <had to be> sent to <general> staff office,
<that was to> Ren<. Then this Ren had to further these documents
to the upper level>.
Q. Let me ask it differently. Was Ren routinely copied on
military communications just like Son Sen was, just like Nat was,
and just like Brother 81 was?
Was -- do you know, was Ren always copied on military
communications? Is that something from your position that you
could shed light on?
A. <Allow me to tell that> documents usually were <categorised
into different types>. <In relation to the> confidential
documents were not sent to me <as the subordinates>. Regarding
the <general-purpose instruction> documents <were received by us
the subordinates; but the documents> about the arrest of certain
individual, I usually did not receive any such documents, but
those documents may have been <shared among> the upper echelon.
And Ren may have received some of those documents. I was in a
lower rank, so I did not receive any such documents. The secrecy
was the <considerable important> principle <within the DK. They
would not let everyone know everything>.
Q. But just to be clear, do you know whether Ren, because of his
military position, was routinely copied just like Son Sen was,
just like Nat was, in telegrams? That all telegrams from
whichever division to the general staff office were always copied
to Ren.
A. As for those who were in the copy, usually Ren was responsible
for putting the names in the copy part. <I have no knowledge
about such documents, because as I stated earlier, within the
DK,> during the time, the secrecy was an important principle. I
minded my own business, my superior minded his own business. So
there was clear distinction between the work that we performed.
<Some information was revealed to the subordinates and some was
not.> Usually we did not know all the information.
Q. Thank you for that clarification, Mr. Witness. Now I will
return --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on.
You may now proceed, Judge Lavergne.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I think it will be better to go into greater detail as regards
document <E3/992>. Does the witness know the signatory of this
telegram, Rom? Does he know where Division 117 was positioned?
I don't know very well where we are going. It would be perhaps
better to have more details on this specific communication.
MR. KOPPE:
Well, I'd be happy to do, but the content of that telegram is not
relevant for this witness because it doesn't matter. The three
documents were collected or assembled to find out whether Ren was
routinely copied on matters that he, of course, didn't know
anything about.
So we can go in that -- into that document, but it's Division
117, so I don't think it's relevant. He doesn't know anything
about this.
My questions are all related to document E3/1044, which is a
document signed by Ren.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
If you would allow me, Mr. Koppe, document E3/992 deals with "an
attack on a base of the Vietnamese enemies <that was one
kilometer from our territory". > It <talks about> a place called
Loc Ninh. It would be interesting to know what that place is.
<And I think> we've been talking <about> armed conflict between
Cambodia and Vietnam.
<Maybe you don't think it has any relevance, but it might be
relevant to the Chamber.>
BY MR. KOPPE:
I'm happy to speak about armed clashes at National Road 13 or Loc
Ninh, but I'm not quite sure whether that is in Svay Rieng. But
again, my question is about -- my questions are about E3/1044.
Q. Mr. Witness, do you have that document in front of you? It's a
document signed by Ren. It's the 30th of October 1977, E3/1044.
My question to you is the following. I understand from your
testimony that you were, yourself, not involved in removing bad
elements from the military forces. However, Ren, in this
document, requests the removal of bad elements, and he divides
these bad elements into three categories.
Category 1 pertains to three persons to be sent to Brother Duch.
Category 2 relates to seven persons to be sent to Brother Huy.
And Category 3 is about 26 persons to be sent to farm paddy at
Prey Sar.
And my question to you is, were you aware at the time that there
were three different categories used to describe enemies of
Democratic Kampuchea?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. Based on this document, I have no idea about the removal of
some individuals. I was not allowed to know about this issue. I
do not know if individuals were <truly> removed <or not, I may
not know it>, but this was stated in the document.
<According to this document, these> individuals were removed
during the time <> those individuals did the farming work at Prey
Sar, so it may have happened in late 1975 or early 1976.
Immediately after the liberation during the time, some forces
were removed to do the farming.
Q. I understand. But were you aware of a categorization of
enemies or bad elements or whatever you would like to call them?
Category 1, in Son Sen words -- Son Sen's words, the dangerous
category. Category 2, the ordinary liberal category that must be
educated again and again. And Category 3, the category of those
who have merely been incited by the enemy.
In other words, it's E3/13; English, ERN 00940355; Khmer, 0005 --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please repeat the document numbers and ERN numbers, and repeat
them slowly for the interpreters.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Yes. It's Son Sen addressing his commanders, E3/13; English, ERN
00940355; Khmer, 00052414; and French, 00344983.
Q. So Mr. Witness, three categories, according to Son Sen, the
dangerous category, the ordinary liberal category that must be
educated again and again, and a category of those who have merely
been incited by the enemy.
Is that -- are these three categories something that you were
aware of at the time when you were a commander?
MR. BOYLE:
I have an objection to the question. The question started off
asking about a particular telegram sending some individuals to
S-21 and some to Prey Sar. Now we seem to be talking about a
totally different individual with the different three categories.
The only thing that I can see in common is that they have three
points.
So I would object to the question on the basis that we have no
evidence that the telegram is related to this speech. Perhaps it
can be reformulated to simply ask about the speech itself, but it
shouldn't be confusing the two documents.
MR. KOPPE:
I'm not sure if I understand this objection. Time and again and
again and again we have discussed this document from where Son
Sen speaks. Duch has been confronted with it, many others have
been confronted with. Now I'm reading out a document from his
commander also speaking about those three categories, and my
question is simple, does he know or the existence of those three
categories that both Ren referred to and Son Sen refers to.
MR. BOYLE:
Allow me to clarify, then. The telegram that Ren sent actually
doesn't refer to those categories that the Son Sen related
document does, and that's why. He simply talks about categories.
He doesn't talk about them in the context of Son Sen's
statements.
MR. KOPPE:
And how would you know that, Mr. Prosecutor, that these are not
the exact same three categories?
JUDGE FENZ:
I think the problem we are having, and it's unnecessary to have
this discussion, I would say, is you're drawing other conclusions
than you are.
Why don't we just confront them with the documents or ask the
general question, are you aware of any categorization? And then
you can confront him with the documents and say, "Is this the
categorization or is this the categorization?" and we'll make up
our mind if this is the same thing.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Mr. Witness, are you aware of the existence of three
categories, three types of categories categorizing three
different sorts of enemies?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. I was one of the commanders. <The> three categories <as
indicated in these documents>, I am not aware of that. I do not
know how the upper echelon <analysed and> distinguished these
individuals into three categories. I was a commander. I, myself,
never categorized these <weak force> into three groups.
<Due to such documents, Ren and> Son Sen <> may have been the one
who distinguished into three categories. I was in the lower rank.
I do not know about that.
Q. Fair enough, Mr. Witness.
I'm finished. I'm happy to discuss with the witness document
E3/992, but I wasn't really planning to. But if the Bench insists
that I discuss that with him, I have no problem in doing it.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, as a side point I said to my colleague that if the
Chamber had specific questions regarding documents, it may put
these questions <either> before I cross-examine or after, but it
appears to me that document 922 (sic) speaks about the Kratie
area. It's 992 (sic). It's E3/992.
So we're speaking, rather, about the area around Kratie here, so
I'm not sure that the witness can react to this information. But
in any case, maybe I can start with my cross-examination and,
during the break, if the Chamber deems that it's important to get
back to this document, the Chamber can then interrupt my
examination.
I see that the President is nodding his head, so I can start.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Maybe it would be easier since we spoke about this document that
a few questions be put to the witness regarding this document.
Then you'll have the possibility of continuing with your
cross-examination.
Q. Witness, you have here a document here which is a telegram
referenced E3/992. I do not know if your duty counsel can show
you this telegram. It's a telegram on which you were asked
questions a little earlier on.
So this telegram is signed by someone called Rom. So first of
all, do you know someone who has -- who bears this name, Rom?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. Rom was in the North Zone, that is, Division 117. And I'm not
familiar with the name.
Q. Fine. So this Division 117, you tell us that it was stationed
in the North Zone.
Can you tell us with more detail where, exactly, this division
was stationed? Do you know it?
A. Division 117 was within the area of Anlong Veaeng, <but> I do
not know its exact base or location since I was in Samlout <which
is far from Anlong Veaeng>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Maybe there is a misunderstanding. This document dates 2nd March
1978, so the event took place in 1978. And the question to you is
whether you know Rom and where that Division 117 was located at
that point in time<. This is does> not <refer to> the present
time, because <it could not be Samlout in '77 and '78, that
time,> you were in Takeo and then you went to the East Zone, <the
question is about the time of the issuance of the documents which
is on 2 March 1978>.
MR. IENG PHAN:
I do know Rom, although I was not close to him. And during the
Democratic Kampuchea regime, in 1978, Division 117 was located in
the Northeast Zone where Anlong Veaeng area was.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Fine. Did you ever hear about an attack on Loc Ninh, and do
you know where Loc Ninh is located?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. I do not know where Loc Ninh was located, and for that reason,
I did not know about any attacks there.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Fine. Thank you for this clarification, Witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I now hand the floor to the Defence Counsel for Khieu Samphan.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Mr. Ieng Phan. My name is
Anta Guisse, and I am the International Co-Counsel for Mr. Khieu
Samphan. I believe we already met a little while ago in Case
002/1.
I'm going to put to you a few complementary questions and try to
obtain more specific information on what you experienced during
the armed conflict when you were first near Takeo and then when
you were in Svay Rieng. So these are complementary questions in
relation to what you already explained to the Chamber before.
Q. I understood from your testimony that you placed the beginning
of the conflict between DK and Vietnam somewhere between 1976 and
1977. So my question is, do you remember the first attack, which
took place when you were assigned to the area around Takeo? Do
you remember the date of that first attack?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. I confirmed that in early '77, there were clashes that
happened in Takeo province, though I cannot recall the dates. The
first clashes took place along Preaek Chik Vinh Tae (phonetic) or
Vinh Tae (phonetic) canal. And to put it simply, it happened just
opposite the Phnum Den or Den Mountain.
And those clashes <in early '77> were not of a serious nature. So
that is for your information.
Q. You said yesterday that when you were assigned to Takeo
province, you were first stationed around the city of Takeo and
then you were assigned closer to the border. So my question is
the following.
When you faced this first attack which you remember, were you
next to Takeo city or were you already stationed close to the
Vietnamese border?
A. During the clashes with the Vietnamese, I <already went to the
border and> I was not in Takeo town any more. <> However, our
unit did not involve in the clashes. <But we knew it because the>
clashes took place <> within the same geographical location.
Q. Well, this is a question that I wanted to put to you
specifically.
So if I understood, <at that time> you were then in Regiment 12,
so do you know how many other regiments were in Takeo and where
they were stationed, geographically speaking?
A. I have stated that after I left the special unit <203>, I was
reassigned as deputy commander of Regiment 12 and the location or
the headquarter of Regiment 12, at the time, was opposite the
Chau Doc town office, that is, in the area called Chrormokh
Chrouk (phonetic). So it is opposite of the Chau Doc provincial
office. As for other regiments, namely, 13 and 14, they were
based toward Phnum Den, or Den Mountain, that is, towards the
border areas in Kampot province.
And we, Regiment 12, was part of Division 2 <prior to the change
of units>. And the clashes that happened, happened to Regiment 11
because in Division 2, there were Regiments 11, 12, 13 and 14,
and Regiment 11 was at Preaek Bak Dae (phonetic), that is, a
canal branch off Bassac river.
So the first clashes that happened early <'77 involved> Regiment
11, which was located to the left side of where we were located.
Q. And since you just told us that it was Regiment 11, which was
involved in this first attack you remember, how did you obtain
that information? Were there meetings or was there any kind of
communication between the different regiments to see what the
situation was like at the battlefront?
A. Allow me to provide you with some reasons for the clashes with
Vietnam along the border.
Initially, in Regiment 11, there were no major issues. What
happened was the result of a border issue.
Typically, Vietnam dug the ground there in order to fish, and so
they actually entered Cambodian territory to dig that ground. And
we tried to stop them. We tried to stop them for one or two
times, but they did not listen. And the third time, the
Vietnamese side planted a border post with grenade, and when we
<> remove<d> the border post, the grenade exploded and some
people died.
We tried to negotiate with them and to make the report <to the
superiors>, but <nothing improved>. <This led to> the armed
conflict. That's how they did. They first planted the grenade
<into the> Kampuchean territory<, this is the true account>.
Then that's the cause of the frictions between the two sides, and
that led to clashes. However, it was not of a major nature. It
was <rather> sporadic. And that's what happened initially at the
time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
It is now convenient time for a short break. We'll take a break
now and resume at 10.30 to continue our proceedings.
Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room
reserved for the witness during the break time and invite him as
well as his duty counsel back into the courtroom at 10.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1013H to 1032H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
And the floor is given to the defence team for Mr. Khieu Samphan
to resume the questioning.
You may now proceed.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Witness, you explained before the break what you knew of
the origins of the first skirmish with Regiment 11. How did you
know about that<, since you were not in Regiment 11>? Were they
any telegrams to explain the situation? Did you attend any
meetings?  Can you explain to the Chamber how you came by that
information at the time?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. The <Division> Number 2 had four regiments, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
When there was a situation happening, the <division> would
convene a meeting and when there was a conflict with the
Vietnamese troops, the Regiment 11 would make the report. Then we
would get the information.
Q. Very well. And can you tell the Chamber how frequently those
kinds of information meetings were held? Were they held on a
daily basis or only when there was a particular cause for
concern?
A. Let me tell you, we were within the same structure <of
division>, and the meetings would be convened on a regular basis,
once in every three days <or a week>, for example, and when there
was a special situation, there would be a special meeting <which
occurred not based on the ordinary schedule>.
Q. Very well. I would like us to now talk about another issue
regarding your time at Takeo. A meeting held <at the end of>
1977, with Ta Mok. My first question regarding Ta Mok is, when
did you meet him for the first time?
A. I met Ta Mok very often since he was the commander in the
zone. And I, at the time, was part of the special battalion under
the <division>, so I made a constant communication <among special
unit, zonal combatants, and division>.
<Though, it was the first> meeting <>, but I, as I said, met him
very often. <The meeting> about the arranging the forces to Svay
Rieng, that happened <in late '77>. In fact, <after the
arrangement completed,> I went to Svay Rieng in <mid> 1978.
Q. Very well. You have anticipated my next question. Ta Mok was,
therefore, involved in the organization of military forces in
Svay Rieng, and not only in <Takeo>. Is that the case?
A. The selection of forces was made at Takeo under the command of
Ta Mok. Ta Mok <therefore> had to <convene a meeting and prepare
fighting> forces to <be sent to> Svay Rieng.
Q. Very well. I'll return to Svay Rieng later. I would us to
continue to focus on Takeo.
You said that you regularly saw Ta Mok, but you didn't answer the
question, or perhaps I didn't understand your answer. When did
you see him for the first time? Was it <between> 1975 <and 1979>?
Was it before 1975? When did you see him for the first time?
A. My <> meeting with Ta Mok happened before 1975. <During> the
attack <into> Phnom Penh<,> I met him for the first time. He made
a plan with Sam Bit to attack into Phnom Penh.
Again, I met him the first time before 1975.
Q. Very well. As regards his character, I understood yesterday
that you did indicate something. I would like to tell you what I
heard. I don't know whether it corresponds to what you said.
You said that Ta Mok was someone who didn't mince his words. Does
that reflect your experience of his character?
A. I saw him and I recognized that he was <quite stern> in <the
use of> his words. He<, to put it simple in Khmer language,> was
very straightforward when he spoke, and he did not use any other
<sophisticated> words when he <spoke>.
Q. In answer to questions put to you by Counsel Koppe, you
referred to Chhouk Rin. Chhouk Rin appeared before this Chamber,
as you know, and this is what he said regarding Ta Mok, at the
hearing of the 23rd of April 2013, document . And the
part that is relevant to me is slightly before 11.21.16. This is
what he stated:
"Would you like me to describe Ta Mok? Since he was my immediate
superior, I know to what extent he was powerful. For instance, he
<would say> the following <slogan>.
Above Mok's head, all there is, is his hat." End of quote.
Does that correspond to any memories of him, and did you hear
such an expression, "above Mok's head is nothing but his hat"?
A. This phrase was usually used in <> an unofficial dialogue<;
not in front of him>. Usually people said that above Mok's head,
there was hat, and above his hat, there was only sky.
Q. And do you know the origins of that expression? Why did he use
that expression? What does it mean regarding Ta Mok's character
and the manner in which he took his decisions, if you do know?
A. To my understanding, the expression was used when one wanted
to refer to his power. Above Ta Mok's head there was his hat and
above his hat, there was only sky. So no one could supervise him.
Q. I'll press on with the quotation of Chhouk Rin at the hearing
of 23rd of April 2013. This what he stated:
"When I left the Southwest where Ta Mok had issued orders and
when I arrived in the East, I observed that Ta Mok issued orders
to all the commanders. I therefore understood that he was
powerful. Everywhere, you could see him giving <orders> to the
soldiers. He progressively acquired influence over all Khmer
Rouge soldiers, both those of the Southwest Zone and the East
Zone. When I was in the West, I saw him. And when I was in the
East Zone, I saw him issuing orders. That is what I mean when I
say that he was powerful." End of quote.
From the answers you gave yesterday to Counsel Koppe's questions,
I understand that you <may not have been> at Svay Rieng at the
same time as Chhouk Rin, so my question to you is whether you saw
Ta Mok at any point in time when you were in Svay Rieng. And do
you know whether he issued any orders to commanders during the
time you spent at Svay Rieng?
A. When I went to <> Svay Rieng, Ta Mok was at Takeo province.
Upon my arrival there, Ren took <charge of commanding> the
troops, and above Ren was <Ta> Son Sen because Ta Mok was not
there at Svay Rieng<, I may not have known when he went there>.
<But the highest commander> was Son Sen, <then, Ren> and under
Ren, <was division which> would be responsible for the tasks. <In
Takeo, Ta Mok was in charge. I am not sure if he went to Svay
Rieng because he was one of the members in central committee.
Chain> of command<, however,> at Svay Rieng was under Ta Son Sen
and Ren.
Q. I will return to Svay Rieng in a while, but I would like us to
wrap up things on <Takeo>, so let us backtrack a little.
You stated that you left in 1978, to go to Svay Rieng. I would
like you to confirm a number of points that we have on record and
shed some light on them.
The first document in this regard is document E3/853, and the ERN
in French is 00290267; and the ERN in English is <00185243>; and
the ERN in Khmer is 00052825.
In order for you to understand the context, it is a report
<addressed> to Angkar. This is the name mentioned on the
document, and it says <it is> from the Southwest Zone. And it's
dated the 3rd of June 1977.
And this is what is stated in paragraph 1 of the <page> I've just
mentioned:
"The enemy's activities from outside. At the border, the enemies
occasionally fired shells at our territory, and at the border
<at> Kampot, they move their <inhabitants about> three kilometres
<from the border>, and the phrase saying that <for> thousands and
thousands years <there's been> lasting solidarity between Vietnam
and Cambodia was written in both languages, Khmer and Vietnamese.
In contrast, they used tractors to dig trenches at Koh Chanloh
<monastery>." End of quote.
I would like you to confirm whether, as part of the activities
you engaged in in the Southwest Zone at the time, do you recall
-- June 1977 in particular, and <if>, in June 1977 or before
that, you saw trucks disseminated by Vietnamese troops. That is
the first question. Did you hear of that?
A. I was not aware of the leaflets. Perhaps there were leaflets
close to the border of Kampot. I did not see at the time leaflets
<in Takeo> where I was stationed.
Q. Did you know Koh Chanloh <monastery>, and as part of meetings
you attended, did you receive any information on trenches that
were dug by the Vietnamese at that location? And if it wasn't at
that location, was the issue of digging the trenches something
that you received among the information that was provided to you?
A. Regarding digging trenches at the borders of Takeo and Kampot,
practically speaking, Kampuchea and Vietnam had their respective
trenches. Each country had already the trenches, and trenches
made by Vietnam usually was built with concrete. <Unlike Vietnam,
we, Cambodian side, did not have such concrete trenches.>
Q. And when you say that the trenches were dug by the Vietnamese,
does it mean that on the Cambodian side of the border, the
trenches were different? And if they were different, can you
describe the difference?
A. Vietnam made the concrete trenches <because Vietnam was
wealthier than Khmer>, and for Kampuchea side, we made trenches
from wood and mud. And in the rainy season, usually the trenches
were broken. <The Vietnamese trenches could not be broken, they
stood there for along time.> For Kampuchean side, we had to
<re>build the trenches after every <> rainy season. <For Vietnam
side, they built only once with concrete. Let me tell you,> DK 75
weapon could not cause any destruction of the concrete trenches
at the Vietnamese side because the Vietnamese side, they build
the concrete trenches. <For the Cambodian side, the trenches were
easily broken.>
Q. You made mention on several occasions of the <disparity
between> the forces on the Cambodian and the Vietnamese sides,
and you explained yesterday why you received instructions not to
be the first to attack because you didn't have the forces to do
so.
My question now would focus on three documents, and I'm speaking
in general terms. These documents date back to a period prior to
your arrival in Svay Rieng. But I would like to know whether you
received any information in the course of the meetings you
attended, either when you arrived at Svay Rieng or prior to your
arrival at Svay Rieng.
Before showing you these documents, my first question is as
follows. You said that Ta Mok chose the forces that had to go to
Svay Rieng. Did you have any briefing by Ta Mok<, or from someone
else> on the situation you were going to encounter in Svay Rieng
before you left for Takeo?
A. Usually, as a commander of the zone or a division, before they
sent forces to a specific location, the situation at that
specific location was briefed. We were informed that Vietnam had
already penetrated<. As I stated earlier, I was briefed that
Vietnam was advancing> close to Prasout, and we were told to be
<hurried and> to be cautious.
I <told the Court yesterday that upon our arrival in Svay Rieng>,
<we> had not disembarked my truck yet, <three vehicles were
burned to ground by Vietnamese shooting> and <half numbers of>
soldiers<, on these vehicles, were wounded and> killed<>. I was
told when I was sent to Svay Rieng by Ta Mok that Vietnam had not
yet penetrated <> to Prasout<. Our forces had to transported to
Prasout district> but, in fact, the <Vietnamese> had already
<passed> Prasout.
<So, they could shoot at our convoy. We were told they would
reach behind Prasout district. In reality, when we arrived, they
were not there. The Vietnamese had already advanced forwards>.
Three <of our> trucks had been destroyed. We did not <yet> know
the exact <geography of Svay Rieng, but> some of our soldiers <on
these trucks> had been killed and wounded.
Q. When you talk of three of your trucks, are you talking of
convoys arriving in Svay Rieng from Takeo, or you are referring
to something else?
A. <To Svay Rieng province, there were not only three trucks, but
there> were 35 trucks in <one> convoy, in fact. And soldiers were
from four regiment totalling of 1,800 soldiers. <But the first
convoy consisted of 35> trucks<. Three trucks> were in the front.
The three trucks transported soldiers from Takeo to Prasout
<district> to have those soldiers deployed at Prasout. But at the
time, Vietnamese troops had already arrived at Prasout. <So our>
soldiers <were on the move, had already faced their preparatory
lines. The three> trucks went very quickly <and could not be
stopped by the road guards. As a result, they were at high stake.
The troops on these trucks were sent from Takeo province>.
Q. Very well. You said that your meeting with Ta Mok was held in
late 1977. And if I remember correctly, you left for Svay Rieng
in July 1978. So between late '77 and July 1978, did you hold any
other meetings with Ta Mok or others, during which more
up-to-date information was provided to you, that is, information
that was more up to date than the information you had in late
1977?
A. That meeting happened in late 1977, and the forces were sent
in mid-1978. You may have questioned why it took so much time to
send the troops to that location because <the duration of the
meetings was> to arrange forces. <Why we needed to take that much
time, because Svay Rieng province also faced the Vietnamese
troops.> We <therefore> needed to think of which soldiers from
which units or regiments had to be mobilized from, in order that
we could send the forces to Svay Rieng. <Thus, we could not move
troops from one regiment to another immediately. In Takeo
province, we faced the Vietnamese invasion as well.>
<In order to mobilise troops from four regiments, it> took very
much time<>. The meeting was convened in <December> 1977, <until
late May '78,> those soldiers were sent to Svay Rieng<>.
Q. In the interpretation, I heard of a meeting convened in May
1977. Do you mean December 1977?
In fact, did you say December 1977 in Khmer, or can you at least
clarify the month, please?
A. I cannot recall the exact month of 1977. What I can say is
that the meeting was held in late 1977, in order to deploy troops
<and reinforce> to Svay Rieng. And soldiers could only be sent to
Svay Rieng in late May 1978. This is my clarification for you.
Q. Indeed. Chuon Thy, a witness who testified before you,
explained that before he was mobilized again at the battlefront,
he was in his unit that was in charge of farm work.
So my question is, do you know if, among the soldiers who were
mobilized to go to Svay Rieng, if many of them had been
<completely> demobilized before to go do farm work or
construction work <and how many were assigned> military duties
before going to Svay Rieng? Could you give us an idea of the
proportions here?
A. Regarding the organization of the Intervention Brigade 221
<that I mentioned yesterday>, we had to select forces from those
previous named brigades, that is, 210, 230, 250 and 270. So one
regiment was selected from those brigades in order to form
Intervention Brigade 221. For that reason, those forces <> were
not <production force, but the force to be sent were> the
fighting forces <>.
Q. Fine. This regards Brigade 221. But regarding the other
brigades, do you know if they were people who were involved in
production work before being sent to the battlefront
A. I cannot grasp the situation because the forces that were
assigned to me were all fighting forces. And <my brigade> did not
have any forces who were from the production unit.
Q. No problem. Now I would like to turn to a first document that
I would like you to see knowing that, once again, it's not so
much the content of the document that interests me, but more the
locations that are mentioned in this document, since you said
that fighting took place on both sides of the border. Sometimes
the Vietnamese would <advance> and sometimes the <different
troops would be pushed back>.
So what I wanted to know, if you recognize the locations
mentioned in this document when you arrived in Svay Rieng. <That
will allow me to avoid any problems with pronunciation.> Do these
locations ring a bell?
So the first document I would like to provide to the witness is
document E3/946; French, ERN 00332727; English, 00185205; Khmer,
00021015.
And with your leave, Mr. President, I would like this document to
be given to the witness. And this document is a telegram dated 26
April 1978.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may proceed.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. Witness, so you're being given a document and I'm going to
read paragraph 2 on the first page. This is a report that was
sent regarding the situation at 26 April 1978, and several people
were copied, Uncle Nuon, <Uncle Vorn,> Uncle Van. And this is
what is written:
"On top of the enemies at Preah Tonle in the direction -- in
Preah Tonle precisely, they <gave a surprise attack on> the Thlok
(phonetic) bridge towards the house with the 'sa' letter and came
by Prey Prum Daem (phonetic) by going through Preah Kak
(phonetic)." End of quote.
So my first question, I note that in Brigade 221, of which you
were part, you operated in different places in the area of Svay
Rieng, so in July 1978 or afterwards, during the two months of
your presence in Svay Rieng, do the town of Preah Tonle, the
Thlok (phonetic) bridge, the location of Prey Prum Daem
(phonetic) ring a bell? Are these locations where you had to
fight or where fighting took place after April 1978?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. I am not familiar with the names appeared in the document.
Q. No problem. Now I would like to turn to another document in
order to possibly avoid -- well, this is document E3/862, a
second document; French, ERN 00814597; Khmer, 00021019; English,
00185207.
Mr. President, with your leave, can this document be given to the
witness? This is a report on the situation in all sectors in --
all areas in the first week of May 1978?
So can this document be given to the witness and then I'm going
to put questions to him regarding the locations that are
mentioned in this document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you can proceed.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. Witness, what I would like to focus on in this document is the
first part that describes the situation of the national defence,
knowing that, once again, that this is a document dated back to
May 1978, so that's a little bit before your arrival.
So before you arrived there, did you obtain any information on
Sector 24 and on Sector 23?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. I cannot grasp the situation mentioned in this document. If I
know about it, I would tell you, but I don't.
Q. Fine. So now let me return back to the previous question,
which is when you arrived in mid-1978, you had no information on
the situation that you were going to find there. Even based on
the information that was given to you at the meeting at the end
of 1977, nobody sent you telegrams, reports before you arrived in
Svay Rieng?
A. Before I left, the upper echelon explained to me about the
need for us to go there to provide our support. And that happened
in mid-78. Because our intervention unit needed to go, to be
based at Prasout district, to be in Chak village. So these two
areas were our main actions, and then I deployed the troops in
the said locations.
Q. When you arrived in Svay Rieng, was it Ren who welcomed you?
A. When I arrived in Svay Rieng, yes, indeed, Ren welcomed me.
And he was with another person <> briefed about the situation.
And he was not even aware of the presence of the Vietnamese
troops <at> Prasout, because by the time <the troops> arrived <at
Ren's headquarter>, three of my trucks <passed it,> while I
remained with the main convoy. And we planned <> to deploy our
troops in Prasout district as well as some troops to be deployed
in Chak village. <I had executed this plan.> Three of our
trucks<, however,> were <already> destroyed.
Indeed, I was briefed about the situation, but those people on
the ground were not even aware of the presence of Vietnamese
troops in the area. <It was night time.> I left Takeo at 5 <p.m.>
-- at 5 o'clock, and some trucks would arrive <> in Svay Rieng
<at 1 a.m.>
We had to leave during the night time, and that's why some trucks
were destroyed.
So allow me to say again, we were briefed by the upper echelon
and Ren<.> But he was not aware of the presence of the Vietnamese
troops in the area.
Q. So once you arrived in Svay Rieng, you said, as well as
<witness> Chuon Thy <did>, that your Brigade 221 was a mobile
brigade that was expected to provide <reinforcements> to other
brigades that needed it.
So my question is, when you deployed your forces did you meet
with other brigades, and did Ren give you specific instructions
based on the brigades that you had to support?
A. It is typical that when we were in the battlefield, <the
overall commander, Ren, and> other brigade commanders attended a
meeting chaired by the division commander. And there were no many
items on the agenda because due to the situation, we were
standing and talking. Brigade 340 would be sent to Chak and
Prasout, and the <intervention> brigade would go to lend support
to that Brigade 340 since they were assigned to be based at
Prasout and Chak areas.
So <>  we <already> discussed about this plan before I deployed
my troops.
Q. So the instructions that were given to you by Ren <at that
time>, was the idea in them to push the Vietnamese back or was
the idea to penetrate Vietnamese territory?
A. I testified yesterday that Vietnam was a big country with more
army, more people and more weapons. Our unit, <in the status of>
intervention,< to put it simpler,> was to contain them and not to
make them advance quickly. We would not have the ability to push
them back inside into their country.
We were there only to contain them, but we could not even do that
because when we tried to contain them on the left side, then they
advanced on the right side. <They had many strategies.>
They had more war experience than us. And also, due to their
superior firepower and soldiers, we could not push them back into
their country. I never even had such hope. Our hope was only to
contain them.
Q. Is this why yesterday, when the Co-Prosecutor read out to you
an article from the Vietnamese Press saying that your brigade and
Brigade 340 had penetrated <Cambodian> (sic) territory, you said
that you were surprised and you said that that did not correspond
to what you had experienced?
A. Yes, that is correct. We did not have the ability to do that
or to take Vietnamese territory. We did not have such ability at
all. For me, I know clearly the forces of the Democratic
Kampuchea, we just emerged from the five year long war <against>
the Lon Nol government, and our armed forces were not that strong
yet. For that reason, we did not have any ability to invade or to
grab any Vietnamese territory at all.
Q. Now I would like you to comment, something that was dealt with
yesterday a little bit, that is, a statement from your former
deputy, Sokh Chhean. This is document E3/428; and French, ERN
00485477; English, 00374950; Khmer, 00373485 on to the following
page. You spoke yesterday about the fact that on your side, you
had captured no Vietnamese soldiers, and this is what Sokh Chhean
says:
"Based on what I know, the Khmer Rouge army never captured
Vietnamese soldiers. However, the Vietnamese army captured Khmer
Rouge soldiers. In my unit, there were 20 soldiers, <for sure>,
who were captured by the Vietnamese soldiers. The reason the
Khmer Rouge were not able to capture Vietnamese soldiers is when
I arrived there, the Vietnamese army had already reinforced its
troops in a sure way, and it had already laid enormous quantity
of mines in the river which was an obstacle to the advance of the
Khmer Rouge army." End of quote.
So my first question regarding this is, well, you said that you,
yourself, were wounded by a shell fired by a tank and <also> by a
mine, if I understood your testimony properly yesterday.
So do you confirm what Chhean is saying here, that is to say,
that the Vietnamese troops had laid <a large number of> mines in
the <river>? Is this something that you remember?
A. Yes, indeed. And why did I say that? Though I did not know for
sure whether the mines were laid by the Kampuchean troops or the
Vietnamese troops, <after> I was wounded in my leg <and it is
severe>. And while I was being carried through the rice field, we
stepped on <another> mine and a person who was carrying me at the
front died. And the person who was carrying me at the back got
<his leg> wounded and I also was hit by a shrapnel from a mine on
my head, though I did not know for sure who laid that mine in the
rice field.
Q. Your deputy, Sokh Chhean, speaks about mines that were laid by
the Vietnamese, so aside from this incident, do you know if there
were other incidents involving other brigades and involving mines
elsewhere than where you were injured?
A. It is my understanding that during the course of war,
<Regardless of> Vietnamese troops or Kampuchean troops, wherever
they were based, they had to lay mines at night time. And that
happened to both sides.
When we were not familiar with a geographical location, we had to
lay mines, three or four mines, during the night time and we
would remove them in the next morning. And that's the art of war.
We had to use all kinds of tactics and strategies. Sometimes
those tactics or strategies were explained. Sometimes they were
not. But we had to use all the strategies in order to survive
ourselves.
Q. Well, speaking about strategy, I would like to seek
clarification in relation to what you said yesterday. Yesterday
morning at around 11.36 <am>, I understood that you said you had
a meeting with Son Sen <near> Svay Rieng and, in the afternoon,
at around 1.44 <pm>, I understood you're saying, at least in the
French, that you had not seen Son Sen.
So can you tell us if, yes or no, you met Son Sen in Svay Rieng?
That's my first question.
And based on your answer, I will continue with another question.
A. I <would like to clarify that I indeed> attended a meeting
with Son Sen in Svay Rieng, and yesterday, I spoke about the
location of the meeting, that it was in Kraol Kou <village, a
little further to Neak Loeang>. And I was asked many follow-up
questions about the Kraol Kou location, whether it was a military
headquarter. And my response <> was that it was a logistics
office<, storing ammunition, and> it was also a mobile office
used by Son Sen.
When Son Sen left Phnom Penh to go there, he would have meetings
with the commanders on the ground in that location for an hour or
so <and then> he left.
Q. Do you know someone by the name of Ke Pauk?
A. I only heard of his name, but I never met him because he was
in the Northeast Zone.
Q. With the leave of the President, I would like to provide the
first page of the statement of witness 2-TCW-942. I cannot
mention his name, but I would like, however, the witness to see
the first page of the statement and to see if he knows this
person. And then I will read out a segment of this person's
statement so that the witness may comment.
So this is document -- it is witness 2-TCW-942, and it's
statement E3/426, French ERN 00 -- Mr. President, with your
leave, can I provide this document to the witness?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may proceed.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. So as the document is being given to you, let me give you the
ERNs. French, 00403068; in English, 00364071; and Khmer,
00357492.
Witness, I simply would like you to look at the name as it's
underlined in orange in the document that was just provided to
you. And do you know this person without mentioning this person's
name because we must use a pseudonym for the moment?
So does this name ring a bell, and did you see this person at the
logistics office in Svay Rieng?
MR. IENG PHAN:
A. Yes, I know this person. And I saw him, too.
Q. So you saw him when you were in Svay Rieng, that is to say,
between mid-78 and the moment when you were evacuated to Phnom
Penh after you were injured. Is that correct?
A. I saw him and got to know him after 1978.
Q. Fine. So you did not see him in Svay Rieng. Is that correct?
A. No, I did not see him in Svay Rieng. And after 1979, I saw
him. And even at present, I know him and I even know where he
lives.
Q. Fine. So I'd like to read out an excerpt where he speaks about
Ke Pauk, and this might be at a different period from yours, but
however, I would like to confront you with this passage.
So he is speaking here about his stay in Svay Rieng, and this is
what he says:
"Later on, Son Sen assigned me to the radio and logistics office
in Svay Rieng at the end of 1977. In 1978, Son Sen was relocated
from Svay Rieng to Suong's office<, during the events in the
east,> when the Vietnamese arrived, in order to organize the
Eastern Zone and to <get> control the work <related to the
northern part of the Eastern Front.>
Son Sen had two functions, in Svay Rieng and in Suong. And the
command of the East Zone military operations and of all of the
<divisions permanently positioned> in the east, were guaranteed
by Son Sen and Ke Pauk." End of quote.
So in this segment, he does not specify when in 1978 -- he's
referring to, <but> he is speaking about Son Sen and Ke Pauk as
the people who were in charge of all of the divisions in the
east.
So my question is, before you arrived in Svay Rieng, did you hear
about Ke Pauk's involvement in the East Zone forces?
A. In the East Zone, I only know Son Sen. As for Ke Pauk, I only
heard of him through the meetings that he was in charge of the
Northeast Zone, that is, Kratie, Stung Treng, Ratanakiri and
Mondolkiri. As for the East Zone, there was only Son Sen.
However, if there were any reorganization later on, I do not have
that knowledge. <I only know about Son Sen and Ren in the East
Zone.>
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I am done for the moment.
I will have further questions, but I think that my time is up and
my colleague, Kong Sam Onn, also says that he has no
complementary questions, <fortunately,> so we can stop here.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
And Mr. Ieng Phan, the Chamber is grateful of your testimony.
Your testimony may contribute to the ascertainment of the truth
in this case, and you are no longer required to be present in the
courtroom, so you can return to your residence or wherever you
wish to go to. And we wish you all the very best.
And the Chamber is grateful to you, Mr. Mam Rithea. You may also
rest.
Court officer, please work with WESU to arrange for Mr. Ieng Phan
to his residence or where he wishes to return to.
It is now convenient time for lunch break. We stop for a break
now and resume at 1.30 this afternoon.
And this afternoon, the Chamber will begin hearing testimony of a
witness, 2-TCW-1065.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him return to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court stands in recess.
(Court recesses from 1129H to 1332H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
This afternoon, the Chamber will start to hear 2-TCW-1065. This
witness will testify about the armed conflict.
Before we proceed to hear this witness <2-TCW-1065>, this witness
has been interviewed in other cases and the Co-Investigating
Judges have categorize this witness in group A in the memorandum
E319/35 and the Co-Investigating Judges request that this
witnesses pseudonym should be used to ensure the judicial
<investigation>. <The Chamber finds> this request is accordance
with the laws; however, this confidentiality shall be balanced
<between the public> and also the integrity of the investigation.
And the Chamber advise parties to use <the instruction in> E319/7
<in displaying other cases>.
And Court Officer, please invite the witness into the courtroom
together with the duty counsel<, Chan Sambour>.
(Witness enters the courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Witness. In the course of the testimony,
based on the request of the Co-Investigating Judges, the Chamber
will use <only> your pseudonym, 2-TCW-1065. Parties and the
Chamber <in general> will call you "Mr. Witness" and please be
informed that the Chamber will prohibit parties to use your
surname or first name in the course of the proceedings. The
Chamber also uses your pseudonym, as well, not your first name
and surname.
Court Officer, please bring the document <E3/10667> for the
witness to have a look.
(Short pause)
BY THE PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, the Chamber now would like you to confirm your
identity in document <E3/10667>; ERN in Khmer <00808426> and ERN
<in English 00976848, French 01001361. Please see the part where
it is highlighted in orange.>
And please confirm your identity; particularly in relation to
your surname, first name, <your nationality, your occupation,>
your parents' name, your wife's name, the number of your
children, your current address, and also your place of birth<.
Are they correct?>. Please inform the Chamber which part you
believe <correct or> incorrect. Again, please have a look at the
<orange> highlighted sentences, whether or not they are correct.
2-TCW-1065:
A. Concerning the orange highlighted sentences, they are all
correct.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. The greffier made the report this
morning that you have no relationship by blood or by law to the
two accused, Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea, and parties admitted to
this case; is that correct?  Please observe the microphone, Mr.
Witness.
A. I have no connection with any of the convicted persons.
Q. They are not convicted persons, Mr. Witness; they are now
still the accused. They have not yet been convicted yet; I mean
Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea.
Mr. Witness, have you already taken an oath before the Iron Club
Statue before you are here.
A. I took an oath already before the Iron Club Statue.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. I am now informing you of your rights
and obligations as a witness in this Chamber.
As a witness in the proceedings before the Chamber, you may
refuse to respond to any question or to make any comment, which
may incriminate you, right against your self-incrimination.
As a witness in the proceedings before the Chamber, you must
respond to any questions by the Bench or relevant parties except
where your response or comments to those questions may
incriminate you as the Chamber has just informed you of your
rights as a witness.
These are your obligations. You, as a witness, must tell the
truth that you have known, heard, seen, remembered, experienced,
or observed directly about an event or occurrence relevant to the
questions that the Bench or parties pose to you.
Mr. Witness, have you ever provided interviews or been
interviewed by the investigators of the OCIJ and if that
happened, how many times and where?
A. I was interviewed once in 2012 at Chi Kae village, Vihear
Luong commune, Tboung Khmum district, Kampong Cham province at
the time. I was interviewed once, Mr. President.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. Before you are here, have you reviewed
or read the written record or written records of your interview,
you provided to investigator of the OCIJ, to refresh your memory?
A. I have read already. I have completed reading it.
Q. To your best knowledge and recollection, does the written
record of the interview correspond to the statements you gave to
the investigator at the time?
A. Regarding this record of interview, it is correct, Mr.
President. I read it already and I have listened to the reading
of it as well.
Q. Mr. Witness, you are assisted by the duty counsel, <given by
the Chamber through WESU,> as requested by you, and the duty
counsel's name is Chan Sambour.
Now, please put the document back. I have some questions to put
to you, Mr. Witness, in relation to the events that happened. The
first question is: When exactly did you join the revolution?
A. I joined the revolution on 29 March 1970, at Svay Rieng. The
reason that I joined is because of the late king father appealing
for children to go into the jungle maquis.
Q. What was your first function after you joined the revolution;
did you work a civilian function or were you a soldier at the
time?
A. I joined in 1970 as a soldier. I was a soldier for one year.
Q. Which unit were you in?
A. I joined as a soldier in Svay Rieng in Samraong district. Now,
there is no Samraong district. Samraong <district was> in Svay
Rieng province <>.
Q. So you became a district soldier, at that time; is that
correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. To expedite the hearing of your testimony, I would like you to
describe your function as a soldier from the time you joined the
revolution <in> March 1970, up to 17 April 1975. Which unit were
you in; do you recall it and what was your real function at the
time?
A. Allow me to inform the Chamber, I am now telling you about the
period of 1970. I <served as> a soldier for one year; then I went
to attend medical training.
I became a medic from 1971 up to 1976, the medic at the
battlefront. I was not a medic for civilians; I was with the
soldiers as a medic at the battlefront, <that was> up to 1976.
Q. Which unit were you in when you worked as a medic?
A. From 1971 up to 1975, I was a medic in the district level <in
'75>. After the victory of Phnom Penh, that is, the liberation of
Phnom Penh, I went to <serve as> a medic <at the East Zone>; that
is<> Hospital 156. I became the chief of the medics <under>
Division 4 <in the zone, in 1976 until late 1977>.
Q. Besides being a medic from 1971 up to 1975, you, again, were a
medic and from 1975 up to 1976, you were still a medic <but that
was at the zone level> in Unit 156. Could you tell the Chamber,
in detail, your role and function from 1976 up to 1979; were
there any changes in your function from that time <of revolution
which was Democratic Kampuchea?>
A. Let me continue to tell the Chamber. I am now informing the
Chamber about the period of 1976. In 1976, I became the chief of
the hospital.
In late-1977<, in December>, Kampuchea and Vietnam started <to be
hostile and they had> conflicts. I became a medic at the front
battlefield. <That was the very front.> There was a conflict
between Kampuchea and Vietnam. In December 1977, the fighting
started. It lasted until 25 May 1978, during which Pol Pot
committed a coup d'tat in Kampuchea, when and during the time
people<, combatants, cadres,> were killed.
My soldiers <in the entire Division 4>, from commanders of
divisions down to <regiments, commanders of companies and so on,>
were called to a meeting at the <central zone>. I did not go to
attend. Why? Since everyone went to join a meeting, I had to
station at the battlefront, at the time, because when there was
an intensified fighting with Vietnam.
<To come for the meeting, at> around <3> p.m.<, at that Division
4,>, <all> cadres were arrested <and put in trucks>; one left,
and that person <was walked> to the well and <told to sit down.
He was already blindfolded with the scarf. While he was sitting,
he loosened the scarf and saw the well in front.> <After> seeing
the well, <he> jumped across the well and ran away. He was shot
with the gun and got injured in one of his arms. He ran to see me
and told me <at the front. He said "Comrade, the clique of
central zone, the Ke Pauk's clique, killed our combatants and>
cadres, <those> who were invited to the meeting, had all been
arrested". I <therefore> learned about <the truth> that from the
person who got injured in his hand and I realized that Pol Pot
committed treason.
<At 5 p.m.,> after hearing that, I called all <general staff from
all battalions within> Unit 156, to a meeting and inform those
people that Pol Pot committed <the killings against our cadres
and people; so now what could we do?> I discussed with my
soldiers and my soldier asked me where they should go. I told
them to keep calm; <now we needed to fight to survive.> However,
some went to their homes<. To perceive such situation,> I
<withdrew soldiers who were> fighting <against the> Vietnamese
<at the front>.
<> I had to retreat three hundred soldier <to cross National Road
7 and got into Prey A Nguy (phonetic).> I arranged a plan to
<launch> attack <against> Pol Pot <since 1978>. At the time, I,
and my soldiers, did not only attack the Vietnamese troops, but
also troops of Pol Pot because I had to face with the two
<fronts>. <When we encountered the Vietnamese, we fought them.
When we encountered the troops of Pol Pot, we also fought them.>
During the time, <we> went into the forest to fight, I had no
food to eat, <even hammocks, we did not have those>. I had no
salt. We could only find very little <rice> to eat <from people
of cooperatives>, <if we did not> struggle<, we would die. If we
struggled, we could> survive. When <we> survived <>, <we could
liberate our> people <who were facing slaughter>.
I waged the attacks against Pol Pot two times a day. I attacked
Pol Pot to get medicines, rice, and food, and <ammunition and>
weapon. <Pol Pot troops had two fronts. One was the front against
the Vietnamese, engaging in the fight. At the back, my group
fought against> Pol Pot. There were all enemies to me at the
time. I started to engage in fighting and later on, <we> could
gather ammunition, hammocks, and other stuff. I started to fight
from that time onward from <Suong to> Memot <which was my
battlefield>. Only I, at the time, had forces to attack Pol Pot.
In October 1978, I was still in the jungle, but I was on
<constant> mobile at the time. I had organized an espionage group
<of 40 people> to get information. They were on mobile. They did
not stay in the one specific place. One day, they could find a
letter with red ink and the letter said they wanted to contact
us. The letter was sent to me and I read it and I asked my
soldiers in the espionage group who wanted to contact <us in the
jungle>.
<That person told that he would come to meet the next day.> I had
arranged 10 of my soldiers to go and observe who wanted to
contact my unit; <my forces were hiding in the jungle,  my>
espionage group <saw Vietnamese with some Khmer> wanted to
communicate and cooperate with the Khmer forces at that time.
<Our espionage group came back and reported this to me.> I,
although seeing that they wanted to cooperate with my soldiers,
did not believe in them yet.
I had a <discussion> with 12 of my soldiers <>, later on,  <the>
Vietnamese soldier<s were sent to negotiate at Kantuot village.
That happened in November>. <After such long discussion,> I was
invited to go to Vietnam and get ammunition. <My forces were
rather weak at the time.> I brought 60 soldiers with me, at the
time, to go to Vietnam and get military stuff and equipment from
Vietnam.
After I collected all ammunition, I, again, started the
<operation>. <We> co-operated with Vietnam at the time, in order
to <get thousands of> people <out from the jungle to Vietnamese
side>. We, <put two lines and asked> people to <walk in the
middle in order to prepare the front, but some people walked
outside the lines>. The Khmer Rouge, seeing people, <started
shooting. They started to scatter>. <I already crossed to the
other side of Khnang Krapeu (phonetic). One> side <was our line>
and <another side was> the Vietnamese troop<. We asked> people
<to> walk<> in the middle row<. Since they started to scatter,
they dispersed all over the jungle>.
Later on, <at Memot,> I was sick and <> at the time, Vietnam
asked to invite me to go and organize a front. I told Vietnam
that I was sick; I had a fever; I could not go; I had to stay at
the battlefront <because there was no one else to control it.
They told "it would be fine because a helicopter would pick you
up>.
One day at 1 p.m., there was a helicopter landing and <picking>
me <up>. I, at the time, <could> not <walk>, but I was carried
into the helicopter and the helicopter then headed for Ho Chi
Minh. I arrived at Ho Chi Minh at around 5 p.m. I stayed in Ho
Chi Minh for one week.
Then there was a <common> decision <from both the Khmer and
Vietnamese side> to change my function and my role. I was
transferred <from being an army commander> to be part of the
<Kampuchea-Vietnam> Coordination Committee<>. <I was in the
Kampuchean side. For the Vietnamese side was Ta Chuong
(phonetic), the colonel.> So the affairs <for the Cambodian side>
had to go through me and Ta Chuong (phonetic) was <responsible
for the Vietnamese affairs within Region 7.> I was then <further>
transferred to Long Thanh, (sic) <the Vietnamese> school <east of
Prey Nokor>. I was there for about a week, though I did not
attend any course; in fact, there was a three-day course studying
about the <plenty> resources in Cambodia.
<From there,> I went to Long Giao. I used to send 400 soldiers to
study in Long Giao and while I was in Long Giao, I rested there
with the commander of Region 7<, Ta Ba Kuong (phonetic)> and not
long after, we held our discussion <at Phnom Cheung Me Dai
(phonetic)>.
We needed to find a strategy to attack because, at the time, Pol
Pot was killing people and herding <our> people away <to the
west> and we studied and discussed on the location on the map
that if we attacked in that way then the people would be thrown
off into the river<, they would all be dead>. Then we had to use
to a strategy; that is, a <frog jumping> strategy<, implemented
all over the country,> in order to splits the forces of the Khmer
Rouge and to rescue the civilians. And then we launched the
attack or the assault campaign.
And by 1979, when the country fell, I was <removed from there
and> reassigned to take charge of Region 2; that <included 5
provinces>, Prey Veng, Svay Rieng, Kampong Cham, and Kampong Thom
<>, I was charged the police department, not the military one.
They assigned 30 Khmer and 30 Vietnamese to protect me. But at
the time, I was not the chief< although I was the country
representative, I was just a deputy>; they were the chief. They
took charge of all the affairs.
However, in my deputy position, sometimes, I disagreed with their
decisions because <this was the Khmer affairs. We> had agreed in
principle; that is, the five, <eight and 11>-points principles in
Ho Chi Minh. We had disagreement with the Vietnamese side. I was
a person of principle<. Anything which damaged the Khmer
interest, I would not agree,>  because we had Kampucheans as the
mastery of the country.
Q. <Thank you.> You will be asked more questions, since you will
testified for two days. I only want to put some <basic> questions
to establish the foundations of the proceedings <>.
You made mention that from December 1977, there was a conflict
with Vietnam in the area that you were based. My first question
is the following: In which military unit you were attached to at
the time of the conflict and what was your position?
A. The conflict started, indeed, in December '77. At the time, I
was chairman of Hospital 156.
Q. Was Hospital <156> under the coordination of the division or
the zone?
A. It was under the division <4>.
Q. Regarding Division 4, did you know the names of the commander
and deputy commanders while you were under that division in 1977?
A. Allow me to respond. Initially, the commander was Ta Pon
(phonetic) and Heng Samrin was in charge of the military and the
deputies were Kim and Kri (phonetic) and I forget their surnames.
Q. And where was the headquarters of Division 4; at least at the
time the war started?
A. Division 4 headquarter was located in Kraek.
Q. You said that there was a meeting at the headquarter of
Division 4 and it was chaired by forces from the Central Zone and
participants were commanders <of> companies to battalions<, the
leadership within that division> and, later on, those commanders
were arrested and killed and only one survived after he was fired
at and wounded.
What about the commander and deputy commanders of that division;
where were they?
A. They were at the battlefront and, later on, they were called
to a meeting in Kraek and they were arrested. Heng Samrin<, that
time,> had <already> been reassigned to a staff office in Prey
Veng. As for the rest, <including Ta Kim and Ta Kri (phonetic),>
they were arrested right at Kraek.
Q. What about the secretary or the commander of divisional
commander Pon (phonetic); what was his fate?
A. Regarding the fate of division commander Pon (phonetic), he
was actually called away in 1976, and disappeared and there
remained only Heng Samrin.
Q. You also made mentioned <one point which established> the
start of the conflict. Since you're a witness of the armed
conflict in this Court, you said that the conflict started in
December 1977, with Vietnam. Through your experience or
observation, that you were involved in the military affairs since
1970 onward<s> and you <>, yourself, <seemed to be> right in the
middle of the conflict; although your position was in the middle,
<you appear to have a lot of information about it>.
What was the actual root cause of the <armed> conflict between
Vietnam and Kampuchea in the area that you were based in the East
Zone; can you describe it?
A. Allow me to report it to you. There were two cause roots of
the conflict. The conflict, initially, started in 1973. It was
about materials that the "Super Powers" provided to these
countries and they were not equal<ly shared. This was the first
conflict>.
And the second conflict that led to war was the border issue
because of the unclear border demarcation that led to the
<fighting>.
Q. You spoke about the conflicts of the materials; what was the
scare of such conflicts that led to a fistfight between Vietnam
and Kampuchea?
A. The conflict in 1973 is that all war materials which were
provided to Kampuchea and Vietnam was from the same source; that
is, from China. And when those military materials including<,
vehicles, weapons,> ammunition, uniforms; they were all supplied
through Vietnam, but <Kampuchea could not directly receive all of
these.> Chin<ese aids included medical> supplies <and so on>--
for example, let's say China supplied 100; we received only 60,
so we lost 40. Then we were disappointed <subsequently> and start
the initial root cause of the conflict and that's what happened
in 1973.
Then there was a meeting held and <decided that> Khmer <forces
within Vietnamese army> should move to the Khmer side and
Vietnamese should move to the Vietnamese side <in the '73> and
there were only one or two experts attached to each side, so that
the start of the conflict.
And the second issue, as I said, is the border issue because
after we examined the border, the demarcation is not proper and
that led to the conflict. <There were only two conflicts.>
Q. Since you were a soldier at the border -- and as I told you,
the proceedings focuses on the armed conflict between Vietnam and
Kampuchea -- amongst the geographical areas along the Kampuchean
- Vietnam border, I'd like to ask you about your statement that
you said there was a border conflict.
How widespread was this that led to the conflict; or who started
to violate the territory integrity of another country? Who
claimed that another country violated the border, <or> was it a
conflict amongst those who claimed the rice-farming areas; or
what was the actual cause and who actually started the armed
confrontation first <between Kampuchea and Vietnam>? And here I
only focus on the area that you were in; that is, in the East
Zone<, please tell the Court about these conflicts>.
A. Regarding the conflict -- and here I only speak about the
conflict in the East Zone -- the conflict was the result of a
border issue because some Khmer villages were far away to be lost
because they were on the Vietnamese side<. This created the
conflict. We lost Khmer villages. Then,>  observers and
investigators had to go to the ground to actually examine and see
what the real situation on the ground was like and they could not
solve the issue. They could not do it.
There were meetings; however, there was no solution, so what
could we do? The only thing that we could do was to result to
armed conflict. We held the meeting and the armed conflict
started that very night from both sides spontaneously <at the
East Zone>; and it started from then onward and it started
everywhere.
Q. Regarding the border demarcation in the East Zone -- and, of
course, you are very familiar with the East Zone area -- can you
tell the Chamber what was the starting point to the North
stretching to the South part, because to the North, it was to the
Northeast and <the South stretched to the Southwest, as indicated
in this map>, it was attached to the East Zone?
Here, I refer to the map and can you try to tell the Chamber the
starting point from the further North point; that is, the North
point that is the starting point of the East Zone flowing down to
the <further> South point; that is, to cover the entire East Zone
border and how long was the border <from the North to the South>?
A. If you talk about the distance, I cannot tell you; however, I
can tell you about the border area in Kampong Cham province
<where we based>. There were some villages which fell off the
map<. They all had gone>, for example, Svay Pagoda; Tnaot
village, Kradas village.
They were close to the house of the current president of the
National Assembly and I can tell you there; they are no longer on
the map, so where did they disappear? And that is the root cause
of the conflict; the conflict with the neighbouring country, that
is. And if you don't believe me, you can go and see the situation
on the ground.
Q. That is all right. I ask you this question because you have
mentioned that the border area in the East Zone, the armed
conflict started spontaneously throughout that one night and
that's why I want to know about the lengths of the border area
within the East Zone.
And we have heard some testimonies, <in Chantrea and Champus Tea
(phonetic) already had the issue,> although some are not clear;
for example, regarding the border area in Mondolkiri and, at the
times, the situation there was not that intensified as you
suggested.
Also, in the entire East Zone, can you tell the Chamber how many
divisions did the East Zone have and what are their numbers and
where were they based at the time?
A. In the East Zone, there were three divisions; Division 3, 4,
and 5 respectively. There were only three divisions and Division
3 was based in Svay Rieng, while Division 4 was at National Road
Number 7, and Division 5 was newly formed and together with all
the sectors in the division <in the entire zone>; namely, Sector
20, 21, and 22. So allow me to say again, there were only three
divisions in the East Zone.
Q. And how many soldiers there were in each division?
A. Each division had over 7,000 soldiers. A <platoon> had 120
soldiers. I made a mistake. In fact, for one company, there were
about 120 soldiers and for a battalion, there were about <520>
soldiers. <So, in one brigade, there were over 7000 soldiers.>
Q. And what about the commanders and the deputy commanders of
Division 3 and 5, do you know their names?
A. I only know the commanders. For Division 3, the commander was
Choeun (phonetic). As for Division 5, the commander was Chhoeun
(phonetic); however, they all died. And for Division 4, it was
Heng Samrin who is now the president of the National Assembly.
Q. You said that Division 3 was based in Svay Rieng; do you know
<where was> the headquarter of Division 3?
A. I do not know the <location of> division headquarter; I only
know that it was based in Svay Rieng.
Q. That is all right. What about Division 5; where was its
headquarter based; that is, the newly-formed division, as you
indicated?
A. It was stationed at National Road Number 7 and that was <newly
formed> only after the Vietnamese had attacked. Previously,
Chhoeun (phonetic) was from 156 with me, but later on, he was
reassigned to take charge of the newly formed Division 5.
Q. In the East Zone; that is, prior to the conflict with Vietnam
-- as you indicated that it was started in December '77 -- was
there any unit of the Centre army based in that zone; if so, how
many divisions there were? Here, I refer to the period prior to
December '77.
A. Prior to 1977, there was no Centre army; there were only East
Zone army. I only know about East Zone army. The East Zone army,
themselves, controlled the zone<, no central army>.
Q. I only ask you general question. You have made mention rather
extensively in your previous statement and you spoke at length
about the armed conflicts that happened inside Kampuchean
territory. <The question is,> starting from December '77 onward,
did Kampuchean side, at any point in time, use their forces to
penetrate Vietnamese territory?
A. During the course of fighting to penetrate Vietnamese
territory, and as I said, the campaign was launched in December
<>, in the East Zone -- and I cannot testified about other zones
-- that was the only time that the penetration was back and
forth. We pushed them and we were pushed back.
And later on, there was no signs of penetration. <The central
forces> were there only to contain them. We did not have any
force to push them back. And we had to successively retreated. We
could not fight against the Vietnamese troops <because we had
rift within ourselves>.
Q. You speaks about the penetration back and forth <>, can you
tell us when did it happened and how far did you enter the
Vietnamese territory <from the border>?
A. There were different units who entered the territory. Allow me
to speak about my unit; that is, 156. Our task was to attack
<Vietnamese> Barrack 27 <> and I could not say about other
<targets>. We had to focus on the attack on the Barrack 27. We
had to destroy that barrack.
But during the course of our fighting, <that barrack was> half
destroyed. <But the> Vietnamese side<> had intervention support
from a tank unit and we fought for three days and three nights
and then we retreated back to the border area and then the
fighting kept continue.
<> And they could not penetrate us <from the front>; however,
they could penetrate the area where Unit 155 was in charge, <at
Am Pok (phonetic), Phnom Bos Takok (phonetic)>; then they
manoeuvred through National Road Number 7 and <tank unit
attacked> us from behind. And at the time, I was wondering how
come we were shelled by tanks from behind. In fact, there was a
penetration at the area where Unit 155 was in charge and
subsequently, <they surrounded us from behind,> we <then> had to
retreat ourselves to the back in order to contain them.
<Whatever they did, they could not penetrate our front.> The
fighting between Vietnam and Kampuchea was so intensified at the
time. Wounded soldiers had to be carried away under the ground;
we could not carry them in the open and that happened to both
sides, to the Vietnamese side and to the Kampuchean side. We did
not fight either from a long distance, for example, not from 100
metres away, but it was from 30 metres away.
Q. When you tried to enter and attack Barrack 27 on the
Vietnamese side, how far was the barrack from the border area?
A. Barrack 27 was a bit further from the iron bridge; it was not
that far, but I cannot give you the distance in kilometres. It
was not that far from the Kampuchean border. From the border,
there was this "spean deik" or iron bridge and a bit further,
there is this Barrack 27 <and from this, was Smach (phonetic)
market>.
Q. During the course of the armed conflict between Vietnam and
Kampuchea, can you give an example as to at which particular
point in time that the Vietnamese side penetrated deep inside
Kampuchean territory <at the East Zone>; that is, away from the
border and how far was it and when did it happen?
A. It happened in 1977, but I cannot recall the date. It was
toward late 1977, when the Vietnamese attacked us via Road 7. <I
estimated that it was> about 20 kilometres deep inside our
territory. They reached Khnar village at the time. Khnar village
was in Sralab commune. They <could not push> further toward the
West, <because we already deployed troops to curb> their
advancements there. Then they had to retreat.
Q. Khnar village, Sralab commune, can you tell us the district or
the province it was located in?
A. It was in Sralab commune, Tboung Khmum district. It is located
along National Road Number 7.
Q. What kinds of troops Vietnamese employed during their
penetration inside the Kampuchean territory; did they use tanks<,
artilleries, or> any aerial support?
A. When we fought and attacked their Barrack 27, the Vietnamese
side had all kinds of support; that is, heavy artilleries; that
is, 130 mm artilleries, tanks, and aerial support. However, when
they <were> penetrat<ing> into our territory there was no aerial
support; however, they used <only> tanks <along National Road 7,
but> we could shoot and burn some of their tanks. And as I said,
they reached Khnar village by that time <and they retreated>.
Q. You said it was your spearhead, that you had to attack Barrack
27 of Vietnam; can you tell the Chamber who issued the orders to
your units to attack Vietnamese Barrack 27 inside Vietnamese
territory?
A. At that time, I was a military medic at the front battlefield;
I was not a commander, although I was at the front battlefield. I
believed it was the Zone's plan because everything that the
division did was according to the decision of the Zone. Only
after the Zone made the decisions, that's then the division would
deployed those battalions to attack.
Q. From the period of December 1977 up to 1979 and based on your
experience and according to your hard work at the battlefront,
how many times did Vietnam penetrate into Cambodia and how large
was the destruction <of both sides according to your
observation>?
A. There were two types of fighting; one was the fighting against
<one> another; I mean the standoff, and another one was the
counterattack to defend the country or to liberate the country.
Which year are you referring to, Mr. President?
MR. PRESIDENT:
I am referring to the time <frame> when armed conflict occurred
up until the intervention by the Central army <in the East Zone>.
There was, at the time, an accusation that there was a rebellion
within the country and also externally, <that was complicated,>
so I am asking you about the time when the conflict started up
until the time when the Centre sent army to reinforce <to the
East Zone>.
A. In 2077 (sic), there were no forces from the Centre to
reinforce. <Later on,> there was a conflict with Vietnam. In
1977, the Vietnamese troop attack into Cambodia and at the time,
the Division 2 from the Centre <Army> was sent to assist us. It,
at the time, coincided with the internal coup d'tat<, conflict
internally>.
Cadres <and combatants> were subject to execution from that time
onward. I mean from late 1977, cadres and staff members had been
arrested from different offices and ministry and also from other
places. <They ran and scattered all over the places to their
survival. From this point> onwards<, we realised> that Pol Pot
<was hostile to both Cambodian people and> Vietnam. <Because of
this> I, from 25 <May> 1978, <split from being a medic and>
started to <mobilise troops to> attack Pol Pot.
Q. Thank you. I am now turning <from armed conflict> to another
topic. <We will go in details with what was recorded in the
documents>.
First, I would like to ask about your relationships. Do you know
some of the leaders in the East <Zone>? Do you know some of the
secretaries and deputy secretaries in the East <Zone>; <how many
of them? And> what were their names?
A. Regarding the leaders in the East <Zone>, I know only one
individual, So Phim, alias Yang (phonetic) -- alias Yann, rather.
So Phim and I was a distant relative. My grandmother and So
Phim's mother was a biological sibling. My mother and So Phim
were cousins and I had a <distant> relationship with So Phim.
<With some affairs, I often asked him.>
<In the past,> So Phim said that Pol Pot did not betray all of
us, but I, myself, believed that <Pol Pot> betrayed us because
Pol Pot killed people and So Phim said if Pol Pot <killed people
or attempted to stage a coup d'tat>, why didn't <he> tell him.
In <my> reply<, I said, "How could one tell the truth if he
attempts to stage the coup d'tat". This is my reply. I could
talk about this because I knew him as my uncle>. <I said to him
that, "When someone betrayed you, he or she would not tell you
about it".>
So Phim, at the time, was not sure in himself <whether Pol Pot
betrayed us or not>; that is why he<, together with messengers,>
decided to go to <ask Pol Pot at Akreiy Ksatr, Mukh Kampul> for
clarification about that.
Q. Who were older; I mean So Phim and you? When was So Phim born
and what was his birthplace; do you recall since you know him
very well?
A. I do not know his date of birth, but he was originally from
Sangkom village, <> Kokir Saom commune, Svay Teab district, Svay
Rieng province. As for his date of birth, I have no idea. <I was
not yet born.>
Q. You explained, in <depth>, about the <serious> politics;
particularly, about the coup d'tat and treason. <And you raised
this with So Phim.>  And also you made mention about close
relationship with So Phim. You were close to So Phim because of
personal relationship, <or because of your role as a medic or as
a soldier in Division 4>?
A. <The relation was because we> were related by blood<, not
because of work>. Some of my family members worked in the
<Office> of Agriculture<, but they all died, including>
grandmother-in-law died <and three children> at the period. I
sometimes asked about his <well> being. I <therefore> know some
of the matters.
Q. When, usually, you had the opportunity to go to see him
personally to have a chit chat with him? You have told that you
had a personal relationship with him, sometimes to discuss <in
depth> about politics, so when exactly did you start to have such
dialogue?
A. <> I had no specific schedule to go and see him. When I had
the opportunity, I went to see him. I did not have a fixed
schedule to see him monthly or daily since I worked at the
hospital. I sometimes went to visit my family members at the
<Office> of Agriculture, so I could see him at the time.
Q. You stated that your family member worked at the <Office> of
Agriculture <in the Zone>; was that person your wife or was that
person your <father> or how was that person related to you?
A. My biological mother was working there and my
grandmother-in-law was there, as well, <my wife and three
children were> at that place.
Q. You appear to know exactly the location of the East <Zone>
headquarter or office; where was it?
A. <The> zone office was originally based at Suong and later on,
it was moved to Samraong, Kokir (phonetic) south of Doun Tei. It
was call Tuol Samraong or Tuol Kokir where the office was based.
There were houses there and there was also a hospital.
Q. Which sector was Suong in, at the time, and which sector
Samraong and Doun Tei were in, at the time, and where are they at
the current time?
A. Suong was referred to as Sector 21, from the north of national
road. Samraong<, Tuol Preap,> were Sector 20 <>; one in the South
<of the road was Sector 20> and another one in the North <of the
road was Sector 21>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much for trying to answer my question to your best
ability.
It is now time for break. We will take break from now until 3
p.m.
Court officer, please find a proper place for the witness in the
waiting room during the break time and please invite him back
into the courtroom with the duty counsel at 3 p.m.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1442H to 1501H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
And Mr. Witness, I still have some general questions that I need
to put to you.
BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. When you had an opportunity to speak to So Phim<, in the
family fashion,> when he was secretary of the East Zone, so
during those times that you had a conversation with him, as a
family member -- Court officer, could you check <> sound system?
Regarding the times that you had conversation with him, you said
that it was irregular. However, during the DK regime; that is,
between 1975 to the times that the event was unfolded in the East
Zone; that is, in around May 1978,< the time you had the chance
to talk with So Phim as a family member,> can you tell the
Chamber, if you can recall, how many times did you meet with So
Phim and for each meeting, what kinds of topic did you discuss
with him?
2-TCW-1065:
A. Allow me to continue with my response. As to the number of
times that I met him, I met him three to four times per year
because I was based at the battlefield and I did not have time to
see him that often.
When I came to visit my family, I also tried to have an
opportunity to speak to him, but we never discussed about the
nation's affairs; we spoke to each other as a relative.
Sometimes, I had a casual conversation with him and he didn't
mind that and that's about it.
Q. And in your previous statement, you said that you had an
opportunity to speak to So Phim and you said Pol Pot conducted a
coup d'tat, but So Phim did not believe that. Regarding this
conversation; that is, on the <deep> topic of treason and coup
d'tat, can you tell the Chamber as to when did it happen and
where? Can you describe that meeting to the Chamber; that is,
your meeting with So Phim?
A. It was in late '77; that was the time that we had a war with
Vietnam. I was at the battlefront, but one evening at around 5
o'clock, I came to my house and I met him. And he asked me about
the situation at the battlefront and I told him that it was not
good and why it was not good because I gave an example that <a>
tree, despites there was no wind, it simply fell down.
He analyzed it and he said that, in fact, there was a storm in
China, but the remnant effect felt in Cambodia. I asked him why
he built the house and he said that he built that house in order
to receive a Chinese guest. So I was sitting on a bed there and I
chit chatting <with> him about these matters and that happened in
'77 <when we were in the struggle>.
Q. And why did you make such a statement to him?
A. The issue is that we started to fight with Vietnam. At that
time, the Vietnam didn't attack us; however, then there was an
internal armed conflict and that happened in May and I knew that
the situation was not good<, and that it was an internal
conflict,> and I thought that maybe some people were traitorous
and I chit chatted to him that it could be Pol Pot. But he said
that if Pol Pot was a traitor, Pol Pot would have told him. <It
was a chit-chat.>
However, there were five members of the Standing Committee
including <him, So Phim, why then Pol Pot did not tell him. We
continued the chitchat and I said, "Normally, traitors would not
tell us that." But> his analysis that it was Son Sen who
initiated the coup d'tat<, not Pol Pot>.
Q. A while ago, you also stated that he did not believe that Pol
Pot conducted a coup d'tat and it was likely it was done by Son
Sen. Then he went to Phnom Penh and reached Akreiy Ksatr area;
can you tell the Chamber about the fate of <So Phim> in around
that year; that is, the year of 1978?
A. It is my personal opinion that in 1978, he became hopeless and
that is why he went to Akreiy Ksatr area; that is, Mukh Kampul
and he sent his messengers to ask why Pol Pot sent the soldiers,
armies from the Central Zone to kill the cadres and kill the
people <of the East Zone>. He wanted to have a firm confirmation
on this issue, but he failed it because Pol Pot had actually
engaged in the coup d'tat, but <we were still not sure about
it,> we made a wrong analysis of the situation.
If <he> were to believe me and he escaped it, then he would be
protected<. There were many troops in the East Zone>. If he were
to travel to the East Zone, we had three divisions and of,
course, we could defend him, but he, himself, <did not> believe<>
his subordinates. <That's why it was his peril.>
Q. You just made mention that he sent his messengers to inquire
about Pot Pot, so where was So Phim, himself; where was he?
A. I haven't yet finished; allow me to continue. So he made his
trip. He went along with his messengers and one of the
messengers, Chhoeun, was his nephew. He sent Chhoeun to send a
letter to the Party Centre, but <on the way,> Chhoeun was
arrested. Then after Chhoeun disappeared, he sent another
messenger. The messenger was subsequently arrested.
So then an army came with tanks to surround him to arrest him and
that was <the end of> his fate. He had no choice but to kill
himself, so he committed suicide by <shooting> himself. But
before he died, he told people who were nearby him to stand up
and to rise up. <He, himself, was finished.>
Q. You said that he arrived at Akreiy Ksatr; did he <including
his guards or> messengers arrived at Akreiy Ksatr? Or where did
he stop and then send his messenger or bodyguards to deliver a
letter to Phnom Penh? Where was he when such event was unfolded?
A. I do not know the actual location; however, one of the
messengers who could flee said that it was at Akreiy Ksatr.
<After he shot his messengers,> he shot himself to death, <but
there was> one messenger who could escape and hide himself in a
pond survived, although he was fired upon by those soldiers from
the Southwest. Then when the situation became quiet, he fled to
the village; only him survived. But I do not know the actual
location.
Q. So that is second-hand information that you learned from that
person and what is the name of the person who told you?
A. The nephew named Ung (phonetic), however, he now works in
Thailand. He's been working in Thailand for a few years.
Q. Is he So Phim's nephew or So Phim's wife's nephew?
A. He is So Phim's nephew.
Q. Allow me to recap what you just said. Because he felt
desperate or hopeless, since he sent two messengers to deliver a
letter and they disappeared, he decided to kill some of his
<bodyguards> and only one survived and later on, he killed
himself; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. What about his driver; what happened?
A. I, at the time, did not ask about the driver.
Q. And based on the information that you were told by that
nephew, did you know as to when actually it happened? Of course,
you said that you do not know the actual location where the event
took place, but as to the date; do you know it?
A. No, I do not know as to when it happened. I only asked that
person and, indeed, he was also related to me as a nephew. I only
wanted to know what happened, but I did not delve into
greaterdetail.
Q. While So Phim was alive, did he have a wife and if so, what is
<her> name and how many children he had?
A. I do not know her native name; I only know her alias, Yeay
Kirou. And they had a son<, Nat (phonetic),> and a daughter<, Si
(phonetic)>, but one was adopted. <Nat (phonetic) is a doctor
and> Kasi (phonetic) who<se> husband was the son-in-law of Ros
Nhim who was <from the Northwest Zone>. So he had two children.
Q. And do you know the adopted child he had, whether the child
was a son or a daughter?
A. It was a daughter named Tadeav (phonetic); I do not know her
whereabouts.
Q. What about Nat (phonetic); is Nat (phonetic) a son or a
daughter?
A. Nat (phonetic) was chief of Hospital P-2, <he is deceased>;
however, I did not know about Kasi (phonetic), whether she's
alive. Nat (phonetic) was the son.
Q. What about the fate of his wife, Yeay Kirou?
A. Yeay Kirou died. I did not know where she was <taken to be
executed>, because I was at the front battlefield and I did not
know about <what> happened at the rear.
Q. If that is the case, how could you say that Yeay Kirou was
taken away and killed?
A. I made that claim because, as in the case of my family
members, I could not find them and if Yeay Kirou is alive, she
would come to the native village. And I heard people saying that
Yeay Kirou was taken away and killed. <They would not spare her.>
That's why I said that she's dead.
Q. You spoke about Ros Nhim who was an in-law to So Phim, as So
Phim's child got married to Ros Nhim's child, and do you know Ros
Nhim and what was his position during the DK regime?
A. I do not know Ros Nhim. I only knew that he was chief of the
Northwest Zone. His son married So Phim's daughter; that's all I
know. I only heard from other people that he was chief of the
Northwest Zone.
Q. Did you ever know that Ros Nhim came to visit the East Zone
which was under charge by So Phim?
A. I do not know as to when he came to the zone. I was attached
to the army and I did not know what happened at the rear.
Q. Do you know Suas Nau, alias Chhouk?
A. No, the name does not ring a bell.
Q. That is all right. And did you know Chan Seng Hong, alias
Chan?
A. I only heard of his name. I did not meet the person. I did not
have any contact with this person.
(Short pause)
Q. My question is in relation to a rebellion, as you spoke about
it, and that you also discussed the <in-depth national> matter
with So Phim, who was the secretary of the East Zone. Did you
ever know if So Phim had any contact or relationship with
Vietnamese <individuals or represent> authority during the times
that he was a secretary of the East Zone?
A. I never know about any contact he made with Vietnam or with
anybody from that side.
Q. My next line of questions is related to some documents. I will
show you some documents in order to identify the people in those
documents.
Court officer, please hand over these documents to the witness.
You were interviewed by the investigator of the OCIJ, in a
separate case and this is a telegram dated 6 November '77, signed
by Chhon, and during your interview -- that is document E3/10669,
in question 3; Khmer, ERN 00808443; English, 00976867; French,
01001377; you were shown a <separate> telegram signed by Chhon.
Please read that portion. And that telegram was issued during the
night of 6 of November '77, and the document was copied to Uncle,
Uncle <Nuon, Brother Van>, <Brother> Vorn, Khieu, Office and
Archived.
There is one point that I would like to ask you for clarification
from this document; that is, the person named Chhon. Witness,
have you ever seen this document before?
A. No, I have not seen this document and I am <not> familiar with
the person named Chhon. I have not seen this document before.
Q. Regarding the events that were mentioned, namely that:
"At 4:00 p.m. that afternoon, I had a sickness and I did not know
<whether I got syncope or not>. Then while I was sitting,
listening to the reports, I fell off my chair. I could not move.
I became unconscious for 20 minutes, and in the late evening and
nighttime, I could resume my work and I continued working the
next morning until it was successfully concluded. On the night of
the 5th and the morning of the 6th <in November,> I became
exhausted. My blood pressure was varied. Sometimes it rose to 14
in a short period of time. Sometimes it dropped to nine. That's
why I felt unwell and I could not enjoy my meal. I had tension in
my <right> chest. At present, I have a severe headache."
Do you recall that in such a meeting with the leader of the East
Zone, this event took place; that is, the person became
unconscious and fell on the ground in the middle of the meeting?
A. No, I do not know and I did not attend such a meeting and I
never heard about a person falling off <and became unconscious>.
This is the first time that I saw this document and I did not
know where this meeting took place.
Q. You are related to So Phim, and can you tell the Chamber that
to your knowledge, did So Phim use other names or aliases while
he was Secretary of the East Zone?
A. Initially, he was known as So Phim and later on he was known
as So Yann. So he was known by both So Phim or So Yann.
Q. And amongst the high-ranking civilians or military in the East
Zone, was anyone known as Chhon?
A. Personally, I never heard of anyone named Chhon, and as I
said, I have not seen this document before.
Q. Regarding Telegram 91, dated the 10 December, and that
document is E3/8370:
"With respect to M-870: The enemy situation at the border; that
is, at Route 22, on the night of 9 December, the enemy entered
the Trach <> Khaol, and currently they stationed around Trapeang
Smach at Prey Baut Kang and Sapoun, west of Trapeang Phlong
village, near the vicinity of Preah Phdau village. We tried to
interrupt them and to ambush them so that they would be
separated.
In Svay village, the enemy intensified their attack and we had to
retreat to prepare ourselves to defend against the advancement in
Rumdeng, crossing Trapeang Phdau (phonetic); that is at Road 22,
to the east and south of Rumseng village. We prepared small
groups to attack them, and the 9 December, we killed 105
soldiers, and <186> of them were wounded and we destroyed <one
DK-75, six machine guns> and <5> tanks were destroyed as <the
other two> stepped onto mines. The enemy conceded that their
two-star general was killed. Wish you good health, <with great
success>."
Morning of the 10 December, signed by Chhon.
Mr. Witness, <you do not recall the name but> are you familiar
with this situation, because it happened at Road 22 and maybe you
are familiar with the geographical location of that Road 22? Does
the telegram content jog your memory?
A. I have just heard about the document. There was no individual
named Chhon <in the East Zone>. The situation mentioned in the
document, Trach Khaol, in fact, consisted of only my soldiers. So
the attack was launched against my soldiers at the time, and
these forces were -- the document, I believe, mentioned about the
soldiers from the Central Zone. Trach Khaol was the base where I
and my soldiers stationed<, from the west of Trapeang Phlong>.
These people, in fact, initiated a coup d'tat and attacked my
forces. <That is why I never saw it. They were the forces from
the Central Zone or the Southwest Zone.>
Q. There was no clear name of the one who issued a telegram, but
the <received> date was <10> December 1977 <at 13:15>. I asked
you about the situation happening at the time. My question is did
forces from the Central Zone come to station at the east with
your soldiers? You stated that there were only soldiers from the
East Zone who were there and they were on their own mastery to
defend the country.
A. Let me inform you, Mr. President. There were two situations
happening at the East. In 1977, we attacked Vietnam. After the
attack, Vietnam pushed into our base and they defeated us at that
location. We then were assisted by the soldiers from the Central
Zone, Ke Pauk. Ke Pauk, in fact, <> Ke Pauk forces were sent to
assist us, but <not to help us>, Ke Pauk<, in December '77>
attacked us at Trach Khaol, Veal Rumseng, Tuol Sangkae<. No one
based there, there> were <only> my soldiers <> based <right
there>. So these forces, the forces from the Central Zone <and>
the Southwest Zone went to attack my forces. This is the first
time that I saw the document.
Q. One situation that I emphasized is <the enemy conceded that>
one major general <of the division> was smashed. <At this point,
the victory claimed by the Kampuchean army in their war against
Vietnam.> That was within the report, and there was one sentence
stating that one <major> general was smashed and that major
general was part of the Vietnamese Army. And this information was
learned from the confession. Does this jog your memory that at
the time, a major general <inside a> tank <> was smashed? Do you
recall that?
A. I do not believe in such event. This is the report about the
achievement made by the unit. In fact, there was no <> major
general <> smashed <inside the tank>. The forces from the Central
Zone went to attack my soldiers and also, at the same time, the
Vietnamese troops. From <Trach> Khaol and other locations,
<including Prey Rumdeng,> my soldiers were stationed there<. No
Vietnamese presented there>. Again, this is the first time I have
seen the document. This is about the coup d'tat, <this clique>
killed Khmer people. I do not know about the attack against the
Vietnamese based on the document. <These are all fake documents;
they could maneuver whatever they wanted>.
Q. I have some other documents, and I would like to give you two
more documents for examination. The first document, E3/988 and
the second document is E3/905. They are all telegrams. The first
document, E3/988, Telegram Number 1:
"To the Beloved Brother,
Phim wanted to tell you about the situation of army in the
morning of 22 December. At 10 a.m. they attacked us successfully
at <Sa'am,> Ampuk, Chi Peang. And <at noon of> the <22nd>
December, one tank entered the rice mill warehouse <at the
crossroad of Kandaol Chrum> and there was another tank coming and
arrived at Bat Ponlea <village>, the east of Kandaol Chrum. The
first tank fired our rice truck at the warehouse <at Kandaol
Chrum>, and then that tank turned to National Road Number 7
eastward. That tank <also> came using National Road Number 7<.
They assembled at one place at Ta Hiev (phonetic). On the
afternoon of> the 21st (sic) December, we did not know the number
of the<ir tanks and infantry>. We <overwhelmed> them at that
location <of Tectona grandis forest at Ta Hiev (phonetic)
intersection in Anloung Treh (phonetic). We are now attacking and
containing them at this location>. Please Brother, respectfully
be notified, East Zone 22, December, Comrade Peam."
My first question is about the timing and the location of the
event where the attack happened and tanks were coming onto the
Kampuchean territory. Since you were stationed at that location,
did such an event happen?
A. This document is -- the information is correct. Comrade Peam
is mentioned in here. Peam was part of the staff office of the
East Zone. This report was made <for> So Phim. I recognize this
document.
Q. Thank you. And another document, E3/905, Telegram 09:
"Dear Respected and Beloved M-870,
About the Vietnamese situation on <2 (sic)> December <> 1977,
they attacked vigorously and captured the whole Kraek rubber
plantation, but workers in all villages withdraw and our
artillery troops also withdraw to the north part of Dambae. It is
learned that on the morning of December 23rd, 1977, the
Vietnamese moved through Veal Morl, to the plantation, and up to
go Ko Srok. During these two days, there had been no clashes with
our forces while people disorderly gathered and ran. There is no
information from Memot <factory> because the messengers have not
shown up yet. Based on the information from the soldiers, most of
them, they had a lot of trucks and tanks. There was confusion
among us and them. We could not distinguish between us and them,
especially our artillery unit."
The date is December 23rd, 1977. The author is Phuong.
My question to you is are you aware of the event and who is
Phuong?
A. I admit that this document originated from the East <Zone>.
This is the report. <I however was not sure about Phuong because
we never met.>The situation did happen in such a manner. There
were artilleries. I admit that the two telegrams made the reports
about the situation <for Ta Phim> and the reports originated from
the <East Zone>. I do not know well Phuong.
Q. <Since> you are aware of the situation and you admit that you
know and recognize the telegrams or documents<, we wish to show a
few more documents>. Do you know the position of Phuong, or don't
you know? What did he do back then?
A. I do not know his position, I mean, Phuong's position. I heard
from others, because we had different tasks to perform. I mean,
civilian officials had a different task to perform compared to
the military. We had separated work <at that time>.
Q. I have some other telegrams to ask you, and I will only select
<three> to show you.
Greffier, please bring the documents to the witness -- court
officer, rather, please bring the documents to the witness.
Please look at the first document, Telegram Number 7, E3/906:
"Dear Respected and Beloved M-870,
The situation of the Vietnamese aggressor on December 22, 1977 at
12. They expanded their spearhead from Ta Hiev (phonetic) to Bat
<Ponlea>, along National Road Number 7. Their northern spearhead
was stretched to Srama, Toek Chrov, Neang Tin and Khnol. Their
tanks were driven on many handicaps who then scattered and ran
into different directions. Especially yesterday, 22nd, they
caught approximately 100 people <of mobile unit> who were
harvesting rice. Their troops moved quietly<; they would not make
sound by firing> and when they entered the villages, they burned
down houses. Da village was completely burned. In the previous
occasion, I did put <direct> communication in play both in the
battlefields and at Brother Phim's place to understand the
situation, but now it is cut off. We learned through messengers
and people who ran and creeped. Some of the people at Kraek
rubber plantation have moved to Chhlong. We have no information
regarding Memot. From my place to Chhlong, only 30 combatants are
kept for guarding purpose. December 23, 1977, <Phuong.>"
You stated that you do not know Phuong, but you said that the
situation occurred in the East Zone. This is a telegram and you
have heard my reading. Can you confirm whether or not the
situation mentioned in the telegram occurred, or do you know or
are you aware that this event happened?
A. The situation took place. I admit that I recognize <these
three> document<s>.
Q. Another document, E3/108 (sic), Telegram Number 9: <To beloved
M-870>
"The Yuon captured National Road Number 7 from Phum Steung to
Psar Memot. The north of the National Road, they reached Neang
Teut, <Khnao, Cheach> and the rubber plantation <was captured>.
They took the rubber and took a lot of soil. And the west of
Memot, they reached Spean. Workers from Memot <factory> also
retreat. <In the morning of the 24th, they came from the east of
the factory.> Enemy took the stuff of the people and arrested
<more than 200> people <of a mobile unit> for <brutal>
mistreatment. They ripped off clothes worn by male and female<,
but didn't shoot them in front of them>. And on 24 December, we
lost control. Soldiers were scattered. We could not communicate
one another. We could not communicate with the commanders. The
ammunition<, transported for fighting at the border,> were seized
by the enemies in large amounts. We learned <direct> information
from the battlefield because we had communication with the rubber
plantation and our soldiers. I used radio <connect the
battlefront. On the other hand, militiamen at rubber plantation
are monitoring the enemy closely> . <> For me, I would like to
ask Angkar to intervene as soon as possible. Bong Phim sent to me
a letter. Please send forces to assist us at Chamkar Kausu rubber
plantation <to move troop for immediate combats>. I have <agreed
to do that by assigning> the Unit Kor -- Unit K, <we therefore>
asked Angkar to ask the rubber plantation to send <8-Kho> forces
and I asked Angkar to provide weapons for <4->Kho (phonetic),
included the anti-tank weapons <to supply the rubber plantation
office immediately at Chup)>. Dated
December 1977, Phuong."           24   Are you aware of the situation? Did this event take place at the
time?
A. From the reading and from my review, the document was from the
rubber plantation or Chamkar Kausu. Phuong was part of the rubber
plantation of the East. Phuong was not within the military, was
not within the army. The rubber plantation made the report to the
East.
Q. The report was addressed to M-870. The document is E3/908. The
document number is in fact E3/908 <due to the mistake of
interpretation>. <For the record, the telegram> that I have shown
to the witness <for discussion and examination> consists of only
one page.
The last document, Telegram 08, E3/909:
"To Beloved and Respected M-870,
We have just received information from the rubber plantation of
Memot that on December 23rd, 1977, the 'Yuon' moved from Dang to
the worksite of western part of Memot rubber plantation. They
caught <a> truck loading full of rice, and one of their other
spearheads directed along the National Road leading to Memot
<market> and Khnang Krapeu. However, we were not able to grasp
the information on what was happening there.
An analysis is that they plan to attack and capture Region 21,
starting from Pratheat - Chhlong, road eastward, and they have
<capacity to do so> because we have no big forces. We only have
militiamen guarding the rubber plantation <who could not carry
out the combat>. Our main forces have been sent to the border a
long time ago. <> We had no control. Our main forces scattered
and we could not communicate with one another. I, myself, have
witnessed the situation and there is a relevance to divisional
commanders. December 24, 1977, Phuong."
You have heard the content of the telegram. Are you aware of the
occurrence? Do you recall that the event happened in that
location on the specific date that I read to you?
A. Let me inform you, Mr. President, we were responsible for our
spearheads. <According to such official reports,> Phuong was in
charge of the rubber plantation. He was working in the civilian
sphere <, not the military affairs>. He made the reports to the
<zone office>. <> The "Yuon" was in fact entered and penetrated
at 154 area, and I was based at area 156 <so I did not actually
witness it>. Again, Phuong was in charge of rubber plantation. I
recognize <these four> document as well. These documents are the
reports to the zone, but I, myself, did not witness the actual
event or occurrence. We were 30 kilometres perhaps apart <from
each other, between Memot and Kraek>. But this is the way that
the event unfolded.
Q. Thank you. And my last question is for your clarification. You
have already stated, but I recall that you did not answer right
to my question concerning the <fronts> fighting <against> Vietnam
and about the scope of destruction. I asked you about how large
the destruction was. So what was the size or scope of
destruction? I mean the fatalities and the property destroyed.
Could you tell the Court?
A. Mr. President, it is based on the experience <at> my
spearhead. I cannot give you the presumption or assumption of
what happened in other spearheads. I was at Spearhead 156. Based
on my experience at the battlefield, we had a lot of casualties
and we lost a very limited number of property, but Vietnam's side
had lost a lot in terms of property. We seized weapons from
Vietnam. <Later on, the struggle, we> could destroy a few tanks.
We received news through the radio communication, and when we
attacked<,> we also pushed back and forth and tried to capture
the radio communication system. <It was a very brutal fight. It
was 20 or 30 metres in distance. So both sides had immense
casualties. As I told you earlier, we had to carry our wounded
soldiers via underground. We could not do that on the ground.>
<Even at> Pong (phonetic) village <north of Trapeang Phlong>, the
battlefield at Pong (phonetic) village lasted for three days. We
could smell only the <cordite. We lost appetite>. <Small weapons
were not heard any more, we heard only> B-105 and B-130. <After
the getting close to Pong (phonetic) village, only one trench,
the Vietnamese side lost 50 soldiers, but we> lost a lot as well.
We had many casualties as well, so <that was> the bloody war,
bloody conflict with one another. Wars occurred in Kampuchea, war
against Americans, war against Lon Nol<, war against the Khmer
Rouge, but it was not as worse as the war against the
Vietnamese.> So that was <> the bloody wars.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
Judge Lavergne, you may now proceed.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I would like to let you know that there are other telegrams that
might <possibly> be presented to the witness, in particular,
Telegram E3/891, E3/983, E3/922, E3/251, E3/901,  and
E3/1067. These telegrams were printed and they are also in Khmer.
Maybe we could give them to the witness this evening so that he
may read them and possibly tomorrow morning, we could <briefly>
question him about this to see what he thinks about these
documents.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. It is now time for adjournment. The Chamber will
resume its hearing tomorrow, Wednesday, 2nd November 2016, at
9:00 a.m.
Tomorrow, the Chamber will conclude the hearing of the testimony
from witness 2-TCW-1065. Please be informed and please be on
time. The Chamber is grateful to you, Mr. Witness. The hearing of
your testimony has not come to a conclusion yet. You are
therefore invited to come and testify once again tomorrow.
Thank you, Mr. Chan Sambour, the duty counsel. You are also
invited to come here once again tomorrow.
Court officer, please work with the WESU to send the witness back
to the place where he is staying and please invite him back into
the courtroom tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.
Security personnel, I instruct you to bring the two accused, Nuon
Chea and Khieu Samphan, back to the ECCC detention facility and
have them return into the courtroom tomorrow before 9:00 a.m.
The court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1603H)
