P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
We are going to hear the civil party statements; those who have
already been decided by the Court to choose them to hear before
the Chamber.  We are going to hear only some of the civil parties
among the 93.
Before we proceed to hear the statements of the civil parties,
the Greffier is now instructed to report the attendance of the
parties to the proceedings and the person concerned.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the parties to the proceedings today are all
present.  The civil parties E2/85 and E2/89 are all present and
awaiting call from the Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Before hearing the statement of the civil parties, the Chamber
would like to enquire to the defence counsel.  The Chamber refers
to the list of civil party applications which was read out during
the hearing of the 10th of August.  For planning purposes, the
Chamber would like to know if the defence intends to challenge
any of the applications of civil parties who will not be heard in
person.
Accordingly, it requests the defence to indicate which
applications it wants to challenge and, in one or two sentences,
the reasons for the challenge.  The defence will be provided with
an opportunity to reason their challenge in more detail orally at
the end of the hearing of the witnesses currently scheduled.  The
civil parties will be provided with an opportunity to respond
orally.
So we have already confirmed this last week, so if the defence is
ready to respond to this, please express your position in
relation to the civil parties.  The Chamber has decided not to
call to come before the Chamber, and the purpose of this reason
is that we would like to make sure that the proceedings are more
expeditious.  So the floor is yours, the defence counsel.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Originally, 20 civil parties were to
be heard by the Chamber and the defence said last Monday --
presented its observations regarding the joining of five civil
parties and I express greatest reservations regarding the joining
of five civil parties.
And then E2/50 said to us, and provided us with a certain number
of documents, from which we can draw that this person was,
indeed, detained at S-21.  So I want to specify, for reasons of
clarification, that the defence has no objections regarding this
person joining our civil party.
And, again, regarding the 20 civil parties that were originally
going to be heard, the defence has noted that two of them -- that
is to say, E2/81 and E2/82 -- have waived their request to be
heard.  However, these two people still would like to remain as
civil parties and so, therefore, we repeat the position that we
stated last Monday; that is to say that we have the greatest
reservations on the strong grounds of their actions.  And I'd
like to specify that it's the same thing regarding the civil
party that was supposed to be heard and the following ones,
E2/77, E2/34.
Now, regarding civil parties whose hearing has not been
requested, the defence has a certain amount of reservations
regarding a certain number of these civil parties for two
specific reasons.
The first one is that some of the civil parties do not provide
the necessary evidence that can tie them with the victim.  They
are in the three civil parties for which it is absolutely clear
that this link with the victim is not clear and we're thinking,
in particular, about E2/22 and E2/37 who say that they are
friends, and only friends, and friends of people that they have
lost at S-21.  And we're also thinking about civil party E2/66
who does not state in any clear way his link with the victim.
And the second reason for which the defence expresses
reservations regarding the joining of civil parties is that there
exists in the case file no elements or -- in any case, no
elements that are sufficiently clear that demonstrate that the
victims that are represented have been, indeed, detained at S-21.
And the accused did a bit of research in order to see if the
victims brought up were, indeed, in the prisoner lists and he did
not find their names.
So it is the same for --this is the case for the following civil
parties, therefore:  E2/30; E2/35; E2/38; E2/41; E2/49; E2/57;
E2/62; E2/63; E2/64; E2/65; E2/69; E2/70; E2/71; E2/73; E2/74;
E2/75; E2/76; E2/81; E2/82; E2/83; D25/15; D25/20.
And regarding all of these civil parties, I would like to repeat,
the defence did not find sufficient evidence in the case file
that the victims that they brought up have indeed been detained
at S-21.
And, as well, for some of the civil parties that I've just
mentioned, we do not have in the case file the proof of any kind
of link or family link between the victim that is brought up and
the civil party.  So for certain civil party parties, there's not
only no clear demonstration that the victims were indeed detained
at S-21 but, as well, there is a lack of proof that there is any
kind of tie with the victim.
And I'm thinking, in particular, about the following civil
parties:  E2/30; E2/35; E2/38; E2/41; E2/57; E2/63; E2/64; E2/65.
And, in particular, in which the civil party indeed mentions a
name, but without indicating the name of this uncle:  E2/69;
E2/70; E2/71; E2/73; E2/74; E2/75; E2/76; E2/81; E2/82; E2/83;
D25/15; D25/20.
So we would like to remind, however -- and the Chamber indeed
stressed this -- that it is the civil parties' responsibility to
provide the proof of the link that unites them with the victim.
So the defence, therefore, believes that the civil parties have
to provide this proof and have to demonstrate this link with the
victim.
This is, Mr. President and Your Honours, the defence's stance
regarding the civil parties, however, I'd like to specify that
Mr. Kaing Guek Eav would like to keep the possibility -- even
regarding the civil parties that he does not challenge -- to make
a few observations.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have just heard the defence and I would like to have, however,
a little bit of clarification in relation to what I just heard.
You indicated that in certain cases there was no evidence in the
civil party applications -- any kind of evidence of a family tie
with the victims.  Do you mean by this that only the children and
the grandchildren of the victims are admissible to be joined as
civil parties or is it in more generic terms, the absence of any
kind of family tie because it's not exactly the same thing?
You also say that in certain cases there is no proof of the
reasonable grounds for this application can we consider that this
absence of family link, does this jeopardize the well-foundedness
of the application?
MS. CANIZARES:
Indeed, I think that in more generic terms since a certain number
of civil parties talked about an uncle or a nephew, well, we can
indeed speak about family link more than just being a child or
grandchild.  And, as of the moment, when the civil parties will
not provide the proof of this family link, we can also believe,
therefore, that it is not in their interests to act before your
Chamber and, therefore, their application would not be
admissible.
And I would like to specify, however, if you please give me the
leave, that the accused is perfectly willing, and the defence as
well, to review its stance depending on eventual evidence that
could be submitted to it by the civil parties.
The observations that are here presented are only presented here
on the basis of the absence in the file of these elements and
since we have, for example, for one of the civil parties that
must be heard, reviewed our position because our colleagues
presented us with documents that indeed demonstrated the
well-foundedness of their application.  And if the civil parties
are able to provide elements that would demonstrate this
well-foundedness, well, the defence is perfectly willing to
review its stance.
We wish, however, that these documents be communicated to us
before the civil parties are heard or before the application is
brought up here in Court.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, the defence counsel, for expressing your position in
relation to your challenge concerning the civil parties, the 20
civil parties.
And with this information, the Chamber believes that the civil
party lawyers will take into consideration and the Chamber will
take this opportunity to make sure that our next schedule is well
calculated and that time will be well allocated for such
challenge in the future.
Next, the Chamber would like to advise the civil party lawyers as
the following:
The Chamber hereby recalls the rights of the Chamber to leave the
questioning of persons appearing before it.  In the directions
given by the Greffiers of the Trial Chamber on the 5th of August
2009, document number E115, the Chamber delegated the
responsibility of leading the appearance, questioning of civil
parties, to the civil party lawyers.
The Chamber reminds that such responsibility includes the duty of
the civil party lawyers to ask clear questions that are relevant
to Case 001 and to guide the civil party should he or she make
statements that are relevant to Case 001 or not confined to the
description of the injuries suffered by the civil party.
The Chamber recalls, in particular, paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of
the direction that emphasize that civil party statements have to
be clearly relevant to Trial 001.
Consequently, the President expects each civil party lawyer to
introduce his or her civil party with answers to these questions:
(A) What is the name and brief identifying particulars of the
civil party?  This might be an ID, electoral card, et cetera.
(B) What is the relationship or connection to the person who has
suffered harm at S-21 including S-24?  Does the civil party have
proof of a relationship?  If so, can it be put before the Trial
Chamber?
(C) Are there any relevant documents to confirm the presence of
the person at S-21?  For example, biography, confession, entry
into the prisoners lists, photographs, et cetera, and the
relevant ER number.
(10) The civil parties will be allowed to speak only on facts
which are relevant to Case 001.  It is the lawyer's
responsibility to ensure that the statements of the civil parties
are relevant to the case.  The civil parties will be allowed to
read a statement prepared beforehand.
[09.26.46)
(11) The President does not wish to interrupt the statements of
civil parties but, in the interests of ensuring that all can be
heard, he will do so, particularly if questions are not relevant
or time is exceeded.
So this is just the instruction so that the statements of the
civil party can be framed to the facts and that times allocated
are well used.  So the statements of the civil parties can be
used one-third of the allocated time and the portions of which
can be used for the debates in the Chamber if the Chamber or the
Judges so need.
Mr. Alain Werner, you take the floor.
MR. WERNER:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Your Honours, good morning.
May I be allowed just to ask one question of clarification about
what you now discussed before and what my learned colleague from
the defence told us?  Can I just ask one question of
clarification?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please proceed with the question.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you.  Because some challenge was expressed about some
documents of the link, I would need to know -- just for us to be
completely clear -- because indeed it would require us quite
quickly to go back and check the documents.  And, of course, we
understand that if indeed some documents are missing we should as
soon as possible find these documents and then, in advance of the
discussion, show them to the defence.
Now, am I correct to understand that the discussion between -- in
this Chamber about those documents missing or the link missing --
would take place at the end of the 18 civil parties so that will
be either on Thursday the 27th or Monday the 31st?  That would be
-- so in 10 days, two weeks -- that would be the time where we
would be -- we should be ready to discuss the matter.  Is that
correct?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Due to the submissions by the civil party counsel, which is
related also to the questions posed by the defence counsel, and
their position in objections and the reasons that they have given
to the Chamber; in addition to the scheduling of the trial
proceedings for the civil parties who have now been objected by
the defence counsel and who are scheduled for the hearing at the
end of our trial proceedings -- that is, after hearing the
testimonies of the defence counsel and before the final
submission -- so there is still plenty of time, and all the
related matters to the identification or observations in relation
to the objections raised by the defence counsel, the Chamber will
not consider this matter at the moment.
And the Chamber would like only to know regarding the preliminary
objections made by the defence counsel on which civil parties and
what are their preliminary reasons for such objections, and we
will discuss more at the end of the hearing of these particular
testimonies as scheduled by the Chamber.
MR. WERNER:
And, Your Honour, may I just add that of course we will do
whatever -- we are going to, starting today, to go back and to
check the documents, and if some documents are indeed missing
then we will, as soon as possible, produce them and then you will
be aware and you will know what is going on between the parties,
if for some of them things are clarified.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you invite the counsel for E2/85 into the
Chamber?
I notice the counsel for civil party group 3.  You may proceed.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Thank you for giving me the floor.
I would simply like to have clarification concerning the manner
in which the civil parties will be heard, since it is a civil
party which was constituted within our group, and I will be the
one who will need to ask questions to the civil parties.
It seemed to me that you had just indicated that counsel for the
civil party could indeed be in charge of interrogation but it had
appeared to me initially that the civil party would first make a
deposition and that it was only once this had been done that
counsel would intervene.
Is it, therefore, possible to intervene during the deposition of
the civil party, for instance, in order to help the person to
continue with the deposition, or is it necessary to wait until
the deposition is over in order to take up certain points that
were mentioned during that deposition?
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for raising the matter.  The Chamber would like to
inform all the civil party lawyers that in the questionings
before the Chamber, the civil party's interest is just part of
the criminal proceedings.  It is the civil party lawyers who
represent their clients to adhere and to protect the interest and
their rights, and it is whether the lawyers want to interrupt the
testimonies or the statements of the civil parties who are their
clients -- it is up to them to make their own decisions
individually.  And the Chamber does not intervene if the lawyer
wishes to interrupt the statements or the testimony of their
respective clients.
However, the Chamber would like to remind you that you better
focus primarily on the relevant facts, as I have stated earlier,
so that the proceedings before this Chamber would be smooth and
the time allocations shall be strictly adhered to, and the time
allocation is based on an individual civil party and it is not a
common time allocation for all the civil parties.
This is done in response to the request made by the civil party
lawyers who submitted the total duration of the times of the
testimonies of their respective clients.  So you have to make a
judgment amongst yourselves for the time and also the time to
leave for other parties -- for instance, the defence counsel --
to question your client.
If you have any matters you wish to clarify regarding this point,
you may continue.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
No, I have no further statement to make.  Thank you, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you invite the civil party E2/85 into the
Chamber?
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam, what is your name?
A. My name is Martine Lefeuvre and I was the wife of Ouk Ket.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I will be 57 in September.
Q. Where is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. I live at 96 grid La Fromondière in Limon, France, and I am a
nurse, state diploma nurse.
Q. In this case, you have applied as a civil party.  Are you
seeking reparations by yourself or you will waive these rights to
your lawyer to act on your behalf?
A. I will leave it to my lawyer to seek reparations.
Q. What is your connection to the crimes alleged on the accused
Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch?
A. Mr. President, I would like to present to you in a certain
fashion the chronology of our life and explain to you how it is
that I am before you today.
I met my husband in 1970.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the civil party lawyer.  You may
proceed.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Yes, Mr. President, if you will allow me.
You had indicated that it was possible to make a brief
presentation concerning the case prior to Mrs. Lefeuvre
presenting her vision of things and before she made her
deposition.  And I wanted indeed to indicate to the Chamber that
this is a case file AD-5 concerning Ouk Ket who was an engineer
and diplomat, third secretary at the Cambodian Embassy in Senegal
when he was recalled by the Foreign Ministry of Cambodia in 1977
in order to return to Phnom Penh.
He returned to Phnom Penh and later on Mrs. Lefeuvre learned that
he had been executed in Tuol Sleng on 9 December 1977 at S-21,
since his name can be found in the list of persons executed on
that day; a list in fact which is annexed to the case file.  This
is reference ERN in French, 00339169, in Khmer, 00281230, and for
the English, 00328268.
So we have this element which makes it possible to establish the
connection between the presence of Ouk Ket in S-21 as well as to
document his execution since we are in possession of the exact
date of his execution.
Further, in the case file, we have a photo of Ouk Ket under
reference 00285014.  There's no Khmer or English ERN reference.
And we have in fact recovered the name of Ouk Ket which was found
in two documents that are also in the case file.  This is the
addendum produced in the framework of our own case file as CPA,
that is a list of prisoners prepared by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.  That is in case D25/59.  The ERN reference for Khmer is
00188859; in English, 00239016.
As well as having found his name in the list of prisoners
produced by the prosecutor, and here again in a specific case
E6/81 with ERN reference 00330082; ERN English, 00330082.
Further to that, in the case file of Mrs. Lefeuvre, we have
produced, apart of course from the information form and identity
documents as well as registry writings proving Mrs. Lefeuvre's
identity, but also proving that she was indeed married to Ouk Ket
with whom she had two children.  So we have supplied the
engineering diploma which was obtained by Ouk Ket in France as
well as the diplomatic passport which had been given to Mrs.
Lefeuvre at the time in which it appears that her diplomatic
passport allowed her also to have Cambodian nationality as well
as her children.
Now I don't know if you need the ERN references for all of these
documents.  However, we have obviously produced all these
documents and these documents are in the case file, this perhaps
in order to avoid over-extending the debate.  If you wish to have
the references, of course I will gladly give them to you at any
time you shall request them.
So these are the first basic elements I wanted to submit to you
in order for you to have a clear idea of the evidence that is to
be found in the case file, the various supporting elements that
are there.  There is no difficulty in ascertaining that Ouk Ket
is clearly related to this victim.  Well, thank you, Mr.
President.  Unless you have any further observations that you
wish to make, Mr. President, I believe that Mrs. Lefeuvre can
indeed begin with her deposition.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity to Madam to
describe to the Chamber the relevant events which led you to
become a civil party in this case, so that the Chamber as well as
the public can understand the events.  You may proceed.
MS. LEFEUVRE:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Well, I will first of all give you a
chronology of our life.
I met Ouk Ket in Paris when I registered for English courses in
Jussieu. Ouk Ket was finishing his studies as a statistics
engineer, a diploma which he obtained at the end of 1970.  He had
come to France in 1968 on a grant from the French Foreign
Ministry since he was an excellent student in Cambodia.
In 1970, at the request of Prince Sihanouk, he decided to support
the United National Front of Cambodia under the presidency of the
prince.  My father-in-law was the major domo of King Sihanouk and
had instructed him never to betray the prince.  We were wedded in
October 1971 and my husband was given his diplomatic function as
third secretary of the Cambodian Embassy in Senegal by the Royal
National Unity Government of Cambodia.  He left in December 1971
and I followed in January 1972 in Dakar, Senegal, in Africa.
In 1973 and in 1975 I gave birth to my two children -- a boy,
Makara, and a daughter, Neary.  In 1975, after the withdrawal of
US troops from Cambodia, Ket intended and wanted to return to his
country out of love for his country in order to take part in the
national reconstruction effort.  He was an intellectual, he had
skills and he wanted to take part in the reconstruction.  His
wish was to teach.
In April 1977 he received a correspondence from the Foreign
Ministry of Cambodia, requesting that he return to Phnom Penh.
Therefore, all four of us left Senegal by plane to Paris, where
we went to my birthplace to live at my parents' residence in
Limon.  We spent some three weeks there prior to Ket flying to
Cambodia on
June 1977 via Beijing.            7   During his journey he sent me two postcards which I received
during June.  One had been posted in Pakistan and one had been
posted in Beijing, where he told us of his love for us  --
myself, children, family -- written both in Khmer and in French,
and the postcard that was posted in Beijing says, amongst other
things, "On 11 June 1977 I will be in Phnom Penh."
This postcard is in fact co-signed by two other persons who knew
me and whose name I recovered later in the Tuol Sleng list.
After that I received no news whatsoever from my husband.  Since
his silence was a major subject of concern, since it was not
usual for him to leave us without any news, in September 1977
already I went to the Chinese Embassy in Paris, Avenue George V,
in order to ask the Chinese to do something in our favour so that
I may have some news about my husband.
I went there with my two children, who at the time were two and
four and a half years old.  The person I met there and to whom I
had handed an identity picture of my husband to demonstrate that
he was indeed my husband, showed it to my four and a half year
old son and said to him, "Do you know the person on the picture?"
And my four and a half year old son said, "Yes, of course, it's
daddy."  I encountered great difficulty to obtain that the
embassy would intervene and in the end the embassy refused to
help me.
It should be known also that in September 1977 Ket had been gone
for three months and I learned later that at that time he was in
Tuol Sleng and that he was still alive and that we might have
been able to do something in order to prevent his death.
So I went home and during 1978 I contacted Amnesty International
as well as the International Red Cross and of course I followed
all the news concerning Cambodia and I learned at the end of 1978
of the conflict with Vietnam.
At the beginning of 1979 I received a letter from Mr. Chan
Youran, who was the boss, who was the ambassador of my husband in
Senegal, and he was at the head of a delegation which went to
Switzerland, in Geneva, representing Cambodia.  In his letter,
which you will find in the case file, he told me, "Ket was fine
before my departure when I left the country."  So I was very
surprised and in order to obtain news and information about my
husband I took the train, with my two children, and travelled to
Geneva in order to meet this delegation with the hope that the
delegation could give me some good news.
Indeed, he confirmed that Ket was fine before he left but he was
unable to tell me where he was, in what state he was in and what
he was doing in Cambodia.  I returned home convinced that he had
not met my husband and that this was a lie.  I wrote a letter,
therefore, to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, whom I had had opportunity
to meet in 1973 in Dakar, Senegal, during his African tour, and
the prince replied to me by telegram in May 1979 wherein he asked
me to contact Mr. Chan Youran , who at the time was a roving
representative for Cambodia, and Mr. Chuon Prasith who
represented Cambodia at the United Nations.
I already know the answer since I presented it.  So I continued
following the events in Cambodia and on the 2nd of December 1979,
I travelled to the Pavillion Bertel outside of Paris where Prince
Sihanouk was giving a conference on the state of Cambodia, the
current state of Cambodia.   And I asked him where my husband
might be and he says he doesn't have any idea.
But Mr. Thiounn Prasith is there as well, and I ask him the same
question, "Where is my husband?  Where is my husband, Ouk Ket?"
And he answers me, "Don't try to bargain your life for him."  I
am absolutely flabbergasted by such an answer.
During the entire course of 1979, I met many Cambodians who were
fleeing from their country, in particular refugees, as well as
intellectuals that I had had the opportunity of meeting in Paris
when I was living at the Pavillon de Cambodge with my husband at
the Cité Universitaire.  Some of them had been detained at the
Terres Rouges and their accounts were absolutely horrific.
And at the same time, he gives me Mr. Ho Nim's confession to
read, Mr. Ho Nim's confession at Tuol Sleng and then I begin
saying to myself that something very serious happened to my
husband.
At the end of December and at the beginning of 1980, with the
help of an organization in France called L'association de Femme
Khmer, the organization for Khmer women, and whose president is a
French woman who comes to help women who are dismayed (sic) in
France; listens to what I have to say regarding my husband's
silence, I should say, and decides to help me by buying an
aeroplane ticket for me to go look for my husband in the refugee
camps in Thailand, and to try to also find my Cambodian family.
Therefore, I arrived on Christmas Day, 1979 on the Thai/Cambodia
border on the Thai side, and it is a French doctor, a
paediatrician who is the son of this woman who is the president
of this organization, who receives us and who will help me during
my entire stay there.
I am going to discover in these camps the entire dimension of the
horror -- of the horror that the people that I had known before
were enduring, as well as the Cambodian population.
This was the rainy season.  We were walking through mud and I
would roll up my sleeves in order to help.  I'm not yet a nurse
back then and it is as of that moment that I will take that
degree.
So, therefore, I remain in these refugee camps.  Every day we
bring five or six children, small children five to six months
old, infants who are dying because of malnutrition or
dehydration, and I do whatever I can to help all of these people.
I shared their daily life.  We are living under plastic tents
that are supported by wooden poles.  There are no toilets.
And then I am able to find friends who had known my husband.  So,
therefore, I am in the camp of Khao I Dang and there I meet Mr.
Hou Tong Hoeun who tells me, "Martine, you came because I sent
you a letter in France.  And I answer him, "No, I didn't receive
your letter".
And then he explains what the letter was about which I will then
discover when I return back to France.  And he says, "You know, I
worked at Tuol Sleng for four months".  And I said to him, "What
is Tuol Sleng?"  And he explained to me that it is an
extermination camp and "I found your husband's name in the Tuol
Sleng files".
And when I discovered this data -- when I returned -- that had
been scribbled on a piece of newspaper.  It was written down
indeed, "Martine, Ouk Ket was exterminated at Tuol Sleng", and
for me having gone to the refugee camps this allowed me to
understand the magnitude of the dismay of all of the Cambodians.
So, therefore, I returned to Paris and I am completely diminished
and I decide to take the examination to become a nurse, which I
passed in June 1980.
Back in France, I must reorganize my life without my husband and
I must explain to my children what happened to their father and
how they will have to grow up without their daddy.  And up until
then, I was hoping to find my husband again.
I have no official documents.  I am a widow.  My children are
orphans and I must tell them the truth with a lot of hardship
because already for myself it's something that is tremendously
difficult, accepting this reality.
So they are four-and-a-half years old and seven years old and my
son, as well as my little daughter, ask me everyday, "Have you
seen Daddy?  Will we see Daddy again?" because this -- and this
was a like motive of the two previous years -- and I must tell
them, no, they will never see their Daddy again.
So therefore I take the exam.  I passed the exam to become a
nurse and I studied for three years.
And, in parallel, I tried to bring together a whole dossier with
all information that I can get on Cambodia, particularly
regarding Tuol Sleng, and I discovered little excerpts of this
madness.  I became seeing how Ket was attracted to Cambodia and
how Cambodia absolutely grinded him.
So, therefore, we go on with our lives trying as best as possible
to have a normal life, but it's of course very difficult.
And in February 1990, in a local paper from my hometown, I
learned that a French woman is the president of an organization
where the Phnom Penh agricultural school is linked with the
agricultural school of my hometown.  I contact this woman, who
tells me that she is leaving the following week to Cambodia, and
she asks for the lists of my Cambodian family members.  She tells
me that she will do all that she can to find their trace.
And, indeed, two weeks later I receive a letter from Cambodia and
it is my mother-in-law who is writing to her son in this letter.
This letter is in Khmer and I'm able to follow a bit of it.  I
understand, therefore, that among the 11 family members, four of
them survived -- my mother-in-law and her three youngest
children.  So therefore we write to each other.  I tell her that
her son probably went through Tuol Sleng and she asks to see us.
And with my children for a whole year we tried to bring together
funds so that we can travel to Cambodia and buy three aeroplane
tickets.
And we ask ourselves, what are we going to find?  What are we
going to find when we arrive regarding the family and regarding
the country?  We land in Pochentong Airport on July 16th 1991.
This was a very emotional moment because we are following Ket's
traces, who had returned in 1977, and we're trying to imagine
then what he was expecting from this return.
[10.11.50}
And for all three of us, it was a terrible shock as soon as we
landed.  Everything was broken down, and we go live with my
mother-in-law who lives in a traditional Cambodian house on
stilts in the suburbs of Phnom Penh, and we sleep just like the
Cambodians, that is to say on the floor.  There is no water, no
running water.  There is no electricity, and they are completely
without any -- in total poverty.
Up until 1975, the entire family of 10 was living at the Royal
Palace and they had a decent lifestyle.  Therefore, ending up at
such a low level was a shock and my father-in-law, the family
head, was exterminated and therefore my mother-in-law had a lot
of hardship facing daily life.
And we became very sick and my son almost died of dysentery at
the age of 18.  Two days after we arrived, therefore, on the 18th
of July 1991, we travelled; we go to S-21.  And when we arrive in
this place, which was formerly a high school, we are of course
completely overtaken by the horror.  And we begin looking through
all of the photographs that are lined up by trying to find Ouk
Ket's face, and we do not find him.
But I am able to recognize faces of Cambodians who were known
abroad.  All three of us are deeply saddened, of course, but more
than that even, we are very much angered and I have a hard time
telling my children to leave this place because their fists are
clenched and they're clenching their teeth before such a quantity
of horror.
And then the following days we go to Choeung Ek.  When we arrived
there, we are struck by the mausoleum where all of the skulls are
piled up, and we say to ourselves that Ket's skull is among all
of these thousands of skulls, and we look at the pits, which we
walk over.  There are teeth coming up through the ground, leg
bones, radiuses, pieces of shirts, strings, earth, were covering
the people who were killed there.  And we are completely
revulsed.
And in the weeks that follow, we return to Tuol Sleng and we are
set on finding the trace of my husband, the father of my
children, Ouk Ket -- set on finding his trace in this horrible
place.  And we arrive in the room where the archives are stored
and we begin opening the files and twice we find in a list my
husband's name.  And there is a list of 301 people that had been
typed and Ouk Ket's name is on line 43.
And it is written: Ouk Ket, 31 years old, Foreign Affairs
Ministry Base, Tung Toup (phonetic), Third Embassy Secretary.
His date of arrival at Tuol Sleng was June 15th 1977 and on top
of this sheet of paper it is written the lists of the 301 people
who have to be exterminated or exterminated on the 9th of
December 1977.  And I also find in this list the names of people
that I had known.  I photographed the entire place, saying to
myself that it will take time for me to digest what I have seen,
and I photographed in particular the photographs of the leaders
of this prison.  I do not know them.
But later on in France, when I returned to France, by having
their names translated, I will find the name of the accused and
of Mam Nai on the upper left hand corner, and just by looking at
their faces I say to myself that Ket must have had a pretty rough
time.
I note that these individuals are involved in my husband's death.
And when I see these terrifying faces, I can imagine how he
himself was terrified and then I decide that this crime will not
remain unpunished.  In 1993, back in France, and I receive a
letter from the International Red Cross confirming to me Ket's
stay at S-21; that he did indeed stay there from June 15th to
December 9th, 1997 in cell number 23 in room 2, Building C.  So,
therefore, I returned several times alone to Cambodia to
photograph this cell and all of the others as well and I also
returned to Choeung Ek so that I can recollect.
And I continue gathering the evidence and the information.  I am
looking for support from DC-Cam because now the UN is in Cambodia
at that time, and we finally are able to see Rithy Panh's film
which also relates Ket's story.  I have tried to sue for damages
in France.  It's very very difficult.
Cambodia is a real tense place back then, and then I start
learning about the creation of a hybrid Khmer UN Court and I
follow the very slow elaboration of -- constitution of this
Court, but I believe in it, but I really -- because I said to
myself that such atrocities cannot and must not remain
unpunished.  In 2008 therefore I meet the lawyers of the Avocats
sans Frontières organization and the case begins.  This is why
I'm very proud to be before you today.
But now I would like to speak to you about who was Ket and about
what he became.  So during the seven years that we spent
together, mainly in Senegal, Ket was somebody who was very kind,
well educated, delicate, generous, intellectually brilliant,
calm, jovial with a very nice Khmer smile, soft, interested in
all technological novelties, and we were a Franco-Khmer couple
whose children are born on the soil of Africa and this
three-continental contribution was the wealth of our family; a
family that was open to the world without any kind of prejudice
regarding race or religion or regarding lifestyle.
Ket knew how to dress as a westerner or as a Khmer without having
any trouble with this, depending on the circumstances -- an
adorable husband, a very affectionate father with a great amount
of attention for his children.  He would just step out of his
diplomat suit and dress up in his Khmer sarong and start cooking
for us some delicious Cambodian dishes, but he also enjoyed
French cooking, Senegalese cooking, Indian cooking or Lebanese
cuisine.
He was an excellent volleyball player.  We would often go to the
beach.  He was a musician without ever having studied music.  He
played guitar, mandolin, harmonica and the Cambodian flute with a
lot of virtuosity.  Life with him was pure happiness during seven
years.  And now I understand what happened to him in Cambodia
when he returned there on the 11th of June 1977, so therefore he
went to B-1, Grassum Borey Ty Muoy Tay Mun, which was the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Was he detained there in the cellars or was he there waiting to
be detained?  It's unknown because on the 15th of June he was
kidnapped with his hands tied behind his back, blindfolded and
brought in a truck, beaten in the face -- as we can see in his
photograph that we finally found.  When he arrived at Tuol Sleng
he was therefore tied up like a slave to a metal bar, chained up
in a filthy cell.
He was deprived of his most elementary rights, arbitrarily
detained because he was of course not entitled to a lawyer and he
doesn't know why he has to go to this hell.  He was deprived of
his most fundamental needs -- no food, no care, no medical care,
no hygiene, psychological solitude, torture with Nazi methods;
six months of this and I am sure that Ket was able to face it and
that he did everything in his power to be able to resist this and
to be able to return back to us one day.  We were like the
fingers of one single hand.
So now I understand his physical and psychological degradation.
I can picture it.  He died a slow death at S-21 in the most
complete secrecy, in solitude, and on the 9th of December 1977
murderers broke his skull at Choeung Ek and then cut his throat
while throwing him into a pit.  This is an absolutely inexcusable
murder.
And for the past 32 years Ket's absence is something that we
cannot bear.  It is a permanent absence.  My children grew up
without the presence of their father; a presence that was
comforting, a presence that would protect them; without his
affection, without a fatherly figure.  That is to say everything
that organizes the life of a child.  Ket's suffering was and is
still our suffering and it does not go away with time, and I can
tell you that the suffering in fact is more and more intense.  It
is like a gigantic screen that would be too close to our eyes.
Until today we still haven't found the body.  We do not have any
kind of restitution.  There has not been any tomb.  I have no
documents from the Cambodian authorities and the result for me is
complete human failure.  So therefore I came before this Chamber
in order to ask for justice to be done -- justice to be done for
this barbaric crime so that we can finally take into
consideration Ket's suffering and the suffering of all of the
other Cambodians, whether they were in S-21 or anywhere else in
the country, and so that they can also take into consideration
the suffering of the survivors.
I came here also before you in order to bring back Ket's dignity
that was stampeded at S-21; the dignity also of our French and
Cambodian family.  And I also came also a bit to refresh the
memory of somebody who seems to be suffering from amnesia.  The
person who created this murder is an intellectual who could have
stopped the extermination mechanism.  He studied as well; he went
to university.  You can make mistakes in life, of course.  You
can kill somebody by mistake which already in itself is homicide,
and a homicide that is punishable.  However, he had people
tortured and murdered; 17,000 people who were listed.  Of course
we are not including those who are not listed.  And for me he
should have committed suicide because if he was afraid of dying
himself, well this was not a reason for him to continue torturing
and to continue murdering.
There's a kind of a disbalance between the fear of dying and the
amount of people who were killed.  For me this is inadmissible.
I will speak rather in terms of vengeance and in terms of zeal.
Had this math professor forgotten to reflect, to think, to load
up on blood, on the shouts of the people being tortured, on
bodies for a period of nine years?  If one can't call this
enjoying a dirty job, then please tell me what else can it be.
As far as I'm concerned, this is an operation.  The death of
others was in fact his daily food.
And therefore, I feel that the punishment must be commensurate
with the crimes committed.  In other words, a maximum sentence.
I believe that we should not give more attention to that person
than to his victims because today the torturers continue to live
side by side with the victims and this is very detrimental to the
victims.  I would like it to be prohibited from the torturers to
have access to any source of profit related to the crimes
committed and the facts and the events between '75 and '79.  That
all documents, whether they be the confessions, the photographs,
the books, written by those who took part in these massacres,
that all of this be handed over to Cambodian and international
bodies.  And I could easily see a case number 1 working to refill
the roads in S-21 locations and others in order that they become
dignified.  I found a great deal of rubbish lying about and I
think that this is not appropriate.
I am also expecting from the Tribunal to have a pedagogical or
educational impact on the younger generation in order that this
new generation will fully absorb the fact that it is Khmer people
who killed Khmer people and that there is no room here for
negationism.  These facts cannot be denied and they have been
demonstrated.
I am also expecting that our family is not sent back to its
loneliness that we don't return to a situation where we were
simply abandoned for 32 years.  Ket's children and grandchildren
-- I have five and so does he -- needs to be reconciled with the
Khmer part of our family history and it isn't in S-21 or in
Choeung Ek that it is possible to do so.  These locations are the
shame of humanity.  We need a peaceful place here in Cambodia
that would be open to the Cambodian public.
We thought perhaps that a media library with the name of Ouk Ket,
that would be both Khmer and French-speaking in the neighbourhood
where Ouk Ket lived for the first 23 years of his life, and it is
by investing in education and culture that our sorrow could
perhaps be appeased and that the freedom of Ouk Ket and other
Cambodians who fell victim to this bloody regime may be restored.
I would like to conclude by stating that Ouk Ket today is more
present than ever in our hearts and that we love him and always
will love him.  His face is here before us.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time for a break.  The Chamber will take a 20-minute
break until 5 to 11 when we will resume to continue our
proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1036H to 1058H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
Judges of the Bench, do you have any questions to be put to this
civil party?
The Co-Prosecutors, do you have questions to be put to this civil
party?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, distinguished members of the Chamber, at this
point in time I would like to be sure that we don't speak before
the counsel for the CPA (sic) have finished because it seemed to
me that they also had questions to ask.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We would like to now give the floor to the civil party lawyer
group 3 to put questions to the civil party who is her client.
You take the floor.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.  In fact, I was wondering whether or
not I had misinterpreted the decision arrived at this morning and
I thought that perhaps, indeed, I should be speaking first.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
First of all, I wish to thank Mrs. Lefeuvre for her deposition
and for the dignity with which she spoke.  I know that today this
is a very difficult moment for you, Mrs. Lefeuvre, but it is a
moment that you have been waiting for over 30 years.  And you
have indicated to all the importance for you, the meaning for you
of this trial and the importance for you to have the ability to
testify before this tribunal.
I would like to come back to certain points in your deposition
and ask a few questions.  In particular, I would like to cover
the departure of Ket in 1977.  Could you tell us what was the
state of mind of your husband when he left?  Did he have any
doubts, fears?  Was he pleased to have been recalled to Phnom
Penh?
A. Ket was very happy to be able to return to Cambodia and take
part in national reconstruction.  As I said, he wanted to teach
because he said that there was nothing worse than ignorance.  And
so we stayed in Limon at my parents' residence and he seemed
confident.  As a matter of fact, we made some purchases in the
town where I live.  He bought the usual things; a raincoat,
shoes, a suitcase, sunglasses.
And in the bus on the way to these purchases, the bus was very
full and we were holding on to the leather straps of the bus and
I was looking at his face which I wasn't going to see for three
months because he had told me, well I will take the pictures of
the children and your picture with me and I will have a new
passport cut for you and in three months at the most we'll be
together again.
And I was looking at his face then and very handsome.  And an
instinctive sentence came out.  I told him, "if one day I were to
learn that you are dead, I will never believe that you died a
natural death.  You will have been assassinated".  And he looked
at me and tapped my cheek and said, "But, honey, Cambodians are
not savages."  And he was so sure of himself, when I heard that I
trusted him.  That's it.
Well, after that we know what happened.
Q. Wasn't it the case that he had in fact considered taking your
son with him on this journey at some point?
A. Well, our son, Makara, was four and a half years old.  And he
said, "Well I'm going back to Cambodia.  I'll be without the
children.  Do you think that I might perhaps bring Makara; would
that be a good thing?"
And he took very good care of the children when I wasn't around.
He could cook for them, feed them, wash them, play with them, and
I really saw no drawback to him taking our son along.  But at the
last minute he changed his mind and I believe that it was a very
good idea because we know what happened to the children of the
parents who were taken to S-21.
Q. So as far as you are concerned, he had no doubts or
suspicions?
A. No.  He said, "Well, perhaps I'll have to do some agricultural
work," and that must have been the worst possible thing for him,
what would seem most difficult for him.  How can one consider
going back to one's country if one is aware of the fact that they
are going to be killed?  One simply doesn't go back.
And so he went back in the state of mind, in full confidence.
Q. I would like to return to one detail, but simply in order to
avoid any problems with regard to this statement.
When you were in the camps in Thailand you met a person, a friend
of yours who indicated to you precisely what that person had seen
in Tuol Sleng where he had worked for a period of four months.
Could you clarify this statement?  Did he work in Tuol Sleng as a
prisoner or had that person worked in Tuol Sleng at the time when
Tuol Sleng was taken by the Vietnamese?  During which period did
that person work in Tuol Sleng?
A. Mr. Hou Tong Hoeun was one of our friends in Paris.  He had
returned to Cambodia to take part in the national reconstruction
and he himself became a prisoner in a camp for intellectuals in
Terre Rouge where he told me what he had experienced and how
things were run there.
And so when the Vietnamese came to Phnom Penh, he was free to do
what he wanted.  And I think, knowing him well, that he
discovered Tuol Sleng and he figured there must be people I know
who were taken and who had fallen in this trap.
So he worked -- I know not with which organization he worked.  He
told me he worked for three or four months.  So it wasn't as a
prisoner.  It was "to do research" and this is when he picked up
the names of our friends who had lived in France.  And we found
quite a few.
Q. Pardon me for returning to this event once more, but when you
learned about the death of your husband in Thailand, when you
were in that camp and you had to return to France, what did you
feel then in truth?  And how did you react in the first moments
when you learned that?
A. Well, I was crushed, devastated.  I didn't know what Tuol
Sleng was.  Hou Tong Hoeun explained that to me.  He said, "This
is a centre where people were exterminated," and my question was
why?  Why?  Why?
So I was in a rage, sadness to such a point that if I had had the
people before me who had touched a square inch of the skin of Ouk
or a hair of his head, then I would take them to court.  And so I
went back to France.  And in the plane I decided I would become a
nurse, but that I had to tell my children the truth which I was
unable to do for the first week because my suffering --  this
unbelievable pain, how I suffered, how I could tell them what
their father had suffered amongst all the other Cambodians.
And so since they continuously asked me for news about their
father, well I finally took the children in my arms and one
evening my son told me.  He said, Why aren't you giving me any
news about Daddy?"  And I said, "Well your Daddy is dead.  And
this is how it happened."
And he replied to me, "I will take revenge."  And that reaction
frightened me a great deal.
He said, "Mama, I will seek revenge.  I will always do good in
school but, in fact, the rest of the year he did very poorly and
with Neary, who also understood at four-and-a-half it was really
a struggle -- a real struggle.
So we were living being deprived of the affection of Ket, his
support, he was the head of the family.  His financial support as
well, the economic support was gone.  His affection was gone.
These people destroyed our family as they destroyed other
Cambodians.  It's unbearable.
BY MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS
Q. Excuse me.  I think I interrupted you, Mrs. Lefeuvre.
Tell me, at that time, to clarify things, you decided to reserve
your studies and to get a diploma because you had had to abandon
your studies in order to follow your husband.
Is it the case that this period was extremely difficult for you
from that point-of-view as well, given the fact that you were the
sole support in your family, the only one able to take care of
your children?  Did you receive any specific assistance from your
family?
And could you perhaps also tell us if the representations that
you had to make for years and years, if all of this had any
repercussions on the way in which you led your life and the way
in which your children lived.
A. Well, yes, of course.  I became the head of the family, so I
had to find the wherewithal to do this, to continue with my
studies, to be able to feed my children, to bring them the care
and the protection because the parents are the ones who are
supposed to raise their children and we have just been amputated
of the father, of his presence, his affection, his support.
And so my mother took care of the children when I went to class.
And the time I spent doing research is time that I did not give
to my children.  The money I put in airfares, return trips
between Cambodia and France looking for Ket, all of that was, of
course, at the expense of my family.
Q. Aren't you under the impression also that it was for your
family that you were doing this?
A. Of course.  It was necessary to climb back up the slope to
re-organize everything, to live with this tragedy, which still
has an impact on us today.  And as I have explained, the more
time passes and the more it's right in front of us, it is an
unforgivable crime, inexcusable crime.
Q. You spoke to us of your suffering.  Did you have any physical
consequences related to the suffering?
A. Well, in 1984 I had two stress ulcers, stomach ulcers.  I was
vomiting blood because I had to be everywhere at the same time.
I had to study; to support my children.  My daughter cried a
great deal, incessantly saying, "I want to see Daddy.  I want to
see Daddy."  My son was the same.
So we were unable to grieve.  No body, no restitution of body, no
tomb, dust at your neck, just like millions of Cambodians as
well.  This is a daily suffering.  There isn't a day I don't
think of it.
So I had these two ulcers, but I just had to clench my teeth and
make headway, ensure that my children would get an education;
that they would follow a course of study and try to make headway
in life.  When you're small, when you're four-and-a-half and
seven, how do you get started in life without your parents,
without your father who died an atrocious death -- incredible
cruelty?
So that is what I ask, that this be clearly understood and heard,
that people enjoyed killing others.  One cannot do that with
impunity for nine years.  That's not possible.
Q. Mrs. Lefeuvre, you chose to become a nurse, however, I know
that you were unable to continue to practice in a hospital
environment.  Can you tell us why?
A. Well, in the first years -- I have to go back in time -- I
really put my head down.  I was struggling and I was working in
medical resuscitation units, surgery units.  Then I worked at the
emergencies.
And the last three years, as I gradually learned piecemeal what
had happened to Ket, one day I received one bit of information.
We recovered his picture in February and I became unable to
practice my job.  When I saw the blood bags that had to be given
to the patients. I would vomit.  It was impossible.  I saw people
with injuries and it brought up Ket every time.  So I was unable
to continue; I couldn't continue.  So I chose a unit in a light
psychiatry ward.  It was too horrible.  I would see what happen
to my husband, struck on the back.  What did they do. did they
draw blood?  They struck him on the face.
There were people coming in with long hair, poor people, and I
was wondering perhaps he became like this; everything was
possible.  He had gone through it all and it was a shame for
mankind.
Q. Mrs. Lefeuvre, at present -- I apologize for asking this
question -- at present, are you in a position to forgive?
A. At this moment, no.  Forgiveness is a process and so first
there is a need to find the people who did this.
Then a judgement has to come in and depending on the punishment
-- and then there is reparation.  We have not experienced
reparation.  What was done to Ket is something that we feel in
our own body and in our own minds, and at this point I'm not
ready.
This is a process perhaps 30 years from now -- perhaps, it will
take that long to be able to forgive; the same amount of time
that we had to take in order to come to the truth.
Q. You always tried to find out Mrs. Lefeuvre -- you always tried
to understand; wasn't it the case that at some time, you just
wanted to give up; you were discouraged?  Didn't you give up this
quest at some point?
A. Well, research trying to find Ket is not something linear.  I
didn't start in '77 and crescendo; come to any result at some
point in time.  There were some very damaging moments when I
wanted to just put an end to it and wanted to put an end to
myself, but for my children I wanted to love.  I wanted to find
the truth.
At various points, there was major progress like when the
tribunal was created, but at other times, I was desperate.  I
would tell myself never fine and I couldn't cry in front of the
children.  I had to go forward; to be determined, to be tough.
They destroyed our life and that is unforgivable, inexcusable.
Q. Thank you, Mrs. Lefeuvre.  Personally, I have no additional
questions for you.  However, I know that you also don't have any
questions and you did not wish to ask the accused any questions.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
So personally, if the President will allow, on the basis of this
testimony, I would like to obtain specific information concerning
the process which was experienced by this diplomat -- these
intellectuals who were recalled to the home country; is it
possible -- Mr. President,- is it possible to question the
accused on this specific point in order that Mrs. Lefeuvre may,
at last, get an answer concerning the manner in which this
occurred?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Would the counsel wish to put this question by yourself or would
you wish the civil party to put question directly or you would
like to act on her behalf to put such question or do you think
she agrees that you proceed with the question on behalf of her?
Please clarify this.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
The question that I would like to ask on behalf of Mrs. Lefeuvre
-- but I believe that it's necessary that we gather information
on the way that this repatriation process took place in -- the
repatriation of intellectuals, and intellectuals -- we would like
to know exactly what happened so that we could understand the
truth, so that we can understand how these people were brought to
Tuol Sleng.  As Mrs. Lefeuvre had just said, she was not at all
expecting -- was not at all waiting for what was going to happen
to them when they arrived in Phnom Penh.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you please respond to this question?  If you can
do so, you can now take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to respond to the question put to me
by the counsel as following:  the Khmer intellectuals who worked
in the United Front of Cambodia -- actually, at the beginning,
they were placed in the re-education camps and they were put to
be monitored.  For example, people at K-17 and those who --
surveillance then were the young Party members.  For example,
people were sent later on to S-21 included Huot Sambath, Chea
San, Y Sokunthy, and as a routine, when people were sent to S-21,
they would be tortured so that their confession was obtained.
So from 1976 to 1977 I could see more and more intellectuals were
being sent from abroad and that later on, they were sent to S-21
to be smashed.  And this is part of the crimes that had been
inflicted on the returning intellectuals and this is all my
submission.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
I have no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, would you wish to put questions to the civil
party?
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Mr. President, thank you very much, but I do not have any
questions to put to the civil party at this moment.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the defence counsel
to put questions to the civil party if you would wish to do so.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
The defence counsel has no questions to put to the civil party
either.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the accused to
make his observation in relation to the statement by this civil
party.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all, allow me to speak to Madam Lefeuvre
as follows:  I would like to recognize that the biography of your
family is the historical fact and truth.  Having said that
because this statement and biography will be forever true because
whenever anyone would like to research for the sufferings of the
people who have had during the Khmer Rouge regime, they would go
to that reference.  So this historical fact is different from the
flower; flower can blossom and then can somehow change, but the
truth can never change.
The sufferings of the Cambodian people and the victims during the
regime include that of your loved one and it cannot be
forgettable, or forgotten, and that I would like to also state
that further that -- in particular to Madam Lefeuvre and to the
Chamber that I will not run away from the crimes I have
committed.  It is inexcusable.  The nation of Cambodia can point
their finger to me.  They can curse me.
They can punish me whatever they would wish to do so, and the
Court is here and I am before the Court and responsible for all
the crimes committed at S-21 legally and psychologically, and I
do not intend to deny any crimes committed at S-21, and I would
like to seek forgiveness from Madam Lefeuvre and other people who
have lost their loved ones during the regime.  That's all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam, your statement is now finished.  You are now excused.  You
can go back to your seat.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Next the Chamber would like to invite the civil party Ouk Neary
to come before the Chamber.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Ouk Neary?
A. I am indeed called Ouk Neary.
Q. How old are you?
A. Thirty-four.
Q. Where is your current residence and what is your occupation?
A. I am living in France and I work in the field of transport in
France.
Q. What is the name of your father?
A. My father's name was Ouk Ket and he was detained for six
months at S-21.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. My mother's name is Martine Lefeuvre and she is French.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now would like the lawyer for the civil party group 3
to make a brief background and information regarding this civil
party, Ouk Neary.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Ms. Ouk Neary is indeed the daughter of Mrs. Lefeuvre, who was
just heard, and of Ouk Ket whose story you now know.  Since Mrs.
Lefeuvre provided a very full deposition on the way that her
husband had been detained at S-21 and executed there and the
documents that are in the file demonstrate without question the
link that exists between Ouk Neary and her father Ouk Ket -- that
is to say a birth certificate and the different registration
documents -- her parents' marriage, for example -- and we also
have in Ouk Neary's file documents, extra documents that she
provided us which is included in the list of the documents that
were brought to us; that is to say photographs of her father when
he was living with her mother, letters from her father --
elements that allowed her to come closer to this man of whom she
only has very fleeting memories.
So today what is important about her testimony is that we would
be able to understand that someone who has not known her father,
or barely, is to be able to understand, however, what kind of
suffering she can endure during many years of her life because of
the absence of her father; and not only due to the absence but
also due to the fact that she learnt that her father had been
tortured and executed under such circumstances.
So this testimony I believe is completely different from Mrs.
Lefeuvre's because here we're speaking about the feelings of
someone from another generation and who experienced things
differently but, however, who experienced them as intensely.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity to Ms. Ouk
Neary to describe the events which led to being applied for the
civil party and then the intention to seek the reparations
physically or psychologically and impact upon her life and her
sufferings which are also related to the crimes alleged on the
accused during the establishment and the operations of S-21
Office from the 17 April 1975 until the 6th of January '79.  You
may now proceed.
MS. OUK NEARY:
With your leave, I would like to pay homage to my father through
a few lines, through a few verses that I wrote in his honour.
"Regarding my father, the first memory that I have is his death.
I remember him where we were hiding to surprise him for a
birthday surprise for friends.  I can hear the gift paper and see
him amused, saying not to make any noise, and he's holding my
hand as I look up to the ceiling -- this hand that was able to
write so beautifully and so emotionally and so intelligently, and
playing the guitar so beautifully as well; a hand that
transmitted to my mother, who however is French, all of the
knowhow of Khmer cuisine.  A hand that would shake the hands of
foreign diplomats without making any distinction of race, of
culture or of religion and would never go without the wonderful
smile that would enlighten his face."
When I see the faces and the temples of Angkar I remember the
only person through whom I saw these smiles and I admire them
even more so.
You will always remain a beautiful page in my history, a page
that we will try tirelessly to pass on.  But in order to know
this it would have been necessary to call upon the best of what's
in us.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Upon Ms. Neary's request, could we please view two photographs?
It is the photograph of her father with his family.  It is ERN
00281298
And right afterwards could we please view the photograph of her
father at S-21; 00281299 with your leave, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber grants the counsel the opportunity.  Can you please
restate the ER number of these two photos; that is, the ER number
of the documents you intend the Chamber to have shown on the
screen?
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Well, it is document E28912, ERN 00281298.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV officer, can you show these two documents with the ER
number 00281298 and next 00281299?
MS. TRUSSE-NAPROUS:
I think that we should display them one after another.  I thought
that they were all part of one single document.  So I have three
photographs on the very same document.
Okay.  So I think that we should pass through them.  Thank you,
Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit, can you return the screen to the normal court view?
Ms. Ouk Neary, you can now proceed with your statement.
MS. NEARY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
So therefore I am born on the 16th of July 1975 in Dakar,
Senegal, in Africa because my father was working there and we
were living with my mother and my brother at the Place de
l'Indépendance up until the day when he received a letter from
Cambodia requesting that he go work on the reconstruction of his
country.
So therefore we returned to France.  My father returned to
Cambodia and I grew up without a father, with a French mother who
always told me that Cambodia had a very exceptionally strong
identity.
And I grew up with sarong dresses in France.  And I started
learning how to read and write and speak Khmer at the same time
as I was learning French.  And in order to give me moral support
my French grandmother brought us up while my mother was looking
for my father in the camps at Khao I Dang in Thailand and went
back to study and continued bringing us up as well.
And as far as I am concerned, growing up without a father was
something that had become normal.  Communal life is really easier
in Asian society than it is in the West.
So therefore, I grew up until the age of six with eating Prahok
-- fermented fish, Char Khnhei, Samlor Machour and other
Cambodian day-to-day words that might be familiar to you but were
not necessarily familiar to me while I was going to school in
France.
And as far as I am concerned, not having a father was something
normal.  I had heard about a prison in which there were
detainees, so maybe when my mother came back from Khao I Dang --
I knew that there was a place where people were being tortured in
Cambodia but I didn't quite understand it fully.
So therefore I worked very normally.  I went to school and I had
a very normal school -- I went to school very normally in France
until 1991 where we launched a search warrant in Cambodia via
television that was heard by someone who knew our family, or who
knew my father's family.
We received a letter that was written in Khmer.  This letter fell
on the floor with photographs and we were very much troubled by
the Khmer writing.  We thought that it was my father who had
written to us but that was not the case.  It was his mother who
was speaking to my father, which allows me to tell you today that
she was not aware that her son had returned to his country and
that we were those who told her that my father was not with us
but that he had returned to Cambodia since I was two years old.
So since I was curious to come into contact with this part of my
culture, we organized together with my brother and my mother the
funding to buy three airplane tickets in 1991 to pursue a
genealogical trip.  And we were of course not expecting such a
cultural shock, from which of course I learnt a lot.
We were expecting even less so the discovery of S-21 because, as
you see, I grew up in a country where we are free in our choices,
as might have been the case in Cambodia previously, and I ended
up confronted with this institution whose main function was to
create intelligentsia that would be at the service of mankind.
Back then at S-21 it was still written on the wall that it was
the Tuol Sleng Museum.
Today we cannot see this writing any more on the wall, and I do
not believe that the road to S-21 -- I believe it was a dirt road
still.  There was still a corrugated iron fence around S 21, with
barbed wire on top and there was about two metres between the
real perimeter of the school yard which later became Tuol Sleng
and to the guard post that was set up there maybe to keep
detainees or maybe to prevent the detainees from escaping.
There was therefore four buildings that you probably know very
well:  Building A when you're facing the entrance, on your
left-hand side; Building B; Building C and D.  And with my
brother we went into the two left-hand buildings and for me it
was the most tremendous shock of my life.  I can say so because
when I entered into the first room and I then visited the other
rooms, well, I understood that this was the most deadly room
where the truth was the most blatant.
There were metal bars with the shackles that were used to shackle
the prisoners' feet.  There were moulds, sculpted moulds of Pol
Pot's head right next to the shackles.  There was a panoramic
view of a mass grave on a photograph.  I did not yet know then
that it was the mass grave at Choeung Ek.  And on the wall we
could see black and white photographs -- and I'd like to say
black and white photographs of a rare violence because could you
imagine how violent these pictures would have been if they had
been coloured pictures?
And I had difficulty projecting myself from what S-21 -- and then
I remembered how much I was traumatized by these photographs but
it was very much soothing for me to see them.  So there were
bodies on stretchers, amputated feet, bandages on wounds that
were completely disproportionate vis-a-vis the size of the
bandaids, broken skulls that had been broken in and detainees
with their legs still shackled, lying in puddles of blood with
leaves thrown on their face.
And two photographs later, the detainee was not dead.  He raises
his hand and he tries to lean up with his beaten-in face, and I
asked myself whom is he asking help from?
In these classrooms, one finds also that there is a surreal
dimension, which I want to share with you today because between
each classroom there was created, by breaking open the walls,
doors that did not exist before and which completely upended the
operation of what had previously been a school, and froze it into
a barbaric dimension, showing the total lack of humanity of which
people are capable and which reverses the basic motion that leads
to the creation of schools; to transfer it and to change it into
a machinery to crush human beings, to crush brains.  The sole
purpose of S-21 was death and mainly a sole intent, which was to
gather up the importance of those who entered that place and
never came out of it.
With my brother we continued with the visit and in the next room,
going through that door which plunged us into an unreal world,
and in the second room there were ID pictures that covered all of
the walls and we were drawn to these faces which stared at us,
one after the other, drawing them to each one of these faces.
And I wondered if the horror was to see these emaciated faces of
children, men, women, babies sometimes, or if it was to think
that there are others whose pictures aren't even there.
So I continued to walk through this room and saw another one of
these doors taking us to a third room with just as many pictures
on the walls and just as many people staring back at me.  And I
told my brother, "We have to start all over again and look at
each one of them because perhaps my father is there.  And if he
is amongst them, we can't afford to miss him."
So numerous were the pictures on the wall.  What I recall from
that visit is that we came out in oppressive heat, which is a
permanent condition for S-21, paradoxically to the horror which
occurred and the blood which may have flowed there and the shouts
which may have come out of it.  I was thinking about all of these
victims who waited for help, tried to hold out as long as they
could, and nobody came ever to provide assistance.
Later we went through the archives of S-21, which was somewhere
upstairs in one of the buildings; I don't remember which one.
And when the S-21 employee opened the lock and the gate we were
shocked to observe that in spite of the alphabetic
classification, all of the files were stacked under heaps of
dust, which in itself is already an insult to humanity.  At least
that is my perception of it.
So we each took one folder and -- but a trick of fortune made it
possible for us to find precisely the registry of December '77,
which indicated the date of death of my father, and the date of
entry of my father with his name, his first name, date of birth,
function, mistakenly written up.  I never took at face value the
content of that document as far as I'm concerned, but I always
told myself that it wasn't representative and that perhaps I
could and that I needed to find something else.
The reason why I'm describing S-21 to you at such length, it's
because that day that is the day when a drop of poison came to
me, and I have never since that day stopped trying to find out
what happened.
We returned to France; I continued with my schooling.  In France
at 16, you do the baccalaureate, and I graduated.  I had to
pursue my studies, which I did.
I was fortunate to do philosophy, literature and languages, and I
met an extraordinary professor of philosophy who was concerned by
the genocide of the Jews.  And with him I had opportunity to have
lengthy discussions about the values in which I had grown up and
the shock that I had had to face when I entered S-21.
I was aware of the fact that our journey and the cultural shock
that we had experienced could not continue, so I decided to
continue with languages and to arm myself from the point-of-view
of language in order to be able to continue research, if
possible.
In 1993, the conflict -- if I may call it in this way -- the
conflict had become more moderate between Cambodia and its past
which, nevertheless, was ever present.
I was preparing a Masters in English and the subject that I had
selected was the microfilming by Yale University of the S-21
documents.  I received great support from the professor I chose,
and she told me that this is a doctorate-level subject, but I
will certainly give you full support in this research.
And very quickly, going on the Internet, I was confronted with
what was flowing from the Khmer side.  The Khmer Rouge claims
"Watch your back, Khmer Rouge" and I don't know in which forum --
going through the research, there were other statements
attempting to persuade me not to go any further.
Well, actually it worked.  I gave up my studies for another
reason as well, which was that in the Khmer Rouge way of
thinking, unless I am mistaken, it wasn't good to have too much
culture and too much success, at the risk of death.
Well, can you imagine that this idea had in fact slowly grown
into my mind?  And in 1993, I believe, that was the big return of
the Khmer Rouge in Phnom Penh -- I saw on television from France,
Khieu Samphan and Chan Youran on TF1.
The next day I received a telephone call at home for my mother
from Chan Youran who wanted to speak to my mother who happened
not to be there.  He did not immediately introduce himself.  I
asked him to repeat his name, his identity, and with an
uncomfortable smile he said, "I'm Chan Youran.  I am --".  Well,
he didn't say, "I am", he said, "a great friend of your father",
and I replied, "I know.  I saw you on television yesterday", and
that was the end of our discussion.
Since I wanted to return to my country, Cambodia, I changed
track, took French as a Foreign Language because I wanted to
return to Cambodia.  And I had the recollection, which was deeply
embedded in me, of someone in the neighbourhood, my Cambodian
grandmother, who had preserved French words hidden under the
Khmer Rouge.  And, in fact, under the stilts of the house they
had created a classroom and in the classroom gave courses to
eight year-old children and told them in a Cambodian accent in
French,  "Ma famille va à l'école régulièrement".
So he came to speak to us and to my brother, and tears welled up
in his eyes.  He apologized with us to be unable to speak more
French to us, telling us that under the Khmer Rouge he had been
requested to forget his knowledge.  This knowledge that had
disappeared touched me deeply.  It did not leave me indifferent.
And I believe that, in fact, he had an impact on my decision to
return to Cambodia and to contribute my knowledge as a French
national in a country to which I believe I belong.
I continued with my internet research nevertheless.  I made
contact with Craig Etcheson.  I came to know Steve Heder.  I
learned to get acquainted with Yan Nann and later Peter
Leuprecht, and I believe that each one would have been willing
and ready to help me had they had in hand more information than I
had.  But I deplore the lack of transparency, which is present
even today on the part of the Khmer government.
Since we have never been given the definitive evidence of the
passing or the death of my father. In 2004, Rithy Panh invited us
in the preview of S-21.  And I had decided by then that I would
make headway in my life and that I would try to build something
to leave the past behind me, as many Cambodians say who don't
want to talk about this anymore.  And I understand them full
well.  So we went --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Ouk Neary, since it takes time to take an adjournment, the
Chamber would like to let you know that you can proceed with your
statement after the adjournment because the Court and the public
may need to take the lunch break.
We'll take the adjournment now and resume at 1:30 p.m.
Ms. Ouk Neary is invited to come back to the Court this afternoon
to proceed with her remaining of the testimony.
The security personnel are now instructed to take the accused
back to the detention facility and return him by 1:30.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1210H to 1338H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
Next, we would like to proceed with the statement of Ms. Ouk
Neary.
MS. OUK NEARY:
I apologize, Mr. President.  I didn't hear what you just said.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since this morning we heard part of your statement already, and
then we stopped short when we took the adjournment for lunch
break and now, since we are now resuming the session, then we
would like to give the floor to you to proceed with the remaining
of your statement.
So you can now please take the floor.
MS. OUK NEARY:
Very well, thank you.
Well as a matter of fact, I had stopped at 2004 when Rithy Panh
invited us for the preview of his film "S-21" which everyone is
familiar with.  So "S-21" was a documentary film, far from being
a romance fiction with invented characters, since in fact he had
selected persons who had worked at S-21 to make them speak to
express what they had experienced and what they had done in that
detention and extermination centre.
But the reason why I mentioned this today is because I was
thoroughly shocked by three points -- not of the documentary
itself, since it was only showing reality, but events taking
place in S-21.  And I would like to return in particular to the
blood tests since, not knowing what had happened to my father, I
had to try to imagine and unfortunately I imaged the worst.
When I go back to the blood tests I wonder how two people,
because one must be aware of this -- two people can hold down a
man or a woman who are already weak, in order to cut into a vein
to make them believe that it's going to be for a blood test --
and enjoying it probably, preventing that person from defending
themselves.  In other words, even were you to have the ability to
defend yourself to lose all your blood -- and I think this is
where the dehumanization and the ignominious character of these
events comes to the fore.
I also gave a great deal of thought, after I saw that film, to
the young woman who committed suicide because she wanted to
escape what she was being subjected to and obviously I identified
with her because the crime of others and crime in general will
necessarily lead one to think of one's own crime.
The third point which appears to me to be intolerable is the
autopsies, which are probably less often mentioned, which took
place in S-21 and if possible -- and I would like to request this
with your leave, Mr. President -- I would like to be able to read
an excerpt of David Chandler's book which I saw last week, "S-21,
the Unpunished Crime", the French version, .
David Chandler tells us that surgical operations leading to their
death were sometimes performed on patients under anaesthetic, on
prisoners under anaesthetics in order to give medical cadres
experience.  It's possible that experiments of this type were
also performed on prisoners at S-21 and it would not be
surprising that there are no archives concerning this that have
been kept.
I leave you to imagine the repulsion which rose in me when I
discovered all these horrors, knowing that in S-21 the only
possible form of anaesthesia was with salt water.  And so
individuals were taken, tied to a post; the front part of the
abdomen was opened up in order that a -- because what is very
seldom said is that in fact the employees of S-21 were young
people -- so that a young physician could put his hand into the
abdomen of someone who was alive in order to cut the appendix
out.  The victim, who was screaming in pain initially, would
stare at the young man, mute, and the young man was pleased with
having found this because the method was encouraged.
In Phnom Penh there are people who were amputated after stepping
on mines, families that were amputated by losing members of their
family, and I personally experienced an invisible disability, a
psychological agony, a journey into hell when I discovered all of
this.
And if today I want to block the self-destructive message that
was given to the Khmer people without any limit of time or place,
this is why I insisted on the unreal aspect of this.  It is
because when my son was three years old, when he was close to me
and when my companion was speaking to me, I was thinking only of
one thing; was to break away, to extricate myself from reality
and jump out of the window for reasons I could not fathom myself.
Let me reassure you I am much better now.  However, I was forced
to ask myself searching questions with regard to the relationship
of obedience and of submissiveness that were developed in S-21
which led to such a process taking place; and on the phenomenon
of hierarchical terror and the loneliness of the victims and the
subservience both of the victims and of those who committed these
offences.
And I wonder how it is that a few individuals regrettably managed
to take the lives of some three million others with such evil
intentions.
In February of this year I returned to Choeung Ek, which I had
visited after S-21 in 1991.  But at the time it had not hurt me
as much as it did in February of this year because, as I've said
before, the dates of entry and exit which I had found at the time
were not valid for me; and I went to DC-Cam in February where I
managed, thanks to Youk Chhang, whom I wish to thank in passing
even though I didn't understand at first his hesitations and
reluctance.  I managed to recover the picture of my father in
S-21 which this time represented for me the confirmation that he
had been through that venue and that he was no longer alive.
After that, we once again with my mother went to Choeung Ek and
that location, I want to tell you, is the worst place I've ever
been in the world because it continues to soil my feet because of
the injustice that is there.  These are communal pits which have
been emptied, where grass is growing, where men, women,
adolescents, infants were buried.  There are bones that are still
bound, teeth, bits of cloth which were used as blindfolds.
Trees have grown in a tortured way themselves and speak on behalf
of history with the marks of machetes which can be seen and were
more concentrated toward the end of the genocide when the Khmer
Rouge were in a haste to get rid of the enemy within.  The
butchery occurred during the night.
And the pit was different, depending on whether it was an adult
who had been or who had not been decapitated, or the body of an
infant.  That baby could have been me.  I could have been grabbed
by the foot and had my skull crushed against a tree that was used
to destroy all of the children, and sometimes I get the feeling
that I'm the only survivor amongst all of them.
And in the back there is a pond where I don't even dare imagine
how many persons perished.  What happened in Choeung Ek is only
one example of what had been happening throughout the country and
that is unforgivable.  In the bone dust of Choeung Ek, where the
grass grew feeding on the bones of children, the silent soil
opened up and saw all this blood flowing.  Men are born free,
equal in dignity and in their rights.  Any individual has the
right to life, liberty, and personal safety.  No-one shall be
subjected to torture or to punishment or inhuman or degrading
treatment.
And I no longer know what I was taught in school.  Choeung Ek in
fact has eroded my self-confidence.  I must conclude by saying
that I spent my entire life trying to come closer to the truth,
the truth which the accused thinks that he owns and which I was
deprived of, and what was read in 1991 is something that I never
stopped looking for because I wanted to know.  I wanted to know
what my history was, I wanted to know what the truth was, and
this quest is a quest I undertook on my own and it is only thanks
to my efforts that I have reached there, and I've managed to make
the connection with the accused, who is nothing but the nerve
centre of a crime industry which took place in S-21.
I must specify that from the outset witnesses are asked whether
or not they know the accused and I wish to specify that the
accused is the one who does not know me but I have learned to
know him because for several months I have been observing you and
I know enough at this point to tell the accused that I have no
interest in him and that whether or not I come into possession of
the confessions of my father, I give them back to him and I hope
that he will sink with that.  As a Cambodian, his obsequiousness
is unable to hide in my eyes the cynical brute -- the cynical and
bloodthirsty brute that I know.
As a French person I see the accused takes on responsibility
without ever soiling his hands by evoking his agreement in
principle, as he says, but he omits to correct that at the time
his objective was not work but was dirty work which was
scientifically fuelled by others and, as far as I'm concerned, I
find that he represents the shame of the human race.  There
weren't 17,000 victims attributable to the accused but 17,000
reasons to inflict a maximum penalty for this.
If it were only possible also for the accused to stop thinking
that he is the thinking head of Cambodia instead of all the
people who have a right to think, then I believe that that would
be a wonderful outcome.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, would you wish to put any questions to this
civil party?
I have not seen any indication that our Judges would like to put
questions to the civil party.  I would like now to give the floor
to the civil party lawyers group 3 to put questions to the civil
party.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Q. Thank you very much, Neary, for having provided us with this
account and for sharing your feelings with us, and your feelings
which are so important to us because you did not know your
father.  And in reality, if I may summarize what you told us --
or the idea that you wanted to tell us is that up until the age
of
you lived perfectly normally because for you there was just 
 
         16   a father who was absent, who was not there, but there was not the
idea for you of how your father might have disappeared.
And then you told us that as of the age of 16 when you went to
S-21, you underwent an enormous shock and then everything
changed, and you also told us that all of this aggravated your
suffering and your suffering got worse over time, and as you were
conducting your research or as you were meeting people -- I'm not
betraying what you said.  That's indeed what you were trying to
tell us.  Is that so?
So may take the liberty of asking you if for you this suffering
developed over the years, if it worsened over the years or if, on
the contrary, for you there might be moments of less suffering
and moments when you are less involved in this suffering?
A. Thank you for asking this question.  As you know, indeed human
beings are not linear and thank God I did not only stick to this
one single line and I was able, indeed, to take hold of myself,
thanks as well to the help of a psychotherapist who helped me to
put into words everything that I had seen, but I also needed to
understand why I, who always grew up protected from this conflict
-- this conflict that no longer involves me, in fact, if it in
fact ever involved me -- why I, who grew up in France, when I
would see a fan I would see helicopters and relive the American
bombing, whereas I had never been to Cambodia.  That's just an
example I'm saying here.
And of course there were moments, as I said when I changed
directions and I decided to rebuild myself because that's life.
But, however, you shouldn't believe that S-21 stops at the gates
of S-21 and the prison is just walls that just preserve what
happened.  The walls are shouting.  The limits, the bounds of
S-21 do not stop what happened at S-21 and Cambodia is not on its
own; the whole world is looking at Cambodia.
Even if I am from another generation and this other generation
maybe might have been instrumentalized (sic) by what happened, I
would like to read out to you a quote from Rithy Panh, the
film-maker who prefaced Vann Nath's book about his experiences at
Tuol Sleng, where he says:
"The older you become, the more the history of the genocide comes
back to you in an insidious way, a bit like a poison that has
been distilled into your body bit by bit.  The only way to
relieve things is to testify."
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for having listened to me.
Q. Neary, could you please tell me who followed you; who was the
psychotherapist who followed you and over which period of time?
How long were you in therapy?
A. Well, this psychotherapist is called Mr. Dupeyron.  He's
working in Paris.  He worked for the National Research Board --
say NRS -- in France, and he specialized in people who have had
family members who were detained, no matter whether they were
victims or oppressors.  And I started undergoing therapy in 2004,
several time per month at the beginning and then more
episodically which allowed me to -- I believe, to begin mornings
in February and to be here, present, today because when I say
that I understand the need to put into words that people are
experiencing here in Cambodia, I am also aware that this
represents a lot of work upstream and for many years.
Q. You indicated that at certain occasions you suffered so much
that you, in fact, almost wanted to commit suicide and you did
not accept this because you were a mother yourself, however, so
can you describe the state you were in and how it came up in you?
A. A very simple example -- there's a name; it's called
timalisation.  You only see people's lips moving, but you're
completely elsewhere.  You have no explanation to provide to the
generation after you so in the front of this heritage that was
taken from me and instead of a father, in February I got an empty
cell and even though I know what happened, but it's the fact that
I have arrived too late.  Well, before I -- before the
inconsistency of the explanations that I could give to the
generation after me, it is true that even though people might
have been trying to convince me otherwise, that was the only idea
I had in mind.
Q. Ms. Neary, you wrote a lot.  I believe that the Chamber has
understood that Neary often put into words her pain and in her
writings, let me please remember to recall two sentences.  She
mentioned the images of S-21 that keep on coming back.
"I had opened the door and it was impossible for me to close and
the demons of S-21 were coming up in every minute of my
existence; whereas, I had spent the most part of my life in
France."
So do you confirm that this is still what you think and what can
you tell us about what you wrote here?
A. Yes, indeed, I confirm this and we cannot -- you cannot rid
yourself of what was --
what happened at S-21 as you would wipe clean a blackboard in a
fraction of a second.  This keeps on coming back, indeed, even
when you try to forget; it keeps on coming back.
Q. I have a last question or rather I'd like you to confirm here
again what I'm going to tell you.  You spoke, therefore, about
your suffering.  You spoke about your pain and about your pain in
relation to the disappearance of your father, but do you -- don't
you believe that it is only the disappearance of your father
which is the root of your suffering or is it especially the fact
that the disappearance of your father is the result of his
detainment, the result of the fact that he was tortured and the
result of the fact that he was executed?  Is that what you wanted
to tell us in everything that you said to us today; that that is
the real root of your suffering?
A. Yes, of course, because the reality is, unfortunately, of such
a level of atrocity -- boundless atrocity -- but nonetheless,
what I wanted to say to the Cambodian people who might not be
able to deal with this subject is that the only way to face the
future is to dissect what happened and by providing an
explanation to this and when we're able to break down into pieces
everything that happened and that we triy to reconstitute the
puzzle as it must be done, it may improve things of course.  We
cannot remain in solitude and in subservience forever.
Q. Thank you very much, Neary.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
I have no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, do you have any questions to be put to this
civil party?
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The prosecution does not have any
questions for this civil party.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And the defence counsel, do you have questions to be put to this
civil party?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The defence counsel do not have any
questions for this civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now grants the opportunity to the accused to make his
observation regarding the statement of this civil party, Ouk
Neary.  You may proceed.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to seek your leave to speak directly
to Ms. Ouk Neary as follows:  first, I would like to bow my mind
and my body to acknowledge the testimony of this Ouk Neary as an
orphan who lost her father at S-21.  This testimony is valuable.
It is an historical document for the next generation not to
forget the tragedy and not to allow the mankind into such crime.
In the future, we could hear the testimonies of other orphans who
lost their fathers and I am ready to receive those testimonies.
Secondly, the crimes committed at S-21 on the Cambodian people
and the nation itself, I have spoken extensively on this;
however, my personal crimes on the people who were alive, on the
offence, I do not deny it -- any of this crimes.  I am
responsible both by legal ways and in an emotional way.  And I'm
responsible for all those civil parties or those who do not
present themselves here as civil parties, I am all responsible.
And this is my observation, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Ouk Neary, the Chamber does not have any further questions
for you.
You are now excused, so you can sit at the chairs reserved for
the civil parties.
(Witness exits courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Greffier, according to the trial scheduling, after the
testimony of the civil party Ouk Neary, we would hear the
testimony of another civil party, that is Hamill, Robert.
(Witness enters courtroom)
Is the person present in the Chamber?
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the civil party Robert Hamill is present in the
Chamber and ready to be called by the Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Hamill Robert, please come and take the seat before the
Chamber.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Robert Hamill.  Is your name correct,
Robert Hamill?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. Mr. President, I am 45 years old.
Q. Where is your place of birth?
A. Mr. President, my place of birth is Whakatane, New Zealand.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. Mr. President, I am a New Zealander.
Q. Where is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. Mr. President, my address is 1020 Limeworks Loop Road, Te
Pahu, Hamilton, New Zealand.  My occupation is event manager.
Q. What is your occupation again?
A. Mr. President, my occupation is event manager.
Q. What was the name of your blood father?
A. Mr. President, my father's name is Miles Owen Hamill.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. Mr. President, my mother's name is Esther Hamill.
Q. Mr. Robert Hamill, how many siblings do you have?
A. Mr. President, I have four siblings.
Q. Can you describe the names of your siblings to the Chamber?
A. Mr. President, my eldest brother is Kerry George Hamill.  My
second eldest brother is John Dwyer Hamill.  My third brother is
Peter Robert Hamill.  My sister is Sue Mary Hamill.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The counsel for civil party group 1, the Chamber now would like
to give you the opportunity to make a brief description of the
identification of your client and the reasons being a civil party
and other relevant evidence.  If you have it, you may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Mr. President.
As you probably have understood, Mr. President, my client is the
brother of Kerry Hamill, who was detained and killed at Tuol
Sleng.  When my client filed his civil party application at the
time, he included the confession of his brother, which is
, and last week we did file -- civil party group 1 -- an
attestation from Tuol Sleng to attest that indeed this document,
this confession, is to be found at Tuol Sleng.
Now, as we stated in the motion we filed last week, what was
missing was the proof that my client is indeed the brother of Mr.
Kerry Hamill, and my client came with two documents that I have
here with me, and my client has the original if needed.
The first document is a New Zealand birth certificate of Mr.
Kerry Hamill, attesting that his mother is Esther Hamill and then
his father is Miles Owen Hamill.
And the second document is the copy of particulars of marriage of
my clients, and this document dated July 2001 attests to the fact
that his mother is Esther Hamill and his father is Miles Owen
Hamill.
With your leave, Mr. President, I'm proposing to give these two
documents to your Greffier for them to place it in the case file
and, of course, alternatively we can file a motion requesting
that.  We are in your hands.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are granted the opportunity to submit these documents.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Mr. President.  So I think that we have answered your
three questions, if I'm not mistaken, and let me just maybe tell
you how we thought we would proceed.
My client would like to read a text -- and I'm not completely
sure how long it will take but it's quite a substantial text --
and then my client -- we will request Your Honour's leave for my
client to ask through you, Mr. President, or directly as you
wish, a few questions.  That's how we wanted to proceed and I
will have probably very few, maybe one or two questions to my
client.  That's how we were proposing to proceed.
Should I take it that we can proceed then.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Are you going to read the statement by yourself or is the civil
party reading the statement by himself?
MR. WERNER:
Sorry, Mr. President, I was probably not clear at all.  We are
proposing that my client read the statement himself.  So I am
just asking your leave for that to start.  That's it.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, you can now proceed with the reading of the
statement and you can tell us the reasons for your decision to
become a civil party to this case, and the impacts upon you and
your life due to the criminal acts alleged on the accused during
the time of the Democratic Kampuchea from the date of
establishment and operations of S-21 as well as S-24.  That is,
the 17th April 1975 to the 6th of January 1979.
And the facts are directly related to your relative.  You may now
proceed.
MR. HAMILL:
Mr. President, I thank you.  Tena kaotao katoa.  Greetings to
all.
I am deeply honoured and moved to be here today, given the
opportunity to speak.  I realize that this is a privilege made
available to a few, especially compared to the numbers of
families that suffered under the Khmer Rouge regime.
I arrived in Cambodia last week.  Last Thursday, 13th of August,
was coincidentally 31 years to the day that my brother Kerry
Hamill first set foot on Cambodian soil.  The difference now is
that I am here of my own volition.  This is the story of an
innocent man brought to his knees and killed in the prime of his
life, and the impact his death had on just one family.
It is my hope that other families likewise affected by the losses
of this barbaric time can somehow relate to my statement and
recognize that they are not alone in their grief.
This cruel process, the trial, and the sentencing hearing finally
gives Kerry and all the other people that died at the hand of
Duch and others the opportunity for justice, acknowledgement and
vindication.
Your Honours, I strongly believe that my personal suffering
cannot be understood unless the Chamber is properly informed of
the background of my family.  Kerry was a part of our family
which was torn apart due to the accused's actions; a previously
close-knit, outgoing and active family which was in effect
destroyed along with Kerry at S-21.
With your leave, Mr. President, I would like to briefly describe
my family life before this tragedy.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber allows you.  Please proceed.
MR. HAMILL:
My brother Kerry was the oldest son of five children to Esther
and Miles Hamill.  Kerry grew up in Whakatane, New Zealand, along
with us -- his siblings, John, Peter, Sue, and myself.  We were a
very outdoors focused family.  We spent our days outside really
enjoying nature.  Kerry was very special to my mother and father.
We all were but having children is pretty extraordinary
life-changing stuff and we knew as the first-born Kerry really,
really was very special to my parents.
My second eldest sibling, John Hamill, was born 15 months after
Kerry.  In their youth the two were virtually inseparable.
Together they sought out many adventures.
Mr. President, I ask the Court's leave to please, if we could,
put up a photograph of one such adventure of my two brothers,
Kerry and John.  This is particularly important for what happened
later to my second brother.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer, can you project the photo on the slide?
Mr. Robert Hamill, please try to notice the red light on the
microphone.  You can only speak and your voice can only transfer.
It comes through the system only after the light is lit so that
your voice can go through the transcript for the proper record of
the hearing.
You may now proceed.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
As you can see from this photo, this was a classic scenario with
my brothers creating fun out of a stormy day, converting our
family dinghy into a sailing vessel.  On the right-hand side of
the picture is my brother Kerry, which was to be his first
helming or skippering opportunity in life.  To the very left-hand
side of the photo is my brother John and in the middle is a
family friend.  Thank you.
After going to university, Kerry went to Australia to work in
Sydney and develop his sailing skills further.  His goal was
sailing around the world.  When Cyclone Tracy devastated Darwin
in 1974, Kerry went up there to work and earn enough money to buy
his own yacht.  While in Darwin, Kerry befriended a Canadian,
Stuart Glass.  The two eventually decided to each buy a 50
percent share in a yacht, a 28-foot double-ended sloop named
"Foxy Lady".
I would ask the President's leave to put a photo of that boat up
for the Court to see.
They spent a fair bit of time and money repairing that boat and
getting it ready to sail off on to their adventures.  While in
Darwin, Kerry met his girlfriend Gail Colley.  Gail is to the
left of that picture and seated in the photo of the yacht is my
brother Kerry.  Gail is an important part of this story and I
will return very briefly, with Your Honours leave, at a later
time to talk about her.
Kerry and Stuart then sailed to Darwin and began a series of
wonderful adventures, sailing up through South East Asia.  To
earn money they would do day charter trips out to nearby islands
for fishing, snorkelling and sightseeing.  Kerry wrote home
regularly, telling terrific tales of his adventures.  At home
here in New Zealand, we would excitedly sit around the kitchen
table while my father read out each letter accompanied by our
exclamations of awe and amusement and excitement at the many
different sights and colourful cultures he was experiencing.
Occasionally a parcel of clothing would turn up, to the extreme
delight of my sister and myself.  In one letter Kerry detailed
how he met two Englishmen, Neil and Bob, who got on board as
paying passengers from Phuket to Penang.  I met both Neil and Bob
earlier this year and they described to me their wonderful
adventures with Kerry and Gail.  They said Kerry and Gail were
clearly very much in love.  They believed the two would
invariably get married, settle down and have children of their
own.
From all these things, Your Honours, I'm sure you can see that at
26 years of age Kerry was having the time of his life.  He and
Gail were planning a life and future together and we were all
enjoying their adventures and the stories they were sending back
to us in their letters.
The last letter we got from Kerry was sent from Singapore in July
1978.  Fortunately, Gail left the boat at around this time to
visit her family.  She and Kerry planned to meet up a couple of
months later.  We believe the men made for Bangkok but were blown
off course in bad weather and took shelter behind Koh Tang
Island.
Mr. President, my lawyer has apprised me of the situation
regarding the content of S-21 confessions.  However, with your
permission I would like to recall six sentences contained in the
confession of John Dewhurst.  From our family's perspective, that
is what we read 30 years ago and it affected us greatly at that
time.  Whether it be fact or fiction, it was what we believed to
have happened to them and affected us accordingly.
Mr. President, I recognize your discretion in this area and am
completely in your hands in this matter.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, the Chamber allows you the opportunity.  You may proceed.
MR. HAMILL:
Mr. President, thank you very much.
John Dewhurst described in his confession how the boat was
attacked while moored outside Koh Tang Island.  He said:
"Shortly after dark I went below to make some porridge and
suddenly a boat began to close in on us very quickly.  I was
about to go on deck when the boat opened fire and sent shots over
the mast.  So I stayed where I was and turned on our navigation
light.  The gunboat came in closer and lit us up with its
spotlight.
Stuart was shot and Kerry helped him out to sea in a lifebuoy.
Kerry and I went over the side for safety and waited until the
gunboat came in to pick us up.  He told me later that Stuart had
died and had been buried at sea."
Thank you, Mr. President.
Even if we do not know the precise details of the capture of
Kerry, we do know he was brought to S-21.  There, as a part of
the system of degradation and torture put in place by the
accused, he unquestionably suffered beyond all imagination.  Yet,
despite this environment, the pressure to surrender to the pain
and futility and despair, Kerry's confessions were lucid.  He was
clever with what he said.
It is evident from both Kerry's and John Dewhurst's confessions
that they were obtained under torture.  The men wove the patently
untrue statement that they were CIA training into real facts
about their life.
Again, Mr. President, I am aware that the content of the
confessions is not to be discussed before the Chamber.  At this
point with your leave I only wish to ask about certain names in
the confession which lead my family and myself to believe it is
entirely fictional.
I do not seek to rely upon or place any credence upon the
supposed factual content of the confession.  In his confession
Kerry -- sorry.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber grants you the opportunity.  Yes, you may proceed.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
In his confession Kerry stated that Colonel Sanders of Kentucky
Fried Chicken fame, a popular fast-food chain of restaurants, was
one of his superior officers.  He retained his sense of humour
incredibly.  He used our home telephone number as his CIA
operative number and mentioned several family friends as supposed
members of the CIA.  For instance, Colonel Perram was our
father's gliding instructor.  Captain Dodds is an old friend of
Kerry's who still lives in Whakatane.  He also mentions a Captain
Pepper, which may well have been a reference to the Beatles
album. And he talks about a Major Rouse.  A ruse in English is a
fraud or a confidence trick.
Perhaps the most poignant comment in my brother's confession was
the mention of the public speaking instructor, a Mr. S. Tarr.
The instructor's family name was spelled Tarr,
T-A-R-R.  Only the initial of the instructor's first name was
given as "S. Tarr".  It is in fact the name of my adoring mother,
Esther -- Esther Hamill.  That's my mother's name.  He was
sending a message to our mother, a message of love and hope.  It
was as if, whatever the final outcome, he would have the last
say, and he has.
Approximately (microphone not activated) after his capture John
Dewhurst had signed a confession and I presume at that time was
executed.  Exactly two months after his capture my brother Kerry
Hamill signed a confession and I presume at that time he too was
executed.  I say "presume" because we still do not know exactly
when or how either of the men were killed.
Mr. President, Kerry's final letter arrived at our home in July
1978.  The silence after the arrival of that letter was
deafening.
Your Honours, I need to explain the impact of this period, the
impact which this period of crushing uncertainty -- crushing
uncertainty -- had upon our family.  As you will be well aware,
Your Honours, in any family and every family everyone is
interconnected.  When a mother or father, a sister or a brother
suffers, all others suffer.  A family shares in happiness and
warmth.  A family shares in depression and misery.  My family's
suffering is my suffering.  My family's disintegration is my
disintegration.  My family's pain is my pain.
As I already described, Kerry used to write home about once every
month.  Some weeks passed without any communication from Kerry.
The weeks turned to months, still with no contact from Kerry as
time went by, we became more and more concerned about something
was wrong.
Excuse me, I just need to get a little --
MR. WERNER:
And, Your Honour, may I just say because I note the time -- and I
am fortunate enough to know the text my clients are going to read
-- if you want to break now that would be a convenient time in
his narrative, if you wish.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now appropriate for the Chambers to have break, and we also
see that the civil party is emotional at this stage.
The Chamber will now take 20 minutes break so that the civil
party can collect himself and then we continue to hear his
testimony at 3 p.m.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1441 to 1500)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We will continue to hear the testimony of the civil party, Robert
Hamill.
Before we continue, the Chamber would like to remind Mr. Robert
Hamill please to slow down a little bit more, so that the
interpreters would have adequate time to fully interpret your
statement for the Chamber, as well as for the civil parties, so
that they can fully understand the contents of your statement and
what happened to the fate of your elder brother.
I also notice the presence of the civil party lawyer, Alain
Werner.  You may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Mr. President.
It was my sloppiness.  I forgot to mention to start with that not
only we have the birth certificate of Kerry Hamill and the copy
of particulars of marriage of my clients, but we do as well have
his own birth certificate.  I already told your Greffier, and all
of that will be given to them in the proper form tomorrow.  Thank
you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, you can now continue with your statement.
MR. HAMILL:
Mr. President, thank you.
If I may first begin by acknowledging my wife, who was not in
this session early and she has just come in during this session.
I send my love to my wife.  She has supported me through this
enormously through the years and I thank her for that.
I'd also like to ask -- in my nervousness early on, I did not put
up a photo of my brother, Kerry Hamill.  I would ask, Mr.
President, your leave to put this photo up now for the Court to
see.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer, you can take the photo and show it on the
slides projector.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
As already described, Kerry used to write home about once a
month.  Some weeks passed without any communication from Kerry.
The weeks turned to months, still with no contact from Kerry.  As
time went by, we became more and more concerned that something
was wrong.
Our family home was positioned at the mouth of the Whakatane
River, which flows out into the Pacific Ocean.  Towards the end
of the year, my mother, Esther, would gaze out to sea and say,
"It's okay.  He'll turn up at Christmas and surprise us."  We all
half expected the yacht to appear over the horizon at any moment.
Mr. President, you, like myself, will perhaps remember the times
before we lived in a world of instant communication; the days
before mobile phones, the Internet and 24/7 news.  It was in this
time of letters and telegrams, which younger generations cannot
appreciate, that my family waited and waited for any news at all.
There was a desperate sense of hope in our household.
Christmas 1978 came and went, as did the new year, and there was
still no news.  This was the first Christmas without the normal
happiness.  There was no excitement at New Year's.  We were all
thinking of the person missing from our lives -- Kerry.
As time went by, my parents became more and more anxious.  Still
we hoped for a positive outcome, but deep down we were all
thinking the same thing, that something terrible had happened to
my brother.
My father, Miles Hamill, wrote letters to the ports of Asia and
the New Zealand government, requesting information about the
"Foxy Lady" and any possible sightings.  We were trying to
establish if any shipwrecks had been reported in the area.
Nothing of any consequence was reported back to my father.
When you are waiting to hear from a loved one, 16 months -- 16
months is a very, very long time.  Your Honours, one year and
four months of uncertainty passes like an eternity.  In less than
this period of time, a new life can be conceived and born.  I was
14 when Kerry went missing and 16 when we found out the terrible
news.  My two birthdays were a time of mute celebration.  The
waiting without knowing, the hoping while fearing the worst had
been a terrible time for our family.
I remember a day a neighbour rang us, suggesting we go and get a
copy of the local newspaper.  I went with my second eldest
brother, John Hamill, to the local newsagent and I recall the
look of sympathy on the attendant's face as he handed over the
newspaper.  On this day, 16 months after the capture of Kerry, we
got the news that Kerry had been captured and tortured and
murdered at the hands of the Pol Pot regime.  My brother had been
captured, tortured and killed.
Mr. President, nobody in the New Zealand government had the time
to take to contact my parents with this terrible news.  All we
had was the report staring out at the front of the newspaper.  We
were devastated.  All that hope was now extinguished.
I remember later that day standing in the kitchen, hugging my
father, both of us crying for what seemed like a very long time.
It was the closest I had ever felt to my father.  I found it
difficult to describe the feeling of love, complete love,
combined with complete sorrow I felt for my father at that
moment.  In some ways it was a beautiful moment that was
all-consumed in the grief and shock of the tragedy that had
occurred.  Never in our worst nightmares had we considered the
reality of what had happened to Kerry:  death not by shipwreck,
not by drowning or freak accident, but death by torture.  Death
by torture; not over a few seconds or minutes or hours or days or
weeks even.  Death by torture over a period of months.
In the absence of Kerry's body, a memorial service was held.  For
the next 12 months my parents tried to ascertain the detail of
what happened and why the New Zealand government still supported
Pol Pot's regime into the 1980s.  At the same time they tried to
sustain their business, which was in decline, and try and hold
off bankruptcy.
Mr. President, family life disintegrated.  I would like to
describe how my family struggled and perhaps failed to cope with
my brother's death.  With your leave, Mr. President, I would like
to begin by telling you about my brother John.
It is my conviction that what happened to John is directly linked
to Kerry's death at S-21 and as such his story is an important
part of the damage caused to my family.  John was a year younger
than Kerry.  The two brothers had a close bond.  John was a
wonderful sensitive man that had the ability to make us all laugh
to the point of tears.  After Kerry went missing, that humour
stopped.
During the 16-month time lag between Kerry's capture and our
discovery of what had happened, John displayed the effects of
deep depression.  Arguments I had had with him previously
increased in number and intensity.  These arguments often turned
violent.  John was 27.  I was 16.  The loss of his closest
sibling had a massive impact on John.  Eight months after he
found out what had happened to my eldest brother Kerry, my second
eldest brother John took his own life.  He threw himself off a
cliff near our family home.
My father Miles and my third brother Peter were the first to find
John.  They retraced his footsteps to the edge of the cliff and
saw his body at the bottom of the rocks.  On the morning of
John's funeral I remember my mother administering pills to me and
my older siblings, Sue and Peter.  I later found out that these
pills were Valium tablets.
That was an example of how my parents did not know how to deal
with their grief.  There was so little in the way of effective
support systems that they somehow thought it was best to mask
one's own feelings in the cloak of prescription medication.
I discovered later that morning that my father had been in such a
bad way during the night before the funeral that my mother had
called for the doctor, who administered strong sedatives.  It was
enough to render my father unconscious for the next 24 hours.  He
did not, he could not, attend the funeral of his second eldest
son, John.  It was simply too much for him.  It was simply too
much.  I feel he blamed himself for the death of his two eldest
children.  I think he felt he could have done more to protect
them, as all parents do -- as all parents do.
Both Kerry George Hamill and John Dwyer Hamill died at the age of
27.  I find it difficult to separate the death of John from the
death of Kerry.  I am certain that if Kerry's life had been
spared, John would not have taken his own life.  Duch, when you
killed my brother Kerry you killed my brother John as well.
The effect these two devastating losses had on our family simply
cannot be measured.  They were massive and incomprehensible.  I
often think how much better things might have been had my brother
not been taken.  It's impossible to say.
My mother, Esther Hamill, was possibly the most deeply affected
by Kerry's death.  She was thinking about Kerry non-stop, but not
communicating that to us.  She was a very private woman and in
her own way but she was a very outgoing lady as well, very
humorous.  She had a great sense of humour.  But all that changed
after Kerry was captured.
I never saw her cry, she was so strong.  But as a result of that
strength, and holding her pain within, she became very sick.  Two
years after we found out what happened to Kerry and about 18
months after John's death, my mother became bedridden with
painful arthritis.  She was in bed for many months.
Her room was like a mausoleum.  I could barely bring myself to go
into her room.  I avoided her, so much so that it feels to me
like I abandoned her right when she needed me most.  It must have
felt to her like she had lost not only one, not two, but three
sons -- such was my lack of support.  I cannot forgive myself for
that.
It took years for her to get back her independence.  But though
she rarely let on, her back was a continuous source of pain.  A
few years later she was afflicted with shingles, which is a
disease of the nervous system.  This illness took a long time for
her to shake off.  During those years my mother was depressed but
she did not express it in a way that I consciously understood.
She was angry.  She fought with my dad and she was very sad.  My
mother stopped engaging with life.  She did less and saw less
friends.  She removed herself from all social interactions in the
township.
For her remaining children, however, she remained strong and
supportive but I know that she longed to turn back time.  Her
courage was illustrated when I was planning adventures of my own,
adventures that would put my life at great risk.  When I decided
to enter a rowing race across the Atlantic Ocean she said to me,
"You go for it, boy".
My mother had witnessed the death of two beloved sons and here
was a third wanting to embark on a crazy challenge that may well
kill him.  She continued to support me.
Every Christmas my mother would put on a brave face but at some
point on Christmas Day she would disappear to visit John's grave
and light flares as a memorial to her two boys.
My mother died 28th of July 2003 after succumbing to leukaemia,
cancer of the blood.  She died before seeing any measure of
accountability for the death of her son.
My father, Miles Hamill, took the death of Kerry and John very
badly.  Over the years it was relatively common to watch
television and hear Dad in the kitchen doing mindless chores next
door, quietly weeping.  I knew at that point that he would have
been crying for some considerable time before it progressed to
being audible to where I sat in the room next door.  At these
times Mum would stare at the television and try to block it out.
To a certain extent I did the same.  I didn't offer Dad any
sympathy or affection.  For some reason I just couldn't.
The one moment of closeness that we had shared between us that
day we found out what had happened to Kerry had been all I could
offer.  He was a business owner in a partnership that had been a
successful business.
After Kerry's disappearance, murder and John's death, my father
lost the ability to function effectively at work.  He couldn't
make the difficult decisions any more and when hard financial
times came along he didn't respond the way he once might have.
He was forced to retire too young.
My father is now aged 88 and is suffering from the effects of
Alzheimer's disease.  He no longer recognizes photos of my
brother Kerry.
I believe the pain of the last 30 years have taken a toll.
I note on both my parents' bravery through all of this.  There
were many examples that illustrated how grief-stricken they were.
They continued to do the best they could to be good parents to
us.  However, it is clear to me as a parent myself that they were
paralyzed by the tragic loss of their son.
I remember clearly how John openly beat me, punching me in the
face while my mother and father stood by just a metre away.
Before the loss of Kerry this would never -- this unimaginable
event in our house.  My parents would never have allowed such
behaviour but there they were a metre away, allowing this to
happen.  They lost the ability to parent for a long time.  It was
as if they were, as I say, paralyzed, leaving them unable to
continue their parenting duties.
At the time I didn't know what to make of it but on reflection I
believe their reaction or lack of it was symptomatic of the
psychological grief they suffered.  But they held on and perhaps
we, their remaining children, were what kept them going.  They
hung in there and were incredibly strong.
My third sibling, Peter Hamill, does not wish for me to talk
about how Kerry Hamill's torture and murder and subsequently John
Hamill's suicide affected him.  I wish to acknowledge Peter at
this time and send him my love.
My sister, Sue Hamill, was 16 years old when Kerry was snatched
from his boat by the Khmer Rouge.  She was 18 years old when she
found out what had happened to him.  She has spoken to me about
the subliminal fear she feels she has carried with her
consciously or otherwise for the last 30 years; a fear that has
influenced many of her decisions and life choices.
Mr. President, with your leave I would like to read just one or
two lines of something Sue wrote to me.  Not only does it
describe her feelings but it also encapsulates my suffering:
"After shock, disbelief and anger there came the realization
that I could not do anything to bring back Kerry.  He is gone
forever.  But then I began to wonder how could one human do
something unbelievably abhorrent to another human and to an
innocent one?  Something had to fill the void where there had
once been hope and expectation of his return.  What filled that
hole was my choice but I did not consciously choose fear.  Often
it has only been in retrospect that I have understood why I
deferred plans sometimes indefinitely, but slowly I have come to
understand that deep hurts can cause a subtle kind of paralysis.
Time is a very, very slow healer."
Mr. President, I have already mentioned the suffering and the
pain of my mother, father, brothers and sister were part of my
own suffering and the distressing aspect of Kerry's death and the
nature and, more importantly, the nature in which his life was
taken.  Ultimately I do not know how Kerry finally met his fate.
At best my brother was blindfolded, taken out to the S-21
compound to a pre-dug trench, made to kneel down beside it, hit
over the head with a metal bar, his throat slit and then buried.
That was the best-case scenario.
Unfortunately, Kerry was regarded as a special prisoner, the type
of prisoner the Duch division was set up to look after. It
indicates that these prisoners received special attention; the
thought of which makes my stomach turn.
It is also possible that Kerry -- still alive -- could have been
made to sit in the middle of car tires covered in petrol and
seared alive.
When I think about what happened to my brother, Kerry Hamill, I
get the seeds of hopelessness, powerlessness, and despair he must
have felt while incarcerated and tortured at S-21.  He must have
suffered terribly, yet he had no one to appeal to.  He had no one
prepared to listen to his pain and anguish.  There was no way out
and no vindication.
When I try to imagine my brother, Kerry, how he would have
responded in that environment, it makes me feel sick.  I know
Kerry was physically and mentally strong; he would not have
succumbed easy.  His will to live would have been evident.
Mr. President, I would like your leave to show one last photo,
the photo that I imagine illustrates what Kerry suffered.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to put that photo on the
projector so that it can be put on display.
MR. HAMILL:
I know this individual may not be my brother, Kerry; just another
poor soul at S-21, but the way he is shackled, the way he has
been grotesquely beaten, the blood flowing from his gaping
wounds, yet the continuing struggle, the resilience; this man
struggled to hold onto life.  He is moving, holding himself up
ever so slightly off the floor.  For me, Mr. President, this is
my gorgeous -- this is my gorgeous, beautiful brother Kerry
Hamill at S-21.  This is the sort of image that has haunted me
when I was 16 and still haunts me today.  I have lost so much
sleep over this image.
The timeframe Kerry was detained at S-21 also continues to
trouble me.  From what I have been led to believe, the longer a
prisoner remains in S-21, the worse the torture gets.  It has
also been my understanding that once prisoners signed confessions
and put their thumbprint to them that they were then executed.
Whereas John Dewhurst was detained for three weeks, my brother
endured a much longer stay in the compound.  His last dated
confession was on the 13th of October 1978; two months to the day
of his capture.
When I think about the deprivation, the degradation and the abuse
that Kerry would have suffered, after 30 years my tears are still
copious and I try not to think too deeply about what he went
through.
I think Kerry would have been very, very angry; angry to the
point of outrage.  Then I think there must have been stages where
he would have felt that it was useless to resist; that seeds of
powerlessness and hopelessness must have been incredibly
difficult.  I had wondered how Kerry felt in those days in
prison; deprived of food and water, dehumanized beyond belief,
and tortured.
Last year's Republican nominee for the Presidential elections for
the United States, John McCain, talked about his incarceration
during -- in a Vietnamese prison.  He described how he lost the
will to live and attempted to commit suicide on more than one
occasion.  I've wondered if Kerry tried to do the same.  As much
as it hurts to say, I believe at some point in his incarceration,
my brother may have lost all hope and contemplated suicide as a
welcome relief.
During the 16-month period Kerry was missing, I, at 14 and then
15 years of age, took solace in alcohol, boozing it up in the pub
or out somewhere with my friends.  I was 16 years old when the
news of Kerry's fate arrived and that year that followed, my
nights out bingeing escalated in regularity and duration.  I
would often end up violently ill, sometimes on the carpet of my
bedroom after returning home late at night.  I would often go to
school with a hangover and my education, accordingly, suffered.
My parents were dealing with their own grief in their own way,
and through no fault of their own, either didn't notice my antics
or felt powerless to do anything about it.
When I was actually at home -- sorry.  Before losing Kerry and
John, we were an outgoing family but afterwards, Mum, Dad cut off
many of their social contacts.  As children, we stopped meeting
other children and families.  Our immediate family became a
little bubble and we became very reluctant to interact with
others.
Mr. President, I believe that a family is not necessarily limited
to just blood relatives or family by marriage; they're often
family by circumstance.  There are two people who I considered to
be family in this way and I ask for your leave, Mr. President, to
allow me to very briefly, very briefly refer to them.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please proceed with it.
MR. HAMILL:
The first is Hilary Holland who is the sister of John Dewhurst.
I contacted her three years ago and have since visited her in
England.  In the interim time, we have formed a strong bond in
our shared grief.  Such is Hilary's grief that she cannot today
say her brother's name out loud.  She cannot say her brother's
name out loud.  In our correspondence, Hilary described her pain.
And as I feel it also captures my own feelings, I would like to
read you just five sentences of what she has written via email:
"When I first heard of my brother's death, and for a long time, I
felt that if it was possible to die as a result of emotional
pain, then I would.  I could not see how my heart could continue
to pump and my lungs to breathe.  The physical pain was so
intense and that pain continues."
For me, it is all to do with how they were killed -- how they
were killed.  Torture, I believe, is dehumanizing, both for the
person who suffers that torture and for the person perpetrating
it -- for the person perpetrating it.
The second person I would like to briefly talk about is Gail
Colley, Mr. President; the love of my brother Kerry Hamill's
life.
The two of them had plans to marry and have children.  Even now,
I cannot look at a beautiful photo I have a Gail, the two of them
together, without feeling deprived of such a wonderful
sister-in-law and their planned children.  When Gail finally
received the news of Kerry's demise, she too was devastated.
Gail did not get married and she did not have children.
Mr. President, to conclude, all the pain and suffering my family,
Gail, Hilary and myself, have had to endure was created by one
man, by the system of degradation, humiliation and torture he
created from the death camp he ran.  All this heartbreak, sorrow
and human suffering stemmed from the destruction of the life of
my beautiful brother.
That was just one life.  There are between 13,000 and 20,000 such
stories like ours, all stemming from the systems and practices
and actions that Duch administered at S-21.
At a personal level, this whole process has been demanding.  I
have had to dig up all the memories and try to put them in
perspective.  I have had to sit down and write about what you
did, Duch, to good people and the pain that you caused.  When the
need and desire arises, I can be incredibly focussed.  I'm tough
and determined, and yet I sit before this Court frail and
emotional.  I should feel ashamed from behaving so weakly, but I
do not.  The only person in this Court who should feel shame is
that man.
Duch, at times I've wanted to smash you -- to use your words --
in the same way that you smashed so many others.  At times, I've
imagined you shackled, starved, whipped and clubbed viciously --
viciously.  I have imagined your scrotum electrified, being
forced to eat your own faeces, being nearly drowned, and having
your throat cut.  I have wanted that to be your experience, your
reality.  I have wanted you to suffer the way you made Kerry and
so many others.
However, while part of me has a desire to feel that way, I am
trying to let go and this process is part of that.  Thank you for
that.  Today in this courtroom, I am giving you all that crushing
weight of emotion -- the anger, the grief and the sorrow.  I'm
placing this emotional burden on your head, for it is you who
created this burden which no-one deserves.  It is you who should
bear the burden alone.  It is you who suffer, not the families of
the people you killed.
From this day forward, I feel nothing towards you.  To me what
you did removed you from the ranks of being human.  It removed
you from the ranks of being human.  If anything, if anything at
all is to come from this trial and from my statement on behalf of
those I love, let it be that the world takes notice of the evil
that can happen when people do nothing.  And let it be that the
world decides that doing nothing is not an option.
Mr. President, Your Honours, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before this Chamber and express the pain and suffering
that I and my family have endured due to the actions of the
accused.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Alain Werner, you take the floor.
MR. WERNER:
Your Honour, we are in your hands how you want to proceed but, as
I said before, my client would like to request your leave to put
six questions to the accused.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, since you have the intention to put questions
to the accused, you may now proceed with the questions, however,
it depends now on your questions whether the accused is able to
respond to them or not.  Then the accused himself can exercise
his rights not to respond to those questions.
However, you may now proceed, one question at a time, and we can
then pick the question and put it to the accused so that he can
respond.  Do you still now intend to put those questions to the
accused?
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, with your leave, I would briefly like to address
the accused on the acceptance of responsibility of the crimes
committed at S-21 and then go on to ask the accused, through the
Bench, some brief questions.
Duch, I acknowledge you pleading guilty.  I acknowledge --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on.  Mr. Robert Hamill, you can put your questions
through the Bench but not directly to the accused and, of course,
after the Chamber has heard your question, then they can be put
through to the accused.  We are afraid you cannot put the
questions or any statements straight forward to the accused as
you are a civil party.  I hope you understand this.
The accused, please be seated, and only to rise again when you
are responding to questions.  And please take note of the
questions from Mr. Robert Hamill, although the questions will be
passed through the Bench because sometimes the Bench will need
you to just pick up to respond to those questions without having
the Chamber to repeat, but then of course the Chamber needs to
approve whether the questions could be put to you or not.
Do you understand this?
MR. WERNER:
Your Honour, just because again it was my sloppiness and not my
client's, actually what my client intended to do is to say
something very shortly to the accused.  That is one.  And then he
would have six questions.  Then of course he can tell you what he
intends to say for the Bench to repeat it but that is the
confusion.  And again, it's my sloppiness.  He has one very, very
short, very short statement for the accused, and then he has six
questions.
I apologize for that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The statement will be allowed to make to the accused but the
Chamber would like to remind Mr. Robert Hamill to refrain from
using some very strong words that tend to be abusive to anyone
regardless of the accused.  And we believe that your wordings
will be of ethical nature and we don't want to seek this venue as
the ground for any revenge or abusive words and we hope you will
be ethical when it comes to addressing your statement to the
accused.
Please proceed with the statement.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President, and my apologies for any
miscommunication.
Duch, I acknowledge you for pleading guilty.  I am angry beyond
words with you and what you did, but I acknowledge and respect
your guilty plea.  Your acknowledgment is a small but significant
contribution to addressing the harm that you caused.  Those that
have not pleaded guilty and do not accept the harm they have
caused are doubly worth all their hate and ridicule.
You have proven to this Court that you are very good, that you
have a very good memory.  Over a three-year period there were
less than ten Westerners at S-21 and it appears that there were
never more than two held there at any one time.  I ask you to
please answer these questions truthfully.
My first question follows.  Mr. President, question for Duch --
what do you remember of my brother?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, are you able to respond to the question of Mr.
Robert Hamill?  What do you remember of his brother during the
entire period of S-21 and what happened to Mr. Kerry Hamill, to
the best of your recollection?  Can you do that?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the Westerners who were captured and put at S-21
were four of them.  I remember the names but I remember only one
person, "Foxy Lady" -- no, the name of the boat.  Because Pon
called me to meet a young Briton, John something, and I was told
that the Briton was very gentle and polite and there was a
translator who assisted with the interpretation, and I met that
person but I only met the British man.
I did not meet Mr. Hamill.  And he wrote in detail his complete
confession but I believe in his confession.  However, I would
like to reserve just two words to be given to Robert Hamill.
First, that the assumption was wrong that Mam Nai interrogated
Kerry Hamill.  It was Pon who actually did the interrogation.
Number two, I would like to also reiterate further that in the
application of Robert Hamill he stated that the person who killed
Kerry Hamill was Cheam Sour.  It was not him who actually killed
your brother.  The new arrival, the new Westerners, John Dewhurst
and Kerry Hamill, were removed and executed simultaneously and
that their body had to be burned to ashes as ordered.  And that's
all I can tell you in relation to the fate of your brother.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, you can now proceed with the next question.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Duch, you say John Dewhurst and Kerry Hamill were killed
simultaneously.  May I ask when this occurred?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to this question?  The question is
that you said John Dewhurst and Kerry Hamill were simultaneously
killed.  When did it occur?  Do you still remember it?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the actual dates of the executions I cannot tell
the Chamber but, regarding that event, I can say that amongst the
two, only both of them provided the confession and according to
the statement made by Robert, Kerry's confession was done after
John's, so both of them would be taken away and smashed after the
confessions were extracted from both of them.
This is my observation, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, you may continue with your next question.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Was there a special branch dealing with the foreigners and, if
so, what were the procedures applied to them?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you answer that question; you can describe the
process carried out at S-21 towards the foreigners?
THE ACCUSED:
This area is very broad, Mr. President.  Let me talk about the
obligations that the Standing Committee designated for S-21.
Before Westerners came in two sessions for each session the upper
echelon designated the S-21 to interrogate them and then after
that they had to be smashed.  That is, they had to be beaten to
death and their bodies had to be burned to ashes.  And that was
the concrete order from the Standing Committee to S-21 to carry
out.
Whatever policy towards foreigners is so broad.  I could only
talk about the specific order and instructions in this particular
instance.  This is my observation, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, you may now continue with your next question.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
We have heard that Westerners were put on tires and burnt alive.
You have said in this trial that this didn't happen but we
believe that it did.  You said it did not happen because it would
not have been against your orders.
However, we know of the last -- of at least one instance of rape
at S-21 which you have acknowledged which according to you
yourself was against your orders.  So my question is how can you
be certain that one or several Westerners were not burned alive?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you answer that question?
THE ACCUSED:
Regarding the Westerners, I always said they had to be killed and
then, in taking the orders from the upper echelon, they had to be
burned to ashes and I never have spoken anything besides this
line.  My statement before the Co-Investigating Judges is a
testimony to this fact.
I would also like to add that even in my interview with
Christopher Peschoux, I said the same thing even thought that
document was not admitted and could not be accepted by the
Chamber.  And only later on I have heard that they were burned
alive and I did my research to find out the truth.
I would like to recall the questioning before this Chamber as
follows:  in the proceedings before this Chamber regarding
Comrade Huy who acknowledged his task and assignments which was
clearly stated, as well as the statement and the testimony of
Prak Khan which was irresponsible as he stated that one Westerner
was burned alive under the order of Cheam Sour.  So this is
testimony which doesn't carry any weight to stand against the
clear testimony of Him Huy.
And when Cheam Sour was brought in for questioning before this
Chamber he himself was still unclear to me as whether he was a
member of S-21 or staff or not.  He said that the body was burned
and left before the church on the Street 143.  So Cheam Sour's
testimony is even more confusing and it doesn't carry any weight
at all for me to weigh it against the testimony of Comrade Him
Huy.
And I made my conclusion before this Chamber that I have yet to
decide anyone who dares to stand against my order or violated my
orders.  And I would like to reiterate that again before this
Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robert Hamill, if you still have more questions you may now
proceed.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Where were the ashes of the westerners disposed of?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to that question regarding the ashes
of the Westerners who were burned through ashes?  And we can
leave aside the matter whether they were burned alive or dead.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the purpose of the Standing Committee in ordering
S-21 to burn the dead bodies to ashes is to get rid of evidence,
not to leave any trace behind.  And I stated that already to the
Chamber.  And that was the intention of the Standing Committee,
not to leave any dead bodies or trace of those westerners.
As the policy of the CPK was not like the Cuban policy to
exchange the dead bodies for the tractors or bulldozers so the
bodies had to be burned to ashes.  And I would like to state that
again to Mr. Robert Hamill.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
Mr. Robert Hamill, do you still have more questions?  If so, you
can continue.  I think you have already asked five questions so
there is one more remaining question that you can ask.
MR. HAMILL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I didn't have the opportunity to talk about reparation but I do
not seek reparation.  I refer that to my lawyer.
But I wonder, Duch, could you think of anything else concretely
-- concretely as to what you can do to help the victims,
including my family?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, can you respond to that question?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to state before Mr. Robert Hamill as
well as before the Cambodian nation and the Cambodian people that
I do not have any ability to assist anybody at this stage.
The best I can do for Vorn Vet when he was sent in at 6 p.m.
already that is in Cambodian culture that I had to kneel and pray
to him for forgiveness.  And he pointed his finger at me and
scolded me, "You're a murderer."
And another matter which I concealed in my feelings was another
person, that is, Dr. Roat Kut who I regarded as my elder
god-brother and another person Chao Seng who was kept for quite a
long time.  So that was the only thing that I could do to those
people.
Friends were just a façade and I could not do anything to them; I
was so coward at the time.  And this is my last word, that at
that time I did not dare to assist anybody.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity to the civil
party lawyer group 1.  If you have questions to be put to your
client to clarify certain matters or to add to the statement
which was already made by your client, you may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
I have just one question, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. WERNER:
Q. Mr. Hamill, is it correct that you went to Tuol Sleng Museum
last week?
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q, Could you just describe to this Chamber what you felt when you
went to Tuol Sleng Museum last week?
Q. Mr. President, I guess the first thing that struck me when I
went into the start of the building, A, I think it was, and
seeing the special prisoners on the beds, the photos of, which I
had never seen before and the treatment they had received.  And
it was abominable, and incomprehensible.
I couldn't help but relate those special prisoners who were, I
believe, in the upper echelon of the cadre, and they were dealing
with them in a special way.  I could not help but think my
brother was dealt with in a special way, a way I don't know what
exactly that was.
I was moved by the previous speaker and her talking, her
referencing to Tuol Sleng and Choeung Ek, the killing fields, and
in particular regarding the killing fields, the tree where the
babies were smashed against, which I also visited and I found
incredibly distressing.
But those two things for me were relatively insignificant when I
saw what I think was Building C or D and the paintings of Vann
Nath, most of which I had seen before.  But there was something
about being in that building and seeing the original paintings of
the acts, of the act of torture, of dehumanizing the victims, the
prisoners, my brother, that I found incredibly difficult because
I don't believe we can quite understand or get our head around
the atrocity, the sheer brutality and inhumanity of what these
people did.
But seeing those paintings somehow gave me some semblance of
understanding.
Thank you.
MR. WERNER:
We have no other questions, Your Honours.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, do you have questions to be put to this civil
party?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, Your Honours, it is very difficult to speak after
such an emotional day as today, after hearing so much suffering,
hearing so much sadness and also hearing so much anger.
We do not have any specific questions to put to Mr. Robert
Hamill, but if you give us the leave, I have one sole question
that is linked to the statement which I would like to put to the
accused.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are not granted any permission to put questions to the
accused.  If you do not have questions for this civil party, the
Chamber will give the floor to the defence counsel.
The defence counsel, do you have questions to be put to this
civil party?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The defence counsel do not have any
questions for this civil party.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now likes to give the opportunity to the accused to
make his observations regarding the statement of the civil party,
Robert Hamill.
You may now proceed.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all, I would like to recognize the
sufferings of the entire family of Hamill and Dewhurst which
derived from the death of Kerry, and John Dewhurst at S-21.  The
suffering is miserable, detailed and deep.  Two people died at
S-21 and two families suffered greatly, one in New Zealand and
one in England.  The suffering of the Cambodian peoples are also
immense and the sufferings by these two families is a symbol for
the Cambodian people to know that everyone suffered, everyone
without exception.
In my role as a Chairman of S-21, I bear the responsibility, and
I would like to give the opportunity to other -- the victims and
the survivors to point their fingers at me and I'm not offended
by that.  And that is your right and I would accept it with
respect.
In the role as the Chairman before these crimes, I have
repeatedly told the Chamber even if the people throw stones to me
and cause my death I would not say anything and I would not say
that I would be disappointed or intend to commit any suicide.
But if you look at the human history, those people who fail to
accomplish their commission, like Van Gogh, the painter, for
instance, he would cut off his ear, and then he would bandage it
and continue his painting.
Recently, in Japan, there was a specialist who committed suicide
because he could not identify the faked blueprint, so at that
time my intention was to do the revolution to liberate the
country but in the end it leads to disaster of the Cambodian
country and more than one million people died, and there's still
plenty of people who were survivors and who are still suffering.
So I am responsible for my act and whether they forgive me or
not, it is their mind, their free will, and I am here before the
Chamber to accept my responsibilities willingly and I am very
remorseful with what I did, and I speak from the bottom of my
heart.  And I did not say all these words as a pretext for
anything.  This is the real words from my heart and I bow my head
and body before the Cambodian people.  I stand here before this
Chamber to do that with my respect, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The proceeding today has come to an end now.  Also the hearing of
the testimony and statement of Mr. Robert Hamill has come to an
end.
The Chamber would like now to adjourn today's hearing and we will
continue tomorrow morning, starting from 9 a.m.
Mr. Robert Hamill, the hearing of your testimony has completely
ended, so in your name as a civil party you can participate in
these proceedings or you may go wherever you wish during the
subsequent hearings.
(Witness exits courtroom)
Security guards, you are instructed to take the accused back to
the detention facility and bring him back to the Chamber before 9
a.m. tomorrow morning.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1622H)
