PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0901H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today the Chamber continues to hear the remaining testimony of
witness Sou Soeurn. And before the Chamber hands the floor to the
Defence teams, the Chamber hands the floor to the Defence Counsel
for Nuon Chea to make an oral submission regarding the document
submitted by the Co-Prosecutor yesterday as well as the appeal
brief against the Judgement in Case 002/01. And before I hand the
floor to the Defence Counsel for Nuon Chea, Mr. Em Hoy, please
report the attendance of the Parties and other individuals at
today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings all Parties to this case
are present. Mr. Nuon Chea is present at the holding cell
downstairs. He has waived his right to be present in the
courtroom; his waiver has been delivered to the Greffier.
The witness who is to continue his testimony today that is Madam
Sou Soeurn is present and ready in the courtroom. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Chamber now decides on the request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 5th June
2015, which notes that due to health condition -- that is,
backache and headache, he cannot sit or concentrate for long and
in order to concentrate -- to participate effectively in the
future hearings, he requests to waive his direct presence on the
5th June 2015 hearing. He advises that he has been advised by his
counsel that in no way the waiver can be construed as a waiver of
his rights to be tried fairly or to challenge evidence presented
or admitted at any time during his trial. Having seen the medical
report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor for the Accused at the
ECCC, dated 5th June 2015, who notes that Nuon Chea has chronic
back pain and headache and cannot sit for long and recommends
that the Chamber so grant him his request so that he can follow
the proceedings from the holding cell downstairs remotely. Based
on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the ECCC
Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea's his request to
follow the proceedings remotely from a holding cell downstairs
via an audio-visual means.
The AV unit personnel are instructed to link the proceedings to
the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow it remotely,
that applies for the whole day.
The Chamber would also like to inform the Parties that for
today's proceedings <>, Judge You Ottara, who is a National Judge
is absent due to personal matters and after having deliberated
amongst the Judges of the Trial Chamber, Judge Thou Mony, is
appointed to replace Judge You Ottara today and that decision is
based on Rule 79.4 of the ECCC Internal Rules.
The Chamber now hands the floor to Defence Counsel Koppe to make
his oral submission in relation to your request yesterday
concerning the process of document submissions as well as matters
related to the appeal brief of the judgement in Case 002/01.
Counsel, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, Counsel. The day before yesterday we were notified by
the International Co-Prosecutor of another disclosure of new
statements, statements coming from Case 003. For background
purposes it might be worthwhile to remind the Chamber that up
until now we have received 436 written records of interviews from
Cases 003 and 004, numbering up to 6397 pages in English, and
these were all disclosed in the last five or six months, and when
we were notified of new documents coming from Case 003, another
1000 pages coming from 89 written records of investigation, will
be added to our case file bringing a total, I think, new pages
about 7400 total. So again we are confronted with a huge amount
of new evidence rising from Cases 003 and 004. As of yet we have
not received any of those statements itself, we only have an
overview of what is coming soon to us. When we had a look at this
brief overview, we noticed that at least two written records of
interviews were related to Kampong Chhang airport -- that is,
document .1, it's a written record from a civil party
from 6 April 2012, and we also saw a document which is called
.57, a written record of an interview of a witness from
22 May 2014, also relating to the Kampong Chhnang Airport
construction site.
In addition, we noticed that almost all new WRIs are related to
purges in the East Zone and as it's reference in the closing
order soldiers working at the Kampong Chhnang Airport were mostly
coming from the East Zone troops, revolutionary troops in the
East Zone, so it seems that these new WRIs might be relevant to
Kampong Chhnang Airport as well.
In addition some of them seem to be speaking about military
structure within the Revolutionary Army of Kampuchea, so also for
this reason these 89 documents that have now been disclosed and
that we will soon read seem to be very relevant for Kampong
Chhnang Airport.
Now of course as in earlier instances this raises the question
whether we are in fact ready to start hearing evidence on Kampong
Chhnang Airport. I'll be very happy to hear from the Prosecutor
if our concerns are valid and that a lot of new evidence coming
from Cases 003 and 004 have direct impact on the Kampong Chhnang
Airport worksite. In any case at this point, we have just been
notified that these disclosures are coming but we haven't
actually received it and I think it would be in the interest of
all Parties including the Bench to be able to have at least a
prima facia look at these documents before we start on Monday,
hearing the first witness in relation to the Kampong Chhnang
Airport.
As of now I don't address the question whether it is even
physically possible to read 1000 pages in the next 48 hours
before we start, I won't touch that subject right now. I'm just
waiting for making any submissions when we hear from the
Prosecution as to the relevance of these new documents for
Kampong Chhnang Airport.
So, there's all kinds of new questions arising from this latest
disclosure and I would like to have answers from the Prosecution
as to relevance of these documents. That's my first point.
My second point is the scheduling of the Kampong Chhnang Airport
site witnesses; we have noticed that it is anticipated to have
eight and a half working days of testimony. We might have also
this month, some additional witnesses coming back to testify in
relation to the1st January Dam worksite. However, a few days
might be left over before we're entering into the December
recess. But I'm sure the Trial Chamber is aware that two weeks of
the judicial recess have been taken by the Supreme Court Chamber
and in its recent decision it has announced that it will summons
three witnesses to appear before the Supreme Court Chamber. As
you might understand the Defence needs to prepare these three
witnesses well, these are three witnesses that we have requested.
So I want to make sure that if there are few remaining days left
in the end -- the last of June, we will not addressing the
Trapeang Thma Dam before the recess and that we will be granted a
few days extra in order to enable us to prepare our -- the
testimony that is coming at the Supreme Court Chamber.
So the second question is related to, sort of, planning from the
Trial Chamber in respect of the last week of June and I would
like to make this point now rather than wait until the very last
moment. So these are the two issues, very problematic situation
with new disclosures and what are we going to do in the last week
of June in terms of moving on to a possible next worksite. These
are my two points.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And Defence Counsel for Khieu Samphan, you have the floor.
MS. GUISSE
Yes, thank you, Mr. President. Good morning to all of you. I
think <> I should speak now before the International
Co-Prosecutor <makes his remarks>. Of course <just like> what
happened when we <were supposed to> speak about Krang Ta Chan and
that there were <several> new documents, it is obvious that
regardless of the information that the Co-Prosecutor will give to
us, we cannot tell you exactly how much time we will need to
study these documents, because we haven't seen them <at all>. We
only have <seen advance> summaries of <what> these new statements
<should entail>. So we note, just like my colleague <from> the
Nuon Chea team, that <there are indeed two> witnesses from
Kampong Chhnang, and <that> there are at least <-- and that's an
initial assessment based on the summaries that were given to us
--> 51 witnesses who have <a priori> testified <on the> purges,
<they gave> important elements with regard to the composition of
the army. And we know that of course all of this is a very
important element for the Kampong Chhnang <> site. So, under
these conditions therefore it is obvious that starting the
Kampong Chhnang Airport segment without us having the possibility
of <reviewing -- of> reading the totality of these statements is
going to be an issue for the preparation of our Defence. So, I'm
awaiting the information that will be given to me by the
International Co-Prosecutor, but as of now, if the segment is
<supposed> to begin on Monday <anyway>, since we do not have the
documents before us we indeed have a real problem <-- a real
problem> in terms of organisation.
With regard to the second point, which is the preparation of the
appeal hearings and what you <are going to consider, depending on
the possibility of recalling> witnesses for the end of <the
segment on the> 1st January Dam, our concerns <remain> the same,
we also have to be prepared for this. So I'm awaiting information
from the Co-Prosecutor with regard to Kampong Chhnang, but it is
true that a few days of preparation <for> an important Supreme
Court hearing seems to be <the most appropriate way for us to>
provide a full and complete Defence to Mr. Khieu Samphan.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now hands the floor to the Deputy Co-Prosecutor. You
may proceed.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. Let me try to respond to the various
issues that have been raised. In fact there are only two of these
new interviews that we have linked and identified as relevant to
the Kampong Chhnang Airport. This was not a -- for reasons that
-- one reason that's, two reasons that are fairly obvious, this
was not a site of extensive investigation in Case 003, first
because it had already been investigated as part of Case 002 and
secondly, as was publicly announced yesterday, last year or the
year before the secretary, the former secretary of Division 502,
Sou Met, passed away and as a result any investigation of his
crime sites came to an end at that point. So of all the Case 003
and Case 004 interviews, and there are a total of 900 that have
been done, there are only six interviews that we linked as
relevant to Kampong Chhnang Airport four of those -- three of
those were disclosed back in 2011, one earlier this year and the
last two are being disclosed as part of this filing. As I've said
before, our request -- Mr. Koppe made reference to one of these
being an old interview, that is true -- our request to disclose
this interview however was made more than a year ago, it was
initially denied and authorisation only came a couple of weeks
ago. So there's not much more we could have done we, in addition
to having requested disclosure a year ago, we identified these
specifically as priority interviews for disclosure, we broke down
our requests so that the Judges were aware of which interviews
related to which segments.
I can't speak to, obviously, the reasons for the decisions made
by the Investigating Judges, I can tell just from our
interaction, they evaluate these on a case by case basis with the
investigators to determine if there are particular concerns,
whether people -- there are witnesses identified who are being
the subject of further interviews. Beyond that I can't speak to
the reasoning that goes behind this, what I can tell you is we
immediately make requests for disclosure when we identify and as
soon as authorisation is obtained, we do that. These two
interviews, one of them is six pages long, the other one is ten
pages long. They're very short interviews. The issue that Counsel
has raised about getting copies, we've converted, my
understanding is, to an electronic process that makes it easier
in terms of hours of work time not having to copy but apparently
it takes a couple of days for the documents to make its way
through the electronic system. So what I will do is, when I sit
down here after and when we start the witness, I will send an
email to my office to see if we can get hard copies of the two
interviews that relate to Kampong Chhnang so that they can be
immediately provided to the Parties and the Chamber.
The issue relating to the East Zone, the East Zone was not a
subject of investigation in Case 003, it doesn't mean there's not
some tangential information in there, that's certainly possible,
that's about all I can tell you is that the East Zone was not the
subject -- the main subject of investigation which is public
knowledge was Division 164, the navy operation, and that is
obviously not to say that there might not be -- is not going to
be military structure information in there, that's certainly
true. I don't expect that that is different types of information,
particularly in relation to Kampong Chhnang, than what is already
exists.
The request relating to the Supreme Court Chamber, I don't think
we have any issue with the suggestion that we do not start
Trapeang Thma if we finish Kampong Chhnang early, I think that's
a reasonable proposal. I don't think the amount of preparation
time needed for these three witnesses is very extensive. One of
them, without getting into identity, one of them is a person the
Defence have regularly used his interview here so these are not
people that the Defence are not already familiar with. But I
think that's a reasonable suggestion that should we finish
Kampong Chhnang a couple of days early that we wait until after
the break start Trapeang Thma.
I think that's as much as I can say in response to the Defence
issues, if you have any questions I'm happy to do my best.
JUDGE FENZ:
Just two questions, can you -- do you have any idea when the
documents of the current disclosure will now, actually really hit
the case file? I understand you will try to speed it up but are
we talking three or four days or three or four weeks?
MR. LYSAK:
I'm not involved in those logistics but I -- but I asked. My
understanding is that there's a two-step process in terms of them
getting, and they'll be available in one folder, I'm told, on
Monday, they will be available on Zylab on Tuesday, is what I was
told. But, like I said with respect to the two that relate to
Kampong Chhnang, I will immediately see if we can get those hard
copies of those delivered before then.
JUDGE FENZ:
And my second question is, just in case you know, is there
another disclosure in the pipe that will hit the case file, let's
say, until the recess as far as you know?
MR. LYSAK:
I haven't been involved in this because I've been working on
witnesses and other matters. I understand that there is another
disclosure that's been authorised, it relates to Case 004
interviews, so I don't -- my understanding is it wouldn't affect
the current segment. The disclosure that has taken place is a
disclosure from Case 003 so because of that there were these two
Kampong Chhnang Airports and there is in general a lot of
information related to Division 164 in particular. But the
additional disclosure, and I don't have the numbers for you, but
I'll try to find that to see, I don't think it is a large
disclosure but please don't hold me to that. But there has been
another one, it is Case 004 interviews though not Case 003.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The International Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties, you have the
floor.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning to all of you. I wanted to
provide the point of view of the civil parties and say <once>
again what I <have already> said at every discussion with regard
to the <disclosure> of the documents. We have a specific position
<in this trial> because we support the Prosecution, but we do so
in an independent way, so we also need time to become <acquainted
with> the documents, and we are exactly in the same position as
the Defence with regard to this point because we only learnt
yesterday <about> the <disclosure> of these documents and we
<were> only <able to very quickly review> the list of 89
documents. <What seems peculiar to us>, is that the annexes
<were> sent to the Co-Lead Lawyers in a strictly confidential
manner, so <at this stage,> I do not yet have the right to share
this information with the Lawyers who normally are <supposed to
be> there to help us <and support us> in defending the interest
of the civil parties <during the hearings.>
So we organised a <joint> defence for <the> Kampong Chhnang
<segment>, the civil party Lawyers <were involved in> the
preparation of the witnesses, but <as of> today I'm not able to
share the information that is <contained> in this annex with the
civil party Lawyers.
So, it is <obviously also> necessary for us to become <acquainted
with> the documents before we start the Kampong Chhnang segment.
That's my <first> observation.
My second observation <> regarding the proposal of my colleague
to postpone <the examination of the> Trapeang Thma <segment> --
if we can finish Kampong Chhnang before <the end of the last
session in June> -- I have no problems with that, we in fact
support this proposal.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber thanks all Parties regarding the disclosure of new
documents from Cases 003 and 004 <in Cases 002/02>. The Chamber
will take into account all your observations so that it is fair
for the Defence to proceed with their representation of their
clients and to have an expeditious trial proceeding.
JUDGE FENZ:
May I just aske, Mr. Koppe, after what you heard from the
Prosecution would you care to change or be more precise as you
actually said you would.
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, I'm very happy that you give me this opportunity. It's with
great interest that I heard submissions of the Prosecution, he
does not seem to reject our submission that within those other 87
statement there might be some very relevant information regarding
military structure and regarding purges of East Zone soldiers who
then might have ended up in Kampong Chhnang Airport. I don't see
-- we might get the two statements relevant, directly relevant to
Kampong Chhnang Airport, but I don't see us getting the other 87
statements. Having now realised this, I think the only reasonable
and logical way to proceed is to give us at least two or three
days next week to be able to study briefly those new 89
statements and to postpone the first witness of the Kampong
Chhnang Airport, till Wednesday or Thursday that seems to be the
only reasonable way of proceeding otherwise we just go on with
the first witness without having any knowledge of these very new
statements.
Which brings me to a broader issue, I think it's the first time I
heard that there are in total about 900 WRIs in Cases 003 and
004. We are now having, with those new 89 statements, coming
about 525 Case 003 and 004 WRIs, that leaves about, if my
calculation is correct another 375 most likely coming our way. I
see the Prosecution nod no. Well I'm very happy with that, but at
least part of that is likely coming our way. I know also that
Cases 003 and 004 have reached a new situation with the, how is
it called, the charging of the four suspects, so maybe it is also
time for the International Co-Investigating Judge to re-evaluate
his position and just stop being so cautious with giving us the
testimony from Cases 003 and 004. And the summer recess might be
a natural moment to provide us with all remaining Cases 003 and
004 statements because we'll end up having this discussion every
single time we're having a new disclosure and it's getting quite
tiring and almost impossible to have a proper defence for our
client.
MS. GUISSE:
Once more, in <the interest of logic>, I think <it would be
easier for us to> make our additional remarks, and we wish to
just point out that if I understood the Co-Prosecutor clearly --
<and> perhaps he can correct me if I'm wrong, <but if I
understood what he just said,> we will have the possibility of
consulting all the documents as of Tuesday, if they will be
available on Zylab on Tuesday. If I understood him correctly. We
need at least two or three days, and in that case I do not see
how we can start the Kampong Chhnang segment <before -- not next
week, but the week after. Not this coming Monday, but the
following.> I would say <once more> that it is very complicated
for us to talk about documents that we haven't been able to
study, <not even partially. It's also clear that just because> we
have only two statements that focus <specifically> on Kampong
Chhnang Airport, <that does not mean that> the other documents
are not relevant <to bring up the other elements and the
witnesses. They are relevant> for <the> witnesses who are
testifying on Kampong Chhnang. <So, just  because> we have only
two documents <that> specifically <discuss Kampong Chhang, that
does not mean that> the other documents are related to military
matters and <the> purges <> are not relevant to us the Defence.
The Co-Prosecutor's position <may> be <just> that, they have more
information than us <for the time being, seeing how they can
access those documents,> so this is a remark I wanted to make:
that although other documents may not be relevant to the
Prosecutors, they may be relevant to us, the Defence.
MR. LYSAK:
Let me be brief, I want it to be perfectly clear. If there were
interviews of soldiers of East Zone who had been purged and taken
to Kampong Chhnang they would be linked to that crime site so the
suggestion that because there may be other documents out there
that relate to purges that this has to relate to Kampong Chhnang
is simply incorrect. I'm not going to dispute that these
interviews relate to military structure, of course they do. But
as I said, the focus of these interviews is on Division 164, so
it's your evaluation of the situation here. In terms of the
comment about there being the possibility of a lot of additional
disclosures, let me make sure that I'm clear, there have been
approximately 900 interviews, in terms of the ones that have not
been disclosed, the bulk of them have been evaluated and
determined to be not relevant. There are continuing interviews of
course the case is normally about 30 a month that we evaluate. So
there will be more interviews as the investigations continue but
in terms of -- in terms of the documents that interviews that
have already been conducted, and I will check on the numbers on
this too, but I believe with this last disclosure most of the
interviews that we have requested to be disclosed have now been
authorised. This last large group was from Case 003, again I'm
making a somewhat of an educated guess here because I'm not from
the Co-Investigating Judges offices, but there is definitely a
connection to the charging that occurred and then the subsequent
decision that it was appropriate to release those interviews. One
of the reasons that there -- my understanding, that there had not
been disclosure of Case 003 interviews before that was because of
particular concerns related to the on-going investigation of that
division.
So to the extent that is helpful we have done our best to
identify the ones related to Kampong Chhnang, the other
interviews really do, for the most part focus on Division 164,
that is not to say there may be some general information related
to military structure. I'm not going to stand here and tell you
that, that's not possible.
MR. PRESIDENT:
So we conclude the round of discussion on the matter now and I
would like to give the floor to Judge Lavergne to put questions
to this witness, you may now proceed.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE LAVERGNE RESUMES:
Q. Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Madam Witness. I still
have two questions to put to you. Yesterday you stated that while
you were a member of the Chamkar Leu District committee, you gave
birth to a child and that following the birth of that child, you
were less involved in the affairs of the district. Can you tell
us, Madam, whether you recall the date on which that child was
born?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. My youngest child <> was born in the year of snake <. After
his birth, I> had been sick <all the> time, <therefore, I was not
able to work>.
Q. So it was after your youngest child was born that you stopped
<being> significantly <involved> in the affairs of the district,
is that your testimony?
A. Yes, after I delivered that baby, I became ill so I <did> not
work regularly in the district and in the base area, so I
delegate my tasks to <district and Sangkat chief>. I stopped
working for a period of two years perhaps in 1977 and 1978 and in
1979 we parted each other.
Q. According to you, who was the head of the Chamkar Leu
district?
A. From my recollection, Ta Ban was the chief. I remembered that
he was the chief because we were close -- we were close and we
were living nearby and I do not know about other cadres because
we were separated after 1979.
Q. When you state that you stopped taking part in the activities
of the district committee, did you stop getting involved in all
activities or <did> you only reduce your activities? And it
appears to me that the construction of the 1st January Dam
<notably took place> in the year 1977. So did you go to the 1st
January Dam worksite after the birth of your child?
A. I went to that place for visit. I went there to visit my
<husband> and I did not go to the 1st January Dam site. And when
there was a meeting among district members, I would be <informed>
what tasks which needed to be done.
Q. And what were those tasks; can you be a little more specific,
Madam?
A. After I stopped working for a short period of time and I
delegated my task to others I was living at home and I was
helping the <cooperative> kitchen. And the tasks involving in the
district were delegated to those in the district. And about the
tasks that I was told of, they considered me a senior, I mean the
district members considered me a senior, so I was only informed
and reported on those tasks.
Q. And when reports were sent to you, did they tell you that
everything <was going> well and that there <were> no problems?
A. They told me about those tasks and I was told that
cooperatives <> were organised properly and I was no <longer>
involved <in> the tasks after that time I was only <involved> in
<a communal> kitchen <nearby my house, and I also did not go to
the other cooperatives that located far away>. <The Chief of
Sangkat> told <me that> the livelihood in the cooperative was
decent, was good. <I was just friendly informed at that time.> I
was no <longer> involved in instructing the district committee
how to deal with people in the cooperatives, <for> the sector
<had> told me to take rest during that <two year> period.
Q. In your statements, Madam, you stated that your functions in
the district committee consisted of two tasks, the first one was
to lead the people <from> the cooperative in order that they
could build dykes and dig canals. You also stated that your role
was to re-educate the inhabitants. This is what you stated when
you were heard by the Co-Investigating Judges, document E3/5294,
ERN in French, 00367812; Khmer ERN, 00348835; and <perhaps I will
give you the> English ERN <shortly,> I don't have it before me
<right now>.
Let me also point out that the following question was put to you;
"What does <re-education> mean?" and you said the following;
"After attending a meeting at the district level, regarding <the
decision to> implement a plan<,> I gave <advice to the residents
of the cooperative on the basis of> the plan adopted <to develop>
the country."
Another question was <as> follows; "What did you do in the case
of persons who didn't follow your advice?"<>; "When they didn't
follow our advice, we would educate them once or twice, and if
they continued not to comply with our advice, the district would
take necessary measures. I do not know where they were taken to."
So my first question is as follows: Do you confirm that education
<or> re-education <was> part of your duties, Madam?
A. Before I delivered the baby I was working regularly with
people and for educating people. The district would be in charge
of educating people <who were stubborn. It depended on the
Secretary of the> district <who made the decision, for I was only
a member.>
Q. What did you mean when you said that "the district took the
people wherever it wished to", what <does that> mean <>?
A. I'm not sure on this particular matter. Sangkat would be the
one who made the report that one individual had been reprimanded
and advised, but that individual did not <improve, therefore,>
the district had the right to remove that individual. It depended
on the district, I have no idea, I did not have any idea at that
time.
Q. Do you know whether, in order to <make its> decisions, the
district took into account the biography of the persons
concerned?
A. I cannot recall it because it has been so long since that
time. I may have recalled some and my memory is perhaps is not
100 percent correct and sometimes I am confused and perhaps I may
have given wrong responses. I have a weak memory as I stated I do
not recall well.
Q. To the best of your recollection, do you know how former
soldiers or former <civil servants> who had worked during the Lon
Nol regime <were viewed>? How were those people viewed?
A. I do not know about Lon Nol regime. I did not know how
soldiers were considered; it's far beyond my understanding. I do
not know.
Q. Madam, I note that today and yesterday, you requested the
assistance of <a person from> the TPO organisation. This
organisation, as a general rule, is supposed to assist persons
who are victims of <> psychological trauma and to provide them
with <support>. May I know whether you are suffering from any
psychological trauma and if <having> to talk about what happened
during that period <is painful> for you and if so, why?
A. I feel traumatised. During that period everyone was in trauma,
everyone was terrified. < I did not know how it happened.>
Q. Madam, you have just stated that "everyone was <terrified>".
What <terrified> you? Who <were> you <scared of> and <what were
you scared of>?
A. I was terrified of <artillery shelling>, aerial bombings,
family parted each other, parents were separated from children.
When we noticed the presence of <jet> bombers, we were afraid of
those bombers; we would collect our children and flee so I was
terrified because of this.
Q. Madam, today and yesterday we did not mention bombings, even
once. <Were> you afraid of saying things or doing things that
would not have pleased Angkar?
A. <No,> I have no such impression<, Mr. President>. I am telling
the truth. I was terrified and afraid in that period because of
the bombings and we would be killed by those aerial bombings and
as I said I <was> not afraid of the <"Chairman"> . I was <only>
afraid of the bombings and <shelling>. So I'm telling the truth,
I'm telling what I've remembered.
Q. Madam, <were> you afraid of asking questions? Yesterday you
stated that under the Democratic Kampuchea regime, each person
had to attend to their own business. So <were> you afraid of
asking questions?
A. I do not really understand this question. You stated that
whether I am afraid to talk actually I am only telling the truth.
Why I recalled my terrors because of aerial bombings because it
was the reality at that time, parents were separated from their
children because of aerial bombings, we experienced <artillery
shelling and> bombings. So I am only telling the truth and I will
not tell anything which I do not recall it.
Q. Were there any bombings after 17th April 1975?
A. On the 17th April, there were only the rockets flying
everywhere and we fled, we ran away from our homes <and children>
when <the "Yuon" invaded Cambodia>.
Q. Are you sure it was 17th April 1975?
A. <17th April 1975? What I heard was 79.> In 1979, we ran away
to avoid the rockets and there were two times I had to flee my
home. <First, there was> coup d'état <in Phnom Penh. And second,
we had to flee our homes; we separated from our children to
shelter along the border in 79.I was terrified> when there were
rockets flying everywhere <chasing us>.
Q. When people would disappear, <Madam,> when <> the cadres
around you would disappear, when Base People would disappear,
when the people in the cooperatives would disappear, did you ask
any questions about that? Did you dare ask any questions <> or
were you afraid to ask questions?
A. On the issue of disappearance, if the task was assigned or the
responsibility was assigned to someone else, I did not have any
<rights to inquire. I was a common woman, a housekeeper, whereas
all jobs> solely lied at the district.
Q. And this left you completely indifferent, <Madam>? To know
that people would disappear, people who were <a priori> under
your orders. Didn't you try to know what had happened to these
people, didn't this matter to you?
A. Of course, it mattered to me but my authority was limited and
I did not have any authority <in> the district; I also did not
ask about it because I would be implicated. I should not mind
others' business; they were the one who addressed it.> I was
mindful<, and had to protect > my life for that reason I didn't
ask anything.
Q. Madam, worrying about your life, taking care of your own
business, would you call that cowardice or would you call that
the perfect line of conduct you were <instilled with>?
A. When I did not have the authority, I had to think of my life
as an ordinary woman, and I have to live amongst the villagers.
<And> as I said I had no authority to question them.
Q. According to you, <Madam, was there something>, in Democratic
Kampuchea <that did not work,> and if that is case, what <was it
that> didn't work well <>?
A. Personally from my experience I do not know how to respond to
your question. Of course I -- we did not have the right to defend
ourselves or <the right> to question the authority. <This> is my
best recollection of what happened at that time.
Q. Fine. I have no further questions, but before I give the floor
to other Parties, I would like to ask for a bit of clarification
from the Prosecutors. <Earlier,> Mr. Lysak, <I believe> you said
that it might be possible to provide to the Parties, <> paper
copies of the two written records of interview that are connected
to the Kampong Chhnang Airport, can you confirm if it is indeed
possible to provide these photocopies today?
MR. LYSAK;
Judge Lavergne, I'll have to give you an answer, I think, after
the break. I'm checking my email to see if I've received a
response to the email I've sent but I don't see anything yet. I'm
getting at spinning wheel right now, so if I can answer your
question after the break, I'll see if I can find out.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you. I have no further questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now convenient to take a break. We will take a break now
and resume at 10.20.
Court officer, please assist the witness during the break and
invite her, as well as the TPO staff, into the courtroom at
10.20.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1005H to 1030H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is back in session.
And the floor is given to the Defence teams. First the Defence
team for Mr. Nuon Chea to put questions to this witness before
another team.
You may now proceed, International Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. I just want to respond to Judge
Lavergne. I do expect that we will be, at lunch time, delivering
-- be able to deliver the hard copies, we have to go through the
same sort of process we did when we used to deliver hard copies
but because we're only talking of 16 pages it won't take us long
so I expect that we will send around copies at lunch time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for the information. You can proceed now, Counsel for
Mr. Nuon Chea.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President, Good morning, Madam Witness. I have
some questions that I would like to ask you this morning and
possibly also after the lunch.
Before the break you answered some questions in relation to the
birth of your youngest child who you said was born in the year of
snake. Your oldest child was born, if I am correct, in 1962, but
it is unclear from at least the English translation of your
statement whether it was your son who was born in 1962 or your
daughter. As you know your son has given a statement and he said
that he was born in 1962, is that correct, was it your son who
was born in 1962?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. The one who was born in 1962, was the son.
Q. And your daughter, Sok Ny (phonetic) alias Chang (phonetic),
when was she born?
A. I could not recall exactly the year but I only know that she
was born in the year of dragon.
Q. I was born in the year of the dragon that was 1964. In your
statement to the Investigating Judges Investigators, you said
that it was your daughter whom you took in 1970, to the forest.
Was that the daughter who was born in 1964?
A. As I said I do not recall the exact year. I recall that she
was born in the year of the dragon and I did not know the exact
year at that time. And from my recollection she was born in the
year of the dragon, that is what I could tell you.
Q. And just to be sure, it was her that you took with you in
1970, when you left for the maquis, for the deep forest, is that
correct?
A. Yes. I had a daughter with me at that time. My son parted from
me in Kampong <Cham> and later on we <reunited>.
Q. And your oldest daughter, who was born in 1964 and whom you
took with you into the forest, was she with you all the time up
until the liberation of 1975?
A. Yes. She was with me until that time, until 1975, after which
she was assigned to work in a cooperative. She was then put in
<a> children's unit.
Q. And at one point in time, in the period of '75 - '79, did she
also end up working in the Ministry of Social Affairs?
A. She was in that ministry as a medic. She has been <a midwife
in Anlong Veng district, but she resides in different commune
from mine>.
Q. And is she at present, still a medic, a midwife in Anlong
Veaeng?
A. Yes, she is a mid-wife in Anlong Veaeng, to save people's
lives. She is a mid-wife in the commune.
Q. And your oldest son is, I understand, also still living and
residing in Anlong Veaeng; is that correct?
A. My son passed away <> four or five years ago.
Q. I apologise, Madam Witness, I haven't realised that. In your
statement to the investigators, you said that you joined the
revolution in 1969, but that you went into the forest with your
daughter in October 1970, in response to King Father's call. Can
you explain to us, or do you remember why it was that it was King
Father's call that made you go into the forest?
A. The King Father made a call in the period and I noticed many
people went into the forest so I made a sacrifice to join the
others into the forest.
Q. But you said you joined the revolution already in 1969, a year
earlier, why was it then that late King Father's call made you go
into the maquis?
A. I stated as such in my written record but before that time I
had been at home to earn a living and I had been living with my
children. I heard a call that we had to go into the maquis and I
went into the maquis with other people.
Q. Late King Father Sihanouk visited the maquis in 1973, were you
present during his visit?
A. Allow me tell the Court that I do not really understand about
the presence of the late King Father. I do not understand your
question. Peasants were saying that there was call from the late
King Father that everyone had to go into the maquis and we had to
join the call.
Q. From all sides I hear, Mr. President, there was something
wrong with the translation. I will repeat my question. Madam
Witness, I asked you a question about the 1973 visit of late King
Father Norodom Sihanouk to the maquis where he met for instance,
Pol Pot, Khieu Samphan. Were you present at this visit of late
King Father in 1973?
A. When the late King Father visited <> in the forest I was with
people and I was not in attendance. I did not know when the late
King was there. I would like to tell the Court that I have
forgotten it I did not pay attention to the visit of the late
King Father, and as I said I do not know when he was there.
Q. I'm staying in this period with my later questions but moving
on time, moving on to 1976. Do you remember King Father visiting
Kampong Cham in 1976, and that a banquet was prepared to greet
King Norodom Sihanouk?
A. I cannot recall it. I do not know whether the late King Father
arrived at that place, I do not recall it.
Q. Let me read from your statement that you gave, maybe that will
refresh your memory. It is E3/5294, English ERN, 00360119;
French, 00367812; and Khmer, 00348836.
"Question: Did you know of King Norodom Sihanouk's visit to
Kampong Cham in 1976?" And you answered: "I know that they
prepared a banquet to greet King Norodom Sihanouk, but I did not
attend the banquet." Does that refresh your memory?
A. Because of my weak memory I may have recalled it and
<sometimes> I may not have recalled it. And at this time, I told
you already, that I cannot recall it. And as the statement in the
written record perhaps it is so because I may have forgotten it.
Q. Madam Witness, in the case file there is evidence to suggest
that the late King Father visited various sites in Democratic
Kampuchea around five or six times, do you recall maybe any other
visit to the area where you were working or living?
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, if the Counsel wants to ask about other visits
that's fine. I don't think he should lead the witness by vague
unspecified references to the case file, there being supposedly
evidence in the case file of other visits. He has something
specifically he wants to -- document he wants to reference and
ask the witness about, I think that's fine but I don't think he
should be characterising the case file and trying to lead the
witness.
MR. KOPPE:
I'll be happy to give more specific reference, Mr. President.
E3/7 -- I'll -- let me get back to that and let me rephrase the
question. Madam Witness, we just spoke about a visit to Kampong
Cham of the late King Father in '76, and a banquet that may or
may not have been given to him; do you recall any other visits of
late King Father to other sites in the country between '75 and
'79?
A. I do not recall it, the visit of late King Father. I have weak
memory and I am telling the truth. I will tell the Court what I
know and if I forget about something I may not tell the Court.
Going back to that time I was young and perhaps when I made the
statement I had better memory. <I will> not tell the Court if I
do not recall something. Once again I do not recall when the King
visited the place.
Q. No problem, Madam Witness. Let me return now, to this period
between '70 and '75, that you and your daughter were in the
maquis. This morning you answered questions or you were telling
something about the bombs that were dropped from the air by
planes, during these bombs that were thrown out in the maquis by
US or US Air force, was your daughter with you? Did you, together
with your daughter, experience the bombs being thrown out of B52
planes?
A. There were aerial bombardment and the areas in the Sector 130
experienced aerial bombardments. So we fled <the area or> we hid
<> in the bunkers. In the bunkers we felt <also unsafe. We
worried about a bomb might plunge into the bunker and took all
lives in there. We felt more> relieved <> when <we fled into the
jungle,> the airplanes did not notice the presence of people<,
so> they would not conduct the aerial bombardment. So the aerial
bombardment happened at that time; there were aerial bombardment
as I said. <Many houses> were destroyed because of the aerial
bombardments. <Bombs were being dropped without any consideration
at all>.
Q. Were you able to observe many casualties because of these
bombings?
A. Yes, those who were in the bunker sometimes died although they
were <in> there. There were many casualties, <including> cows and
water buffalos died because of the bombing. I recall the event
because that was the reality. I held my <> daughter's wrist and
ran away. That was the reality; <I do not exaggerate that point>.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. I have an additional question about
the period 1970 and 1975. Your late son, Ke Pich Vannak, in
E3/35, gave some answers to questions in relation to that period
and I would like to read the question to him and his answer, and
then ask you if you remember anything about this. Mr. President
-- that is, as I said, E3/35, ERN English, 00346148; Khmer,
00340569; and French, 00367720.
Your late son is being asked a question, "Did any foreigners ever
visit Kha-30 besides the senior leaders?" And then your son
answers, "I saw Le Duan and Pham Van Dong. Le Duan came once at
that time I served him tea and gave him a massage. Pham Van Dong
came twice. When those two persons came, I saw Pol Pot had a
meeting with Le Duan and an interpreter, I did not know who that
interpreter was. During the meeting I heard those two persons
talked about joining the Indochina Party but Pol Pot refused to
join it. The two persons spoke to each other seriously at that
time I was near that place." Madam Witness, did your son ever
tell you that he had overhead, apparently, a conversation between
Pol Pot and the two top leaders of Vietnam, Le Duan and Pham Van
Dong?
A. I would like to tell the Court that my late son was not with
me at that time. He was in the military or perhaps with <his
father>. I did not know the affairs engaged by my late son, I was
with my daughter and we had different tasks to perform. I told
repeatedly that my husband and I lived separately from each other
and it was the same case for my late son. I was only with my
younger child and for the elder children they were living in
different places. Once again, I do not know <what you just read.
When I met my son,> he never told me about that particular
matter.
Q. I understand that you were not at the same time with him, but
it seems to be a very interesting meeting in the forest, are you
sure you never told about this, maybe after 1975 or after 1979,
this meeting between the two top Vietnamese leaders and Pol Pot?
A. <No, he> never told me about it. I have never known or I have
never been informed about such affairs by my late son. I lived
far away from my late son so I do not about the so called
meetings.
Q. I understand, does the term Indochina Party mean something to
you?
A. I cannot recall the Indochina Party. My supervisor discussed
about work in the <district.> <However>, I have no idea <about
foreign visitors>.
Q. I understand, Madam Witness. Your son, in this same statement
on that same page, also spoke to the investigators about Grand
Uncle Thuch, also known as Koy Thuon. Do you remember Koy Thuon,
did you know him at that time?
A. Yes, I know Koy Thuon, but he had different task to do. We
were friends, and I do not know other <details about him>.
Q. Did you hear your husband ever speak, in those years, about
Koy Thuon, and I'm referring to the period '70 and '76?
A. I frequently talked to him or mentioned to him that -- rather,
I already told the Court that my husband never discussed any task
that he performed with me. We discussed about our family matters.
As for Koy Thuon, he was one of my friends and comrades. We chit
chatted with each other about our living matters or personal
matters but not about our tasks that we performed separately.
Q. Did you at the time, either from your husband or from someone
else, that Koy Thuon may be responsible for staging a coup d'état
against the Democratic Kampuchea regime?
A. I do not know about it; no one told me about this.
Q. Do you remember from those years the former leader of the East
Zone, So Phim, did you know him personally?
A. No, I did not know So Phim.
Q. Did you ever hear your husband speak about So Phim?
A. I have stated repeatedly when it came to work related matters
concerning senior leaders or zone leaders, he never spoke to me
and he was strict on the issue of confidentiality. Even if I was
his <wife>, he did not mix the two matters together -- that is,
personal matters and work related matters.
Q. I understand, let me read to you again an excerpt from a
statement of your late son to the investigators. Maybe this is
something that you heard from him later, after 1979 for instance.
Mr. President, again E3/35, English ERN, 00346153; Khmer,
00340566 - 67; and French, 00367724 and 25. It's a rather long
piece that I'm going to read to you, so I will do it slowly and
I'm waiting for the translators to catch up with me.
Question to your late son, he's talking about the period late
1977 mid-1978.
"After that where did they sent you to and what did they have you
do?"
"After that I went back to stay with my father in Stueng village
east of Suong which was the joint headquarter of the Central Zone
and the East Zone. So Phim was the chairman and commander of the
zone. My father was the chairman of the Central Zone and the
deputy commander of the zone military stationing at the front
line. I was my father's driver and bodyguard."
Question "When you were with your father, did you see any
noticeable events taking place?"
And Madam Witness, your son answers as follows: "I recalled the
purging event of East Zone cadres. The purging took place in two
phases. In the first phase there was an order from the Centre to
arrest Heng Samrin. After receiving that information my father
went to meet with So Phim. My father told So Phim, 'Brother the
upper echelon orders the arrest of comrade Heng'. So Phim
replied, 'So, Pauk, you send A Heng to my house'. After my father
informed Uncle Heng about that, Uncle Heng disappeared forever.
At that time Uncle Heng Samrin was the head of Sector 20 and of
the military division unit. The second phase was the purging of
the zone leadership, the division and the sector within the East
Zone. The purging was carried out following a direct order from
Son Sen. At that time Son Sen came down to the headquarter
personally, accompanied by two truck load of about 60 security
guards in black uniform. At that time there were two tanks led by
Chen (dead or alive is not known), coming along to protect him.
When Son Sen arrived, he ordered my father to call a meeting with
the leaders and then arrested them all. At that time, So Phim was
not there. I remember that 42 leaders including their bodyguards
were arrested. I saw the arrests with my own eyes. Among those
arrested I knew Uncle Soth, the committee of sector Prey Veng,
Uncle Chan alias Toeu (phonetic) or La-et (phonetic), the sector
committee and the zone deputy but I did not know which sector,
and Ta Kim, the chairman of the military division of the East
Zone. The arrests of those people took place in 1978."
Madam Witness, this is a long excerpt from the statement of your
late son. I realise, again, it's a long time ago and that you
have difficulties with your memory, but when I read this to you
does that somehow jog your memory?
A. I have already told you that I did not know these kinds of
matters. My son -- my late son always stayed with my late husband
and he was also his driver. However, when it came to the meetings
at the East Zone, for instance, I did not have knowledge about it
and I swear to you that I did not know anything about it.
Q. A more specific question, did you husband ever talk to you
about Heng Samrin?
A. Yes, he used to, he referred to him as Brother Heng Samrin,
but personally I did not know Brother Heng Samrin, I never met
him. But I used to hear my late husband refer to him as Brother
Heng Samrin. I <> never saw him.
Q. Do you know whether your late son ever spoke to what happened
during the Democratic Kampuchea regime with your daughter, the
daughter that we just spoke about, did he, your late son or your
husband ever spoke to these -- about these matters to your
daughter, the one who was born in 1964?
A. I am not sure, but could you please repeat your question as I
did not actually fully understand it.
Q. My question was about So Phim and Heng Samrin, and I asked you
whether you know anything about this, however you said that's
beyond my knowledge. This information that's coming from your
late son, have you ever heard him talk to your daughter about
what happened in 1978, in the East Zone? Do you know whether she
knows these things that you son spoke about?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, can you please wait. And Counsel Koppe could you
enlighten the Chamber whether the last series of questioning is
related to the facts being presented before this Chamber.
MR. KOPPE:
Oh, it most certainly is, Mr. President. It's in relation to the
most important chapter still coming, the internal purges in the
East Zone. What happened in the East Zone as we all know the
husband of this witness played a very important role in fighting
with the rebel forces in the East Zone. So, I think the questions
to this witness in relation to this topic is extremely -- are
extremely relevant and so I think I should be able to ask this.
Especially because the testimony that I am confronting her with
is coming from her son.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, you do not need to respond to the last question that was
put to you by the Defence Counsel as it was not related to the
facts being presented and confronted before this Court at the
moment.
MR. KOPPE:
Again, a double standard, Mr. President, because the Prosecution
is allowed to ask all kinds of questions, about purges in the
North Zone.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence Counsel, please move on to another line of questions
which are related to the fact being debated right now. We of
course have heard the questioning from the Co-Prosecutors and
their focus was not mainly on the East Zone. However, there were
a few questions related closely to <Krouch Chhmar district and
Preaek Prasab district> and the main focus was on the 1st January
Dam worksite which was located in the Central Zone. So, please
try to be straight in your questioning.
MR. KOPPE:
One last question, Madam Witness, in relation to this topic, it's
not about the East Zone, but it's about a decision coming from
another country. At the time, and we're talking February, March,
April '78, you heard about a meeting of the Central committee in
February 1978, of the Vietnamese Communist Party, where they
decided to proceed with plans to provoke an internal uprising led
by So Phim, while keeping in reserve an alternative plan to
topple the Democratic Kampuchea regime through direct
intervention?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Witness, please wait. And the Deputy Co-Prosecutor you have
the floor.
MR. LYSAK:
I don't object to Counsel asking questions on this subject but he
is leading the witness, he's asking a leading question and he is
not identifying -- if he has a document that has some connection
to this witness he can ask her about it, I don't think that it's
likely that this witness would have any connection to it, but if
he is going to ask questions from a document he should present
it, he shouldn't be leading the witness like this.
[11.]
MR. KOPPE:
I think I'm entitled to ask a question whether this witness,
through her husband, had any knowledge of a Vietnamese decision
to start an internal uprising. I think that's a perfectly
appropriate question.
MR. LYSAK:
There's no evidence of that, if you have evidence of that, and
you want to ask the witness identify the evidence.
MR. KOPPE:
I can if you would like to know. E3/7340, also probably better
known as .7, and there's quite some other material on the
case file as well, indicating that there was a fourth plenum of
the Central committee of the Vietnamese Communist Party, in which
it was decided to start an internal uprising, led by So Phim, and
that was the direct cause to start armed clashes, armed conflict
with So Phim. So any knowledge this witness, through her husband,
might have had I think is extremely relevant.
[11.]
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, can I ask you to identify -- are you referring to
this book written Burgler, that looks like it was something
printed off of someone's computer, or is this a different
document. I just want to know what you're asking the witness.
You're asking her to comment on a book written by someone?
MR. KOPPE:
No. No. I'm asking her to tell us if she knows anything about
this February 1978 decision and if she doesn't she can say that
she doesn't know.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence Counsel, please provide details of the document that you
referred to, in particular to the ERN numbers in relevant
languages.
MR. KOPPE:
It has now an E3 number. Like I said, E3/7340, more specifically
it was originally filed as .7, the relevant ERN Numbers
are, 01002002 up until 8; at the present time there's only an
English version available. It is a excerpt from a book by an
American scholar called William Duiker, D-U-I-K-E-R, which is
called, "China and Vietnam the Roots of Conflict". However it is
not only this scholar, it is also Chanda, who refers to this
February '78 decision, it's also newspaper clippings, especially
the "Far Economic" -- "Far Eastern Economic" review that referred
to the '78 February decision, so I think it's quite commonly
known and if that is the case I think I'm entitled to ask this
question to this witness.
MR. LYSAK:
Your Honour, I simply don't see any basis for asking this witness
about a supposed decision of the Vietnamese party that's in a
book. How would this witness have any knowledge of it, there's
nothing that establishes any foundation for asking questions like
this.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you have the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Maybe for the purposes of clarity, can you specify, Counsel
Koppe, exactly which meeting you are referring to? I didn't
understand if it was the meeting of the Central Committee of the
CPK or if this was a meeting of the Vietnamese Communist Party,
so can you please just -- then we will see if you can put the
question or not.
MR. KOPPE:
It was a meeting of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese
Communist Party, also referred to as the Fourth Plenum, February
1978, in which very important decisions were made, including an
internal uprising led by So Phim, the leader of the East Zone,
and if that would fail, intervention through invasion. That
decision might have been the reason for the armed clashes in the
East Zone for which her husband is obviously partly responsible.
So, I'm asking whether she knows anything about this extremely
important--
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Counsel Koppe, if I understand well, you have no minutes of this
meeting nor any kind of official report coming from the
Vietnamese authorities; you are just referring to it through
books, but I don't know what the specific references <are>
contained in these books. So, can you please shed some light on
this?
MR. KOPPE:
It is correct that I don't have any minutes of this meeting, the
Vietnamese authorities are not very happy to share minutes of
their meetings with us; however, scholars, including somebody who
has been testifying here as an expert -- Nayan Chanda -- refers
to this decision already in publication in '78, that this very
important Fourth Plenum of the Central Committee got together and
made this crucial decision to end the democratic regime -- the
regime of Democratic Kampuchea. So, it is, I think, public
knowledge; scholars and journalist refer to it.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
You are referring to Chandler or to Nayan Chanda, <or --> whom
are you referring to? And do you have any specific references
regarding this particular meeting?
MR. KOPPE:
Yes. I just referred to, I think, the most American scholar on
Vietnam, William Duiker. I'm not sure how to pronounce it. I
referred to Nayan Chanda, who gave testimony as to the nature of
armed conflicts in Case 001, and I'm referring not only to his
book but also to publications in the Far Eastern Economic Review
in 1978, which are, I think, partly on the case file.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Fine. Well, <is it too much to ask you to> provide us the exact
ERNs of <all of> these references?
MR. KOPPE:
I just gave the English ERN reference of the chapter of William
Duiker's book. I can do that again if you like. It's ERN 01002002
up until 01002008.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Fine. But please, specifically, what is the specific reference?
Here I see there are about eight pages -- or six pages of ERNs
here, <I don't know,> but what is the exact reference to that
meeting?
MR. KOPPE:
I'm very happy to read the exact quote from William Duiker's book
and that quote is as follows:
"The rationale for action in Cambodia was clear. (Evidence was
accumulating that Pol Pot was firmly in Beijing's camp) and that
the latter would attempt to manipulate the situation in Cambodia
to realise its own foreign policy objectives in South East Asia.
If Hanoi hoped to prevent China from stabilizing its position in
Phnom Penh, it must act soon. An open invasion by Vietnamese
troops would be the most decisive solution, but it could cause
serious international repercussions and possibly direct
confrontation with China. A general uprising led by anti-Pol Pot
rebels in Cambodia and supported discreetly by the SRV was less
risky and certainly less costly, but success would be less
certain." Now it comes, Judge Lavergne: "(In the end, the plenum
decided to proceed with plans to provoke an internal uprising led
by So Phim while keeping in reserve an alternative plan to topple
the Phnom Penh regime through direct intervention.)"
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
That still does not provide me with the exact reference on which
this author is basing himself.
MR. KOPPE:
He has knowledge and so has Chanda about the outcome of this
Fourth Plenum of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese
Communist Party. Again, they're both eminent scholars, one of
them is regarded an expert by this Chamber, so I think, again, it
seems to be sufficient knowledge and sources of this February '78
meeting.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Fine. Can you then explain to us how this witness today could
possibly answer the questions that you're putting to her with
regard to this topic, that is to say her knowledge of this
possible meeting of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese
Communist Party? Do you seriously believe that this witness can
answer that question?
MR. KOPPE:
Maybe not this witness, but her husband certainly could and maybe
her husband spoke to her or her son and she has heard it. This
February decision, again, is widely known, discussed in the media
in '78, so maybe this witness, at a time or later, heard her
husband speak about this February '78 Vietnamese decision to
start an internal uprising. If she doesn't, she can say it.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. LYSAK:
Just very briefly, it should be noted on the record the author
cites no sources whatsoever for this purported discussion at the
Fourth Plenum. If there are widespread media reports of this
event, which I doubt, counsel should be citing them. He keeps
mentioning Chanda, but he hasn't given any cites. I would ask him
to give us cites on that, but I think the ultimate question is, I
don't see any foundation for asking this witness about this
subject.
MR. KOPPE:
I suppose this is kind of tragic that after seven years we're
discussing this very important decision that nobody in this
courtroom seems to know about it. So again, I think I am
perfectly entitled to ask this question and if the witness
doesn't know she will say so.
JUDGE FENZ:
I just want to react to your first part. If you say that -- or if
you reference paper and it is contested or if you reference
books, it is an established practice that you have to cite these
references. So that much is clear; no matter how many years we
have been in this courtroom.
Now, as to the question, I leave it to the President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Witness, you do not need to respond to that question as
there is no base for the witness to do so.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President, for your ruling.
Q. Madam Witness, you said in your testimony you also spoke at
one point in time to Ieng Thirith when she was visiting the dam.
Do you remember giving this testimony?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. I have spoken repeatedly on this issue -- that is, when she
went to visit together with a delegation and she and the
delegation were warmly greeted. That's all I can remember and I
can't recall the details of the visit. And of course, I spoke
about this repeatedly on the two or three occasions that she went
to visit Chamkar Leu and that is the best recollection that I can
give to you.
Q. I understand it's a long time ago, but if -- I will try
nevertheless. Do you remember if she mentioned during her visit
-- during her earlier visit to the Northwest Zone, did she ever
speak about her experiences while visiting the Northwest Zone?
A. On the issue of the visit to the Northwest Zone, I have no
knowledge of the visit.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now appropriate to have our lunch break. We will take a
break now and return at 1.30 p.m.
Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room for
the witnesses and experts during the lunch break and invite her,
as well as the TPO staff, back into the courtroom at 1.30 this
afternoon.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him returned to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1133H to 1333H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is back in session, and the floor is given to the
defence counsel for Mr. Nuon Chea to resume his line of
questioning.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good afternoon, Madam Witness. Before the break, we were
speaking about Ieng Thirith. You testified that you don't really
recall any conversation with her, but your daughter worked at the
Ministry of Social Affairs. Maybe your daughter spoke to you
about conversations that she might have had with Ieng Thirith.
But my question is: Do you remember directly or indirectly coming
from Ieng Thirith's actions of sabotage in the Northwest Zone,
rebellious troops stealing rice, taking it away from the
cooperatives, did you, at that time, ever hear such a story?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. I do not know about the killing. I do not know about the
killing in that province.
Q. Maybe my question wasn't clear, but I was speaking about
stealing of rice -- taking away rice away from the people but
storing it in rice mills, for instance, to keep it for rebellious
troops in the Northwest Zone. Have you ever heard something like
this?
A. How could I know the affairs in Eastern Zone -- Northwest
Zone, <rather>? We had different tasks to perform. No one
discussed these tasks in those districts.
Q. I understand. Let me ask questions then relating to your
district. I have here in front of me a document -- a telegram,
E3/952. It's a telegram that your husband sent to Pol Pot on the
2nd of April 1976, and he talks about events in your district --
Chamkar Leu District.
And ERN, Mr. President: English, 00182658; Khmer, <00000766>; and
French, 00350762 up until 3. I will read to you what he wrote --
your husband wrote to Pol Pot, and then I'll ask you your
reaction. It talks about the enemy situation in the entire North
Zone. He says that the enemy has fundamentally not yet conducted
any strong activity. But "Specifically, some activity has
appeared in Chamkar Leu district. The enemies are former soldiers
in combination with the Cham and former cooperative team
chairmen. They used copies of a photo of Lon Nol and Nol's
announcement of 18 March 1970 to post on tree trunks near
Trapeang village in Chamkar Leu district, and conducted other
activities like burning forests, and destroying crops like
bananas, papaya, et cetera."
Madam Witness, do you remember enemy activities in your district,
such as forces burning down forests and destroying banana crops
and papaya crops?
A. I do not know about the burning of the forest. It happened a
long time ago. I forget it. I could not get information on all
those matters.
Q. I understand, Madam Witness. In the same telegram to Brother
Pol, your husband addresses the problem of fever and diarrhoea
among people in the zone. And on the same ERN numbers as just
mentioned, he writes that the reason -- and I quote: "The reason
is due to when working and overheating, the brothers and sisters
were drinking cold water, not drinking hot water regularly." So,
after (inaudible) this problem, he then writes to Brother Pol --
and I quote: "The measures taken were to raise the principle of
reducing work hours according to goals set by the Party, pushing
political and ideological training, and having the brothers and
sisters be determined in drinking hot water as well." Does this
problem, as described by your husband, ring a bell? Did this
happen in your district as well? And do you recall anything about
the suggested solution?
A. My apology. I cannot have the full grasp of information. Once
again, my apology, <it might be at the time that I was sick.> I
do not recall it. I did not pay any attention to that matter.
Q. No problem, Madam Witness. I'll move on to more general
questions on the food situation and resting time etc.
You gave an answer to an earlier question that the purpose of the
1st January Dam was to block the water and it had a purpose of
irrigation -- irrigation of the rice fields. Was the ultimate
goal of the dam to raise the people's standard of living, was
that what the dam was ultimately about?
A. I understand that the construction of the 1st January Dam was
to help improve people's livelihood. That's what I can say.
Q. You also testified that you and other female cadres went to
Phnom Penh regularly to attend education sessions led by Nuon
Chea. Do you remember whether in these education sessions he
spoke about the ultimate goal of building socialism in Democratic
Kampuchea, being to raise the people's standards of living
quickly? Is that what the main thread of his education session
was about?
A. The education was related to the affairs that I had to
perform. <Concerning the matter you raised; I cannot recall it.>
It happened long time ago. I am sick, so I forgot what I
experienced in that period. I <> attended the meeting, but I
could not remember all the details discussed in that meeting.
Q. I understand, Madam Witness. Maybe if I give you some very
concrete examples, that would jog your memory. For instance, do
you remember Nuon Chea speaking to you and your female cadres
about the working and resting regime within Democratic Kampuchea,
for instance, that the workers needed to have three days of rest
per month, for instance, between 10 and 15 days for rest in order
to visit people or to study? Do you remember concrete measures as
to the working and resting regime of workers?
A. I have answered repeatedly -- I cannot remember the content of
the education sessions. I cannot recall it.
Q. So if I give you some very concrete practical examples, you
think that won't jog your memory?
A. I could not recall it. Why? There were problems with my
memory. <Many people had been killed so the events were not
always stored in my memory. Therefore,> it is difficult for me to
give my answers to your question because I cannot recall it.
Q. Let me try one more time and give you concrete example in
relation to women and children. Do you know whether during these
sessions, Nuon Chea spoke about a mandatory two months rest for
pregnant women?
A. For pregnant women in cooperatives, there was a regulation to
be applied by those pregnant women. They had one month or two
months rest. And after delivery, women could have two months
<maternity> rest.
Q. And in relation to children, do you remember Nuon Chea
speaking about a policy to organise child care centres in the
various bases?
A. I have no idea; I may have forgotten it. I cannot find the
answer for you because I cannot recall it.
Q. I understand. A very last example of what might have been said
during these education sessions. Do you remember Nuon Chea
speaking to you and your female cadres -- your colleagues, about
materials necessary for the people, such as mosquito nets,
blankets, pillows for sleeping -- material which was seen as very
important for the people in the cooperatives?
A. Nuon Chea organised those materials <at Zone levels>. And <the
Zone would organize for districts. Distribution of mosquito nets
and blankets was done at> cooperatives <which received those
materials from sector through district.>. I did not receive any
instruction -- I mean Nuon Chea's instruction about materials. <I
got this instruction from> sectors, <so we distributed at the
cooperatives.>
Q. You testified earlier that you perceived the food situation in
your district as decent, as proper. Do you recall any guidelines
from the Centre in relation to rations of food for different
categories of workers, or is that something that you don't recall
either?
A. I'm telling the Court that I cannot recall it.
Q. Madam Witness, I would like now to read a quote to you from
someone who I will identify later, and this quote is about the
food situation in Democratic Kampuchea between '75 and '79, and
most likely also in relation to your district and your sector. I
will read this quote to you, and then I will ask you if you agree
with this quote.
Mr. President, I'm quoting -- I would like to quote from a
document -- E3/7333, also known as .17 -- just before the
break referred to as the pineapple book. There's no Khmer
translation and there's no French translation. English ERN is
01002277. It's on the bottom of .
Madam Witness, the quote is as follows: "Yes, the population
works hard, very hard. But they are not unhappy. On the contrary,
they laugh (...) And the food in the cooperatives is not bad. Not
as good as my food in Phnom Penh of course. But it is food (...)
It is the real truth when I say the people are well fed." End of
quote.
Do you agree with this quote?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Madam Witness. You may now proceed, International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. I'm afraid the question is
objectionable. It's a strain beyond asking a factual question to
this witness to asking for an opinion. There's no indication that
this statement had anything to do with the district or
cooperatives of this witness. So counsel here is just asking for
opinion testimony. There's no base -- factual basis for putting
this statement to this witness.
MR. KOPPE:
I am not asking her opinion, Mr. President. I'm asking whether
the quote that I just read out reflects her experience in regards
to food situation in her cooperative. So I think I'm entitled to
confront this witness with this particular quote and ask whether
that is indeed her recollection as well.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber allows the witness to give the answer to the
question. And the objection by the Co-Prosecutor is overruled.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Madam Witness, the quote I just read, is that an accurate
description or is it an incorrect description of the food
situation in DK or your sector or district?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. I knew only the task that we did in the district. The living
condition was decent and proper, and the living condition
corresponded with the work that people do. <What I am speaking
about was the condition under the supervision in my district,
Chamkar Leu.>
Q. So would you agree with me when I say that you agree with the
quote, that the quote that I just gave you reflects your
recollection as well?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may repeat your question or rephrase your question. It
appears that your question is a leading one.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Madam Witness, I just read out to you a quote from someone. Is
the content of this quote in accordance with your own
recollection in regards to food situation?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. I already answered that question. The livelihood and living
condition in my district was decent. So what else could I say?
Q. Fair enough, Madam Witness.
For the record, Mr. President, I was quoting late King Father
Sihanouk during his press conference in February -- or January
1979, in Beijing, China.
Madam Witness, some last questions about working hours at the dam
site. Do you recall, at one point in time, a message in one of
the "Revolutionary Flags" about the problems of workers working
in the night-time?
JUDGE FENZ:
Sorry, Counsel, you realise she can't read.
MR. KOPPE:
Well, I -- there seems to be no translation also.
JUDGE FENZ:
I just wanted to point you to the fact that she cannot read.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Well, I read in her statement that she reads a little bit, but
let me rephrase.
Q. Madam Witness, do you remember ever heard maybe at the
education sessions which you attended that there were problems in
relation to working at night-time, and that working at night-time
should be limited as much as possible?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. When I attended the meetings, workers did not have to work at
night. And that's what I learned through the meeting.
Q. Another question in relation to the working hours at the dam.
Do you recall whether the starting of the work, the morning
breaks, the lunch breaks, and the ending of the working session
was the same for all the workers, for all 20,000 workers at the
1st January Dam site?
A. As I repeatedly told you, I did not know exactly about the
working hours. You can consider that I was simply a visitor to
the worksite. And that mainly was my role when I went to the dam
site. And I could not tell you about the working hours.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you very much, Madam Witness, for your answers. I am
finished, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Chamber now hands the floor to the defence team
for Khieu Samphan. And you may proceed, Counsel.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSÉ:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good afternoon, Madam Sou Soeurn. My name is Anta Guissé, and
I am the Co-International Co-Counsel for Khieu Samphan. And I
will put a few extra questions to you with relation to your
testimony. I, first of all, would like to obtain clarification
with regard to your <parents'> social background <>. Is it true
that you come from a family of farmers?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. Yes, indeed. My husband was originated from a farming family.
<He had been cultivating rice paddy since he was young until the
time he joined the struggle.> And the level of education was also
limited. So <he was a> pure peasant.
Q. And your husband and yourself came from the same region, is
that where you met?
A. Yes, we came from the same district, but different villages.
Q. And you said that you got married<, we calculated,> in 1958
and that it was only in 1976 that you were appointed <-- if I've
understood correctly --> to work in Chamkar Leu district; is that
correct?
A. Maybe, I cannot recall the exact year as when I was appointed
to go there. I simply cannot recall the year.
Q. But it is in Chamkar Leu that you worked as a member of the
district committee; we agree upon that, yes?
A. Yes, it was at Chamkar Leu. However, allow me to stress that I
only worked there for a year.
Q. No problem. I understood that. But before the year you spent
at Chamkar Leu, you spent six months in Kampong Thom; is that so?
A. I cannot recall how many months I spent in Kampong Thom.
Q. And <your> region <of the provenance,> where you met your
husband, was which region, which district?
A. Please repeat your question as I do not understand it.
Q. The region where you lived with your parents and <> where you
met your husband, it was which district?
A. I lived with my parents. And after I got married, we remained
in the same Chhuk Khsach commune, Baray district, Kampong Thom
province. And later on, I went to earn a living in rice farming
at Chamkar Andoung. And these are the two locations that I lived.
But I cannot recall when I left home for Chamkar Andoung; I
cannot recall that.
Q. When you were answering a question from my colleague <from>
the civil parties, you spoke about the hospitals that existed
<while you were> in Chamkar Leu district, and you explained that
there were different levels of hospitals. <That there were -->
and of course, I want to repeat correctly what you said. So I
will <quote> what you said yesterday a little bit before 3.08 in
the afternoon. And you said that:
"The hospital existed at the district level, but that there was
also <one at the> "sangkat" <level>, <the> commune <level>. We
had to treat the patients at that level, <at the commune level>.
If the patient's condition worsened, then he was sent to the
district hospital from the commune hospital. And if <his or her>
condition remained critical, then the patient was sent <from the
district hospital> to the province hospital." End of quote.
So my question is: <Madam> Witness, <at the time> when you
arrived at Chamkar Leu, <did you know> for how long had these <>
commune hospitals <been> built <or set up>?
<First, the commune hospitals, can you -- do you know> how long
these commune hospitals <had been there, in the district>?
A. I do not have a full grasp of what happened or when the
hospital was established, because after my arrival, the district
and the commune hospitals had already been established, though I
cannot tell you which years they were built.
Q. Without specifying the year, can you tell us if these
hospitals had been built during the Khmer Rouge period or before?
Did they exist before the Khmer Rouge regime <> under Lon Nol?
I'm not asking for a specific date, I just want to know under
which regime these <commune> hospitals <were> built.
A. The hospitals were built during the times that I worked there.
So when <> cooperatives <were first established,> the hospital
<was also being built>. But I cannot tell you the year.
Q. So if I understood you well, these hospitals were built <after
-- they were built> during the Khmer Rouge regime; is that so?
A. Yes.
Q. And you said that you came from <a family of> farmers and that
you lived in Baray district in Kampong Thom, <apart from> your
<experience> in Chamkar Leu. So what I want to know is that, <at
the time of your marriage> and during your youth, were there many
hospitals in Baray district?
A. When I was young -- and I can tell you that I was young -- and
I did not have any necessary means of transportation. So simply
put, I cannot tell you whether hospitals existed here or there.
And usually, I walked on foot from one location to another. And
mainly, I spent most of my time assisting my parents in working
in a rice field. And only when <people were> sick, then <they
would be> sent to a hospital for treatment.
Q. And do you remember which hospital you were sent to when you
were ill, when you were young?
A. When I was sick or when my parents were sick, we actually did
not really go to the hospital as we believed in superstition. And
mainly we sought the help of traditional healers or we made an
offering to the spirit.
Q. And when you tell us that you resorted to traditional
medication, were there any traditional practitioners you called
upon or <did> this only happen within your family?
A. During the regime, we had traditional healers who sold us
traditional medicine or who gave us some tree barks and leaves.
And for some wounds, we used the bark from Kapok tree to heal the
wound. And that's how the peasants treated themselves during the
regime; and they rarely <visited> a hospital.
Q. In my translation, I heard "under the regime". Which regime
are you speaking about precisely?
A. If I am not mistaken, I heard you asked me a question as to
during which regime I went for treatment at a hospital. And my
response was about the regime when I was young, that is when the
revolution did not yet exist. And at that time, we sought
treatment from traditional healers.
Q. Thank you for this clarification. Now I'm going to turn to
another topic. I'm going to speak more specifically about the 1st
January Dam. And you confirmed to my colleague that you
understood that the building of this dam was to improve the
agricultural situation and to provide more food to the
population. And yesterday, you indicated a little bit after 2.17
in the afternoon that the dam was to be used by the people living
around the dam all the way up to the area of Baray. And you also
said yesterday that you travelled <on several occasions> to the
dam worksite where people from your district were working. So my
question is: Can you tell us more specifically, in which commune
<was the section of the dam that> the people <from> your district
were working <on>, if you remember that?
A. I do not want to repeat my responses as I have spoken quite
many times on the 1st January Dam worksite. What do you want me
to clarify again and again? You should have understood what I
have said so far regarding the 1st January Dam worksite. And I
told you already that I was simply a guest visiting the worksite
and I was not a supervisor at the 1st January Dam worksite. And
the 1st January Dam is located in Kampong Thma district. And I
have repeated this message several times. And what else do you
want me to say regarding the dam?
Q. Witness, I understand that you're tired. Many <> people are
putting questions to you that may seem repetitive, but <if> I'm
asking for clarification <it is because> the responses that you
gave to us were not fully understood. And that's why I'm asking
for clarification.
Of course, I understood <the part in your testimony in which you
stated> that you were not working there on a permanent basis;
that you would go there from time to time. There's no problem
about that. And I also understood very clearly that the worksite
was in the region of Kampong Thom (sic). But <> many witnesses
have come to testify <before this Court>, and we gathered from
that that the dam site covered <> several kilometres. So,
according to the districts <or> the communes, people could have
been working in different communes.
So my specific question is <> where you saw -- or, even if it was
rarely -- people from your district working. If you could tell us
in which commune the people from your district were working so we
could know in which section of the dam site the people from <>
your district were working. I don't know if <my question is> a
bit clearer <now>.
A. Of course, your question is clear, and as I said, the dam is
located in Kampong Thma district, not Kampong Thom district,
because Kampong Thom is a province not a district and it runs
through several villages <in hundreds of kilometres>. And I
cannot tell you which villages the dam runs through. And there
were tens of thousands of workers working on the dam worksite. So
I cannot remember everyone. And I was there as a <> visitor to
the site.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Sou Soeurn, as a witness, you are obliged to respond to the
questions put to you by Parties to the case. And if you do not
know an answer to a question, please say so because your response
is actually an answer to that question. Because Parties have the
right to put questions to you and that is the formal proceeding
before this Court. Of course, the questions are on the main topic
-- that is, on the dam worksite, but the questions are not the
same nor repetitive. They might be similar to you, but there are
specific points within those questions that the Parties want you
to respond to.
BY MS. GUISSÉ:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. So I understood that you do not remember in which village the
section of the worksite you visited was located, <I will not
insist on that>. And as you spoke about the number of workers,
I'd like to get back to that.
Yesterday, you said that there were between 20 to 30,000 workers
and maybe possibly up to 40,000 people <at the worksite>. And
your son, Ke Pich Vannak, who was heard -- document E3/35,
French, ERN 00367721; Khmer, ERN 00340563; English, ERN 00346149
to 50; this is what he said, and one of the questions that was
put to him was:
"Who was in charge of the 1st January Dam worksite?"
His answer was the following: "The committee of the Central Zone
<generally managed it>, and this committee was made up of four
people: my father, Pou <Srach (phonetic)>, Pou Tol, and Pou Chan.
Pou Sreng, Pou <Tol>, and Pou <Chan> were respectively the chiefs
of the 41st section, and the 42nd section, and the 43rd section.
These three chiefs were in charge of gathering <the> workforce in
order to build the 1st January Dam. According to the plan, each
region had to provide 10,000 people to the worksite. But
concretely speaking, I did not know the exact number <>.The
workers worked on a rotation basis." End of quote.
So, on the basis of this testimony from your son, we understand
that <about> 30,000 people were expected to work on the <dam>.
But did you hear about this plan? And does this figure of 30,000
seem closer to reality than the 40,000 you spoke about yesterday?
A. I think that figure is about right. And yes, I said it may be
between <30,000> to 40,000 workers. However, that is my personal
estimation and the correct figure might be best for 30,000
workers.
Q. And when you <give> that assessment -- well yesterday, when
you were asked how many people from your district worked on the
1st January Dam worksite, you said that you did not know. So
under those conditions, on what do you base yourself to tell us
that there were 30,000 workers working on the dam? If you're not
even sure of the number with regard to your own district, how did
you come up with your estimate?
A. As I have said, my estimation rise from the number of workers
selected from each district. And at my district, it was the
district committee who maintained the list of workers sent to
work at the worksite. But I myself did not know the total number
of the workers from <the five> communes under the <Chamkar Leu>
district. <> I do not have that figure or any recollection of the
number.
Q. There's no problem <with> that, so I will stop bothering you
with all of these figures.
You said, therefore, that you travelled rarely to the <1st
January Dam> worksite, <but> you said -- or, at least when you
were present, that you did not see any machinery. As I told you,
<several> witnesses testified before this Chamber, and some spoke
about machinery, such as Witness Or Ho, Pech Sokha, or Uth Seng,
when <they were> speaking about the machines <they> saw <> at
<the time of> the fall of the regime. And there is another person
who apparently worked directly with your husband who's called
Ieng Chham. And does <> this name ring a bell?
A. On the forces of workers at the worksite, I already told you
about that. Mainly, they worked with their manual labour. But as
I said earlier, later on, heavy machineries were used to aid in
the workers at the worksite. And I also said during my testimony
that I knew some workers there, but I cannot recall their names.
And some of them have passed away.
Q. First clarification regarding the answer you've just given.
You said that machines were sent <to subsequently help the>
workers <>. Do you remember when the machines arrived in your
district?
A. I cannot recall as to when they were brought in. However, I
recall that only at a later stage when the dam itself already
formed its proper shape, then heavy machineries were present at
the worksite. <They were used to assist workers.>
Q. Ieng Chham; <whom> you perhaps do not remember, but whom was
heard in E3/5513, that is <in> answer to question 64. And this
was the question that was put to that witness:
"In the construction of the <> 1st January Dam <and bridge>, what
were the technical tools used?"
And the answer was as follows: "In my sector, the tools we used
were <for example> D4s, <D6s,> D7s, excavators, concrete mixers,
and cranes. <This equipment was> used to lift the <soil>." End of
quote.
My question, therefore, is as follows: In your district, did you
see excavators, concrete mixers, and cranes? <Or does this not
jog your memory>?
A. From my district, we only had manpower in digging canals or
building dams, and there were no heavy machineries involved.
Q. But you said a while ago that at <one> point in time, machines
arrived. Do you recall what types of machines <these were>?
A. Are you referring to the worksite at Chamkar Leu?
Q. Yes, I'm referring to your worksite. <Unless I misunderstood
your response:> when you talked of machines, were you not talking
about your district?
A. <That's why I sought your clarification. As far as I knew they
were at 1st January Dam sitsite, however,> digging canals or
building dams at Chamkar Leu, only manpower was used.
Q. Very well. So when you talked about machines that <arrived>
later on, which district were you referring to if it wasn't
Chamkar Leu?
A. I am referring to the 1st January Dam site. I later saw the
heavy machinery there. I do not recall when the machinery arrived
at that worksite. The machinery was used to assist workers.
Q. Just one last point on this part regarding what you were able
to observe at the 1st January Dam worksite. You stated that there
may have been hygiene problems because there were flies. My
question is as follows. As some witnesses came and testified
before this Chamber, did you hear of <> the spraying of
insecticides to kill those flies?
A. I do not know. I do not know about the spraying of
insecticides.
Q. You also talked about the use of water on the 1st January Dam
worksite. You stated that workers <collected> water from
<certain> points, <along the> riverside, and so on and so forth.
A witness, Uth Seng, explained that in some places, boiled water
was placed at the disposal of workers specifically to improve the
hygiene conditions. Do you know whether <such measures were
enacted in your district>?
A. Yes, water was boiled in every cooperative for workers to
drink. And tree or plant roots were put in that water and boiled
for workers to drink and to avoid <malaria> or diarrhoea. And I
do not know about the fact that whether water was boiled at the
1st January worksite.
MS. GUISSÉ:
For the record, I was wrong in mentioning the name of the witness
we referred to. It was civil party Seang Sovida, who talked about
it.
Mr. President, I want to go into another line of questioning. I
do not know whether this is the right time for us to take the
afternoon break, <or whether I should continue>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. It is now convenient time for the break, and the
Chamber will take a short break from now until five to 3.00.
Court officer, please facilitate a proper room for this witness
and TPO staff, and please invite them back to the courtroom at
five to 3.00.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1438H to 1456H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is now back in session, and before I hand the floor to
the defence team to continue putting questions to the witness,
the Chamber will make an oral ruling on the -- in light of the
Case 003 disclosure -- that is, document E319/23.
The Chamber notes the forthcoming disclosure of Case 003
statement -- that is, document E319/23, and the Parties request
for additional time to review these statements prior to hearing
the witnesses regarding the Kampong Chhnang Airport worksite.
According to the Co-Prosecutors, two statements within this
disclosure amounting to 16 pages in English relate to the Kampong
Chhnang Airport worksite. These two statements were provided to
the Defence and the Lead Co-Lawyers today.
In order to provide the Parties an opportunity to review these
two statements, the Chamber will adjourn the hearing schedule for
Monday, 8 June, and instead sit next week from Tuesday through
Friday inclusive.
The defence further submits that other statements in this
disclosure relevant to internal purges and military structures in
the East Zone may relate to the Kampong Chhnang Airport worksite.
The Co-Prosecutors submit that these statements would only be
tangentially relevant to worksites, if at all, and that the
entirety of the newly disclosed statements would be provided to
the Defence and Lead Co-Lawyers by Tuesday next week.
While a full assessment of the contents of these statements will
only be possible after they are provided to the Defence and Lead
Co-Lawyers, the Chamber notes that there remains several months
before the trial will reach the topic of internal purges where
they appear to be primarily relevant. The Parties will have
significant time to review the remaining statements prior to the
start of the internal purges topic, including during the mid-year
recess. Therefore, the Chamber does not consider it necessary to
further delay the hearing of witnesses on the Kampong Chhnang
Airport worksite on this basis. The Chamber notes, however, that
it will consider reasoned motions to recall witnesses on the
basis of the late disclosure of statements on a case by case
basis.
Finally, the Chamber notes the Parties also request that it delay
the hearing of witnesses on the Trapeang Thma Dam worksite until
after the mid-year recess. To have more time to prepare for the
hearings scheduled by the Supreme Court Chamber, this request
will be addressed in due course.
The Chamber now hands the floor to the defence team for Khieu
Samphan to continue putting further questions to the witness. And
Counsel, you may proceed.
BY MS. GUISSÉ:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Madam Sou Soeurn, I'm going to continue with my questions. <To
reassure you, I won't be much longer>.
You said that in the context of your duties as a member of the
district committee, you would supervise the cooperatives. So, in
the context of the supervision, did you have meetings with the
cooperative chiefs?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. I attended the meetings, but the meetings were not held at the
cooperative. The meetings were held at the district and heads of
communes were called to attend those meetings.
Q. And during these meetings at the district office, did you
ever, as a member of the district committee, give the instruction
to the commune <chiefs> to treat the 17 April People differently
from the Base People?
A. Allow me to clarify this matter. When heads of communes or
"sangkat" were called to attend the meetings, on the instruction
of relaying work plans, on the work at the dam, and on food
supply, we discussed the matter thoroughly, and forces were
assigned as who were responsible for the work at the kitchen and
those who worked at the worksite or at the other dam worksite.
Q. I understood that clearly but specifically within the context
of these plans and of the division of labour, did you give any
instructions for the 17 April People to receive less food than
the Base People?
A. That statement is not true, that is that the 17 April People
were categorised differently from the Base People. And from my
full grasp of the situation in my district, there was no
differentiation between the Base People and the 17 April People
as we all ate from the same kitchen.
Q. And following the same line of thought, did you give
instructions to the commune and cooperative chiefs to inflict
poor treatment <on> the New People because they did not come from
the right class? Did you give such instructions?
A. No, that is untrue. There is no differentiation between the
Base People and the 17 April People. The food ration was equal
for everyone. And there was no instruction to the commune chiefs
on the various treatments -- or the different treatment between
the Base People and the 17 April People at all.
Q. The reason I'm asking you this question is because we heard
<several> witnesses and <> civil parties who said that because
they were 17 April People, they would receive different treatment
in the cooperatives or on the 1st January Dam site. So my
question was, if this resulted from instructions that you had
received from the sector or from the zone, and if you yourself
had given such instructions. And based on your answers -- and <>
tell me if I'm mistaken -- but what I understood based on your
answers is that not only you did not provide such instructions
but you <also> didn't receive either such instructions from the
sector or from the zone, instructions indicating that you should
treat the 17 April People differently. Am I right in
understanding this or am I mistaken?
A. That is correct. <> I agree with the statement you quoted.
Regarding the living condition, and the situation in the communes
and the district, there was no mistreatment at all in regards to
the 17 April People. We were all <same> people -- that is, the
Khmer people.
Q. I suppose that you're speaking about your experience within
your district. But do we agree that you did not know how the
cooperative chiefs would behave in other districts?
A. I do not have a full understanding of what happened in other
districts. Although I may say that there was no differentiation
between the Base People and the 17 April People.
Q. I think you were telling Judge Lavergne in talking about the
training sessions that you had with regard to managing
cooperatives when you went to Phnom Penh. Can you confirm that <>
during these training sessions in Phnom Penh <you never received>
instructions aimed at mistreating the 17 April People or treating
<them> differently?
A. The upper echelon never gave instructions to the cadres to
mistreat the New People or the 17 April People or to deprive them
of food. The instructions we received were to organise the
cooperatives and to produce sufficient rice yield for the people
in the cooperatives so that they had enough strength to work.
MS. GUISSÉ:
Thank you for having had the patience to answer my questions.
Mr. President, I am done. And my colleague <Kong Sam Onn has> a
few follow-up questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And Counsel Kong Sam Onn, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good afternoon, Your Honours, Parties.
And good afternoon, Madam Sou Soeurn. I only have a few questions
to put to you. And I noticed that you have been exhausted during
the last two days of your testimony, so please, bear with me just
for a little while.
Q. In relation to your written record of statement -- that is,
<E3/5794>, at Khmer, ERN 00348830; and English, 00360114; and in
French, 00367806; and allow me to quote:
Question: "Were the 17 April People or the Base People the
subject of purges and disappearance?"
Answer: "Both. And when I asked them about the disappearance, I
was told that they minded their business and I should mind my own
business. And I did not dare ask any further questions."
And I'd like to ask you on the words that you made in that
statement that, "they minded their business and you minded
yours", did you receive this kind of phrase from any level?
MS. SOU SOEURN:
A. I did not receive any -- this <is the discipline for work, for
example, we had the right to be aware of our> work <and manage
ourselves, but> we did not have the right to ask about the
affairs of other people.
Q. I have listened attentively to your testimony during the last
two days and you repeated on a number of occasions of the same
phrase -- that is, "they mind their own business and you mind
your business", and now you said that is the practice at the
time. And my question to you is the following: Did you receive
any education from any source so that you put into practice this
kind of slogan?
A. Please rephrase your question. I don't fully get it.
Q. What I'd like to get from you is, did you receive any
education from any source regarding the phrase that you used --
that is, "they mind their own business and you mind your own
business"?
A. We received such an advice from the <Secretary> of the sector.
We were told that we should only mind our own business and others
will mind their business. And that's what I learned from the
sector.
Q. Was that a Party principle? Or was it a <> practice <which was
handed down from individuals>?
A. I cannot remember what it was. I don't know whether that
advice or instruction was originally sourced at the sector level.
Q. That is all right. And can you tell the Chamber whether that
was the principle that all Party members of the CPK understood?
A. I cannot recall that. It is very difficult to say whether it
was self-determination or not. So I cannot answer your question.
Q. That is all right. And in fact, my question is related to the
phrase that you used, that is "they mind their own business and
you mind your own business". And my question to you is whether
this phrase is well understood amongst the CPK party members.
<Was it only you who knew this principle?>
A. If you would like me to respond on behalf of those CPK party
members, I can't. Even for myself, I am unsure as whether it was
a self-determination or not.
Q. Yesterday at about 14.11, and a little bit after that in your
response to the Lead Co-Lawyer's questions concerning Khieu
Samphan, you said that the upper leaders of your husband,
including Mr. Khieu Samphan -- and my question to you is the
following: How did you know that Khieu Samphan was a senior
leader above your late husband?
A. I know that there were senior leaders when my husband called
cadres to attend the meetings at the zone level and that
information was relayed. And that is the best I can recall.
Q. Did you know whether your husband <> had to report to Khieu
Samphan?
A. As I said, I do not know about the work-related <to> my
husband. I only knew about my work. Because instructions were
relayed form the zone level to certain cadres at certain levels,
and only cadres at that level would get the information or
instructions. <I do not know his work.>
Q. And do you know the administrative structure of the CPK?
A. No, I don't.
Q. What about your husband's membership in the CPK, do you know
of his membership status in the CPK?
A. No, I don't. I don't understand about the membership issue.
Q. When I refer to the membership, I refer to his status within
the CPK structure. Do you understand that?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Did you know Khieu Samphan prior to 1975?
A. No, I did not know him.
Q. What about after 1975, or for the period between 1975 to 1979,
did you know the position of Khieu Samphan within the CPK rank?
A. No. I did not know about his position within the CPK rank <>.
I cannot recall it.
Q. Can you make a distinction between the CPK leadership and the
leadership of the Democratic Kampuchea regime?
A. I do not have a full understanding of this issue.
Q. You said that the senior leaders above your husband included
Khieu Samphan; do you have any -- what kind of information that
you relied upon when you make that statement? Or what was the
source of your information?
A. I noticed that I saw him in the forest and that my husband was
working with Khieu Samphan. And that's all I knew about it.
Q. So it was your observation while you were in the forest. And
can you confirm which period it was?
A. I've been sitting here and thinking as to when but I cannot
recall it.
Q. Can you at least say whether that period was before <> '79 or
after 1979?
A. I simply do not remember it whether it happened before 1979 or
not or whether it happened in 1976 or '77. <I cannot recall it.>
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. I am done.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
Today's proceeding has come to an end, and we will resume the
hearing on Tuesday <9 June 2015, > next week starting from 9
o'clock. And on that day, the Chamber will hear testimony of a
witness 2-TCW-975.
And Madam Sou Soeurn, the Chamber is grateful of your valuable
time to testify before us as a witness <in the last two days>.
And your testimony may contribute to ascertaining the truth. Your
testimony is now concluded and you are no longer required to be
present in the courtroom, and therefore you may return to
wherever you wish to go. And we wish you a safe trip back home.
And also, Madam <Chhay Mariden> TPO staff, the Chamber is
grateful of your assistance during these two days.
And Court officer, please make necessary transportation
arrangement in collaboration with WESU for the witness to return
to his place of residence.
And security personnel, you are instructed to take the two
Accused back to the detention facility and have them returned to
attend the proceeding on Tuesday next week before 9 o'clock.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1528H)
