P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now in session.
We will continue to hear the testimony of the witness, Saom Met.
Before we continue listening to the witness, I would like to give
the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to question this witness.  You
have 30 minutes.
The Co-Prosecutor, can you pause for a moment?  Alain Werner, you
may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
Good morning, Your Honour.  Sorry to be on my feet.
Just to report very, very briefly following the observation from
the defence yesterday, that for next week they may have some
issue with one of our civil parties, E2/50, and I told Your
Honours yesterday that we would give some new materials for
inspection for the defence, and we did.
So I just want to report that the defence was able to see this
material and, again, a motion will be filed on Thursday,
hopefully, with all the materials for all the parties.  Thank
you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the lawyer.  You may proceed.  The civil
party counsel, you may proceed so that we would not lose time in
hearing the testimony of this witness.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Mr. President, I would just like to intervene here so that we can
save time later.
With regard to the research that we've been able to conduct in
the files of our civil parties, we are processing some documents
but, at this point, we can indicate today that we are waiving the
hearing of E2/82, and we hope to be able to provide the documents
for E2/81 and we hope to have these documents before tomorrow.
If that is not the case, we will indicate that we are waiving our
right to have this civil party heard by the Court.
Lastly, we have taken cognizance of the Court's decision in
relation to the protection of civil party E2/89.  We offer no
challenge, nor does the civil party, who has agreed to appear
normally.  I am indicating this so that the file can be processed
and sent to the defence as soon as possible.
These are my submissions for this morning.  Thank you.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party counsel for group 3, can you state again the
purpose of your submission regarding the civil parties that you
are representing and which civil party statements that you wish
the Chamber to examine, or what you have submitted is the
information for the Chamber only?
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Mr. President, I was just making this observation so as to help
the planning for the day of the 17th, on which date we are going
to examine the modalities for the hearing of the civil parties.
So in order to deal with the problem of the Chamber's planning, I
was saying that we are no longer going to call civil party E2/82
and that we are processing the documents that we should have
today or tomorrow, and this pertains to civil party E2/81.
If we do not obtain the documents, we are indicating that we will
not ask for this civil party to be called.  If we do have the
documents, then we shall maintain our request for the party to be
heard.  So this is a matter of ours.  Under normal circumstances,
the documents should be available when needed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you may proceed.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Just to clarify, you say that you are giving up the hearing of
one civil party and that if you do not have enough documents to
provide to the Court you may do the same for the second civil
party.
Perhaps it would be better if you were to tell us whether this
waiver is a complete withdrawal of the civil party application or
it is just a waiver of the hearing because they are not the same
thing, especially with regard to the defence.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
This pertains solely to the hearing of the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, I would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to put
questions to this witness.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. TAN SENARONG:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Saom Met.  My first question to you.
Yesterday, you described about the tortures committed in the
detention facility at S-21 while you were guarding outside at
those special prisons.
Did you ever witness the torture act where a prisoner was
stripped off and water was poured on the prisoner and a fan was
used to cool down the water?
A. As I said, whatever I said, it was all true.
Q. Thank you.  In your interview with the Co-Investigating
Judges, you mentioned the vicious torture where a prisoner was
stripped of clothes and water was poured and a fan was used to
cool the water.  So you still stand by your statement?
A. Yes, it was true.  I do not fabricate it.
Q. Second question.  When you worked as a guard at S-21, did you
ever participate in training where you were taught about the
rules of how to protect and how to avoid prisoners from escaping
and various other measures?
A. Yes, of course, there were trainings, livelihood meetings, and
a group chief and a unit chief would give us instruction the
disciplines and to not allow the prisoners escape or not to be
given in to the prisoners, and not to the prisoners to conduct
any activities or to let them die or to go freely anywhere.  The
discipline was very strict at the time.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
With the President's leave, I would like to show a document,
P0000025 on the screen.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV officer, can you show the document with the said ERN
Number?
BY MR. TAN SENARONG:
Q. Mr. Saom Met, this is a drawing by Vann Nath who was a former
S-21 prisoner.  Yesterday, you responded to Judge Lavergne that
you witnessed the torture by using rattan sticks, by using
electrical shock, and nail pulling.
Can you tell the Chamber now regarding the tortures as you
mentioned yesterday, whether you witness those tortures as shown
on this drawing?
A. At that time, the torture, which was done at the place where I
guarded, was different from the place where the nails were
pulled, because at that location when the prisoners were taken
out to be interrogated and when they came back, I saw the signs
of nails which had been pull, but at my location nails were not
pulled and the water was not pour on to the prisoner.
Q. Thank you.  And what about the using of a needle to insert
under the nail.  Did you witness that?
A. At that time, I did not witness it personally.  I saw a
prisoner was being walked to be detained at the location where I
guarded.
Q. When you were transferred to Prey Sar, what about your unit --
the unit which instructed you and transferred you to Prey Sar,
prohibited you from saying anything about the activities at S-21?
A. When I was assigned to go there, I was not instructed on
anything regarding the saying about the S-21 activity.  I was
told that comrade, you prepare your own belonging and now you are
transferred to go and work at Prey Sar.  That was all.
Q. Thank you.  Upon your arrival at that location, can you tell
the Chamber the structure of administration at that location?
A. Upon my arrival, I was inserted into a unit working in the
rice fields, so there was nothing strange besides digging canals
or building dams, and the foods that we received was not
sufficient and the working conditions was hard.  We worked more
hour at that location and the discipline was strict.
Q. Thank you.  Also, at that location, what were you regarded as?
Were you regarded as in the medium category or serious category
or light category?
A. It was my understanding at that time that upon -- when I was
sent to that location, I was not yet categorized into any of
these levels.
The concern was that my brother was arrested and detained at S-21
and, as I reported earlier, only Huy who told me about the arrest
of my brother.  At first, he asked whether I had a brother named
Saom Meng and where he lived and I told him accordingly, from
what I knew, he lived at the airfield in Kampong Chhnang.  Then
Huy told me that he was arrested and asked me to be silent and
not to break this news, otherwise, I would have been arrested.
And from the understanding of what he said, I had to keep it
secret.  That is all.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. Saom Met.  I do not have any more questions for
you and I would like now to give the floor to my international
colleague.
BY MR. AHMED:
Thank you, Mr. Saom Met.  I am one more prosecutor, like my
friend, who are assisting this Court in searching for the truth
about what happened in S-21.
I thank you, in fact, we thank you for your truthfulness that you
have demonstrated when you gave an interview to the investigators
of the Investigating Judges yesterday, and when you were taken by
the Investigating Judges to S-21 during reconstruction.
I am just -- for the purposes of the learned Judges here, trying
to confirm what you spoke to the investigators of the
Investigating Judges so that the judges and the public have a
clear idea of what happened at S-21 and a complete record of
history is maintained.
So I will not ask many questions, but just for your confirmation
about what you have already told various bodies like the
investigators of this Court.
During your interview with the investigators in November just
about two years ago, you told them about how interrogation took
place and these were your words, and I would just request you to
confirm for us this is what your understanding of the
interrogations was:
"Sometimes Tuy interrogated and, if he was unclear, then Duch
came in and asked the prisoner, "Are you going to talk to us or
not?" "
Do you think this is what happened?
A. Whatever statement I made in my interview is still true.  I
did not fabricate anything and maybe I could not even recall more
details regarding those accounts because it has been so many
years already.  So everything was true.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. Saom Met.  I'm not meaning at all
that you're fabricating anything.  I'm just trying to record for
this Court exactly what you told the investigators, so when these
judges decide at the time of their judgment they have the full
truth before them.
And I will just read to you, and you can say the same thing,
whether you agree to what you said to the investigators:
"The prisoners would answer, "I already reported everything to
you, Brother.  There is nothing else to report".  Then Duch would
kick the prisoner once or twice and say, "Soon you will know".  A
moment later they would come up and threaten and beat the
prisoner so that the prisoner would answer."
I just would want you to attest you to tell the Court that this
is indeed what you told the investigators?
A. At that time I told the investigators of the Co-Investigating
Judges office and it is true.
Q. And one last thing and then I'll be done with, just for your
confirmation.
You told the investigators:
"If Duch did not go anywhere he would come to the prisoners'
site almost daily."
Can you just confirm that for us, please?
A. At that time I did make my statement, but probably it was a
little bit excessive.  Actually, he did not come on a daily basis
so I apologize for this.  My mistake.
Q. So how often do you think he came?
A. At that time, if he wanted to grasp the understanding of the
case he would come, or when he was available he would just walk
through and inspect in the prisoners' rooms.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. Saom Met.
And I'll just recall a statement that you gave about three years
ago to the investigators of the Documentation Centre for
Cambodia.  I will not read that statement to you, but just
extract one sentence from there and request for you to confirm
that sentence.
You told the investigators of the Documentation Centre for
Cambodia -- this was in January 2003 -- that:
"Many foreigners, including Americans, were burned on the road
west to S-21."
Do you recall that happening?
A. At that time, there was a guard who spoke about it and I
overheard it, but I myself did not witness it.  That is all.
Q. Did that guard tell you that he saw the burning of the
foreigners?
A. He did not tell me personally, but he told the people who
worked with the record-keeping and the documents and I overheard
it.
Q. Thank you very much for that clarification and for your --
once again, your truthfulness.
Now, I will ask you three or four questions about the people who
were imprisoned whom you were entrusted to guard.
There is evidence before this Court that they were made to write
very long confessions.  Did you see them doing that with pen and
paper in their rooms when you guarded them?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Were you also told that these people were very important
people and that special care should be taken to protect them?
A. The chief of the team told us that the prisoners were
important people and that we had to take special care.
Q. Did Duch also tell you such kind of a thing?
A. No, he didn't, but the chiefs of our team told us about this.
I believe that these kinds of instructions or advice could have
been passed down from him to the chiefs of our team.
Q. Do you remember any prominent figure or any names of persons
that you guarded or your colleagues guarded in that special
prison?
A. No, I don't because at that time we were not allowed to know
this, even among our guards.
Q. You were chosen for this very important task of guarding
special prisoners.  Do you think you were chosen for some special
quality that you had over and above other guards who were
guarding ordinary prisoners?
A. I don't know what special quality I had, but I was assigned by
the superior, and illiterate people would be assigned to a
different section while people who would be able to read and
write would be assigned to guard these prisoners.
Q. Just one or two last questions about your interaction with
Duch, the accused here.
You saw him very regularly.  What kind of a figure was he for the
guards in S-21?
A. I cannot tell anything about his characteristic back then.
Q. Did the guards and even your superiors fear him? Were they
afraid that if they did anything that annoyed him they may be
punished?
A. Of course I was afraid of him.  At the messenger unit, which
consisted of about 50 people, after all only four to five people
remained.  The rest disappeared gradually and we could not see
their faces during meal times any longer, so I started to fear
him.
Q. How was he when he talked to the guards?  Was he smiling, was
he arrogant?
A. I think he did not talk to guards in an arrogant manner at
all.  Sometime he smiled, sometimes he laughed.
Q. Did you see anybody higher than Duch in S-21 and especially
coming to the prisoners, the special prisoners whom you were
guarding?
A. No, I didn't.  I didn't see any persons higher than him who
came to the location.  I saw only him, Chan, and Hor; no other
people.
Q. This means for the two years that you were guarding you saw
Duch in control of S 21 and always in charge, and everybody else
fearing him.  Is that a correct assessment?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. And you may not have heard it, and you can tell us if that is
not the case, but did ever Duch in any political meeting or at
any other time that you heard him say that if anything wrong
happened at S-21 he will be punished by his superiors?
A. No, I did not hear that.
MR. AHMED:
Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I have no further questions
for this witness.
And thank you, Mr. Saom Met, for your truthfulness and for your
forthrightness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the civil parties lawyers
to be able to put questions to this witness.  You take the floor.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Mr. President, Your Honours, I would like to indicate the time
allocation for the civil party lawyers today.  We have two groups
now.  The first group begins with -- in the first group I will
put questions first and the third group will put questions later.
I have a couple of questions.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. TY SRINNA:
Q. My name is Ty Srinna, a civil party lawyer of group 1, and Mr.
Alain Werner, who is my co-colleague.  Mr. Saom Met, good
morning.
I would like to seek clarification from you in relation to the
statement you made on the 28th of November 2007, with ERN
00163653 in Khmer; in English, 00163663.  Before the
Co-Investigating Judges you responded that according to what you
remember during the time you were on guard at each room, whether
you heard any screaming from the detainees, and you said that you
heard detainees cried for help and begged that the interrogators
stop beating them and that they did not want them to beat them.
Do you stand by your statement?
A. I do stand by my statement that I made before the
Co-Investigating Judges.
Q. May I also seek another point of clarification?  You were
asked whether you had observed that detainees in each room
received torture, and you said that everyone was tortured and
they had been inflicted serious tortures, and when the guards saw
detainees being interrogated they themselves, the guards, were
terrified also.  Do you stand by your statement that the guards
were also frightened by the practice of tortures?
A. I do stand by my statement and I don't ever change it.
Q. Next question.  Yesterday you indicated, in relation to Tuy,
you said that one day Tuy used a stick to beat on the detainee on
the back until he was bleeding, and then Tuy used other
instruments of tortures, including the electric wire to attach to
his earlobes to electro-shock the detainee until he passed out.
And when he regained consciousness then Tuy re-interrogated him.
So do you believe that Tuy was such a cruel person like what you
said in your statement?  Can you describe his character?
A. What I have said earlier is true and in such interrogation
violence could not be avoided.
Q. I just would like you to tell us about the personality of Tuy.
Was he an arrogant, cruel person or just a normal individual?
A. Tuy, who was the interrogator, was not a usual person.  As an
interrogator he was very cruel
Q. Do you know whether Tuy had any relationship with Duch, the
accused?
A. Interrogators and Duch relationship is not known to me.
Q. While Tuy inflicted tortures on the detainees do you know that
Duch was satisfied with such acts?
A. I have no idea.
Q. I may proceed with another question.
In your statement of your interview with the DC-Cam on the 31st
of January 2002, with ERN number 0051666 in Khmer; in English,
00337636 -- in that document you gave the interview to the staff
member of DC-Cam and you were asked whether you gave food or rice
to the detainees or whether you knew them, and you said you only
met your chief, who was the chief of the platoon -- no, the
battalion, correction.  And you said he was the chief of
battalion and -- the chief of Battalion 703 and:
"I was his former messenger and when I witnessed such thing, I
was in dismay.  I was afraid I would be trapped in the same
situation when that work was to be discovered."
My question is, what happened to Phy when he was arrested and
sent to S-21?
A. At that time I forgot, but now with this kind of refreshness
and I can recall that Phy was the chief of my unit, Unit 303, and
it was during the wartime, '74-'75, and I saw him under the
wooden house and then I left because I was afraid that I would be
implicated because of my association with my chief.  And then
when he was -- I believe that when he was tortured or
interrogated it would implicate me, and I think I remember this
memory.
Q. Do you remember any staff from 703 who worked at S-21?
A. There were people from 703 who worked at S-21 because the
messenger unit consisted of all people from 703 and they were
mixed up with the people from the west and from Kampong Chhnang,
but actually these people had already been working in the unit
before we came.
Q. Do you know that the majority of staff members from Division
703 were smashed at S-21?
A. I know that a lot of people from 703 were smashed, but we only
learned from one another.  We did not witness the execution
because the chief of the unit would tell us that people from 703
have already been taken in and taken out.
Q. Do you know how many people from 703 were executed?
A. No, I don't know because I did not fully observe the numbers
of people who were killed.
Q. When you were told that all people from 703 have already been
brought in, did you seek any clarification from the person who
told you about this; why people from 703 were all arrested?
A. No, I did not seek any clarification from my colleague because
it was the rule at the location that we were not allowed to
communicate with one another.
Q. Yesterday, you indicated in the hearing that there was a small
incident in relation to the staff member of S-21 who left a scarf
near the window and then he left, and that the detainee took the
advantage of the opportunity to grab that scarf to attempt
suicide.  But then you was quick to be there and that the attempt
was failed, and that you tried to help conceal the secrecy in
order to avoid any prosecution on that guard.  Did you say that?
A. Of course, I did, yes.
Q. Did you intend to help the guard?
A. Yes, I did, because if I did not help to hide this incident
that guard could have been jailed or could have been refashioned
or re-educated.
Q. I would like to ask a question in relation to Huy.  This
morning, you said something about Huy.  Was it true that Huy
helped you when he sent you to the rice fields?
A. Yes, it is true.  If Huy did not help me, I would be in big
trouble already.
Q. In relation to your work at S-21, to what extent were you
given the authority to operate within the vicinity of S-21?
A. Could you please repeat your question?  I don't understand it.
Q. Thank you.  I will try my best to simplify the question.
Regarding the power or authority you can exercise at S-21, did
the upper echelon or your superior delegate any kind of power to
you to operate to what -- to the extent at S-21?
A. No power or authority was ever be delegated to me, and I was
only assigned and sanctioned to guard the detainees and that's
all.
Q. I would like to move back a little bit and I would like to
apologize for skipping one question.  I would like to also seek
clarification regarding the help of Huy, who tried to help you by
sending you to work at Prey Sar.
At that time Huy could help you, of course, but was it possible
to help the other people in general at S-21 at that time; for
example, by way of sending you to the field, as an example, as
what Huy did to you?
A. Huy helped me with that but I did not know whether it was
possible for him to help the others but, of course, he did help
me.
Q. Next question.  I would like to put further questions in
relation to your rights of communication to the superior.
Did you have the rights to meet directly with superior or upper
echelon and to contact with them?
A. At that time, I was only delegated some kind of functions or
tasks and I was instructed by my chief of the team, that's all,
not from the other superiors.
Q. What kind of information could you obtain or did you have the
right to obtain from your chief of the unit?  Were you able to
receive or access information in relation to politics or the
armed conflicts?
A. At that time I'm not sure whether I obtained any information
regarding these matters or I had the right to do so.  I think I
didn't.
Q. Now, I'm talking about the freedom of movement.  At that time,
you said you saw the accused wandering in the vicinity of the
location.  So can you please tell the Court whether during that
time, when you worked as a staff at S-21, what was your freedom
of movement and what was the freedom of the accused of movement?
A. At that time, honestly, when Duch came, whether I was on guard
or off duty, I saw him because how could I not see him because I
was working there?
Q. I'm sorry to interrupt, but I would like to ask about your
rights of movement to walk within the S-21 and move about
elsewhere as opposed to the rights of movement of the accused.
A. The accused freedoms of movement was not known to me, but I am
sure that I am -- I was very well disciplined and I could not
move about easily.  I was not allowed to do so, and I could only
move back to the kitchen and the place where I worked.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you very much, Mr. Saom Met, on behalf of the civil party
lawyers and the civil parties.  We are very grateful to your
assistance.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil party lawyers group 3, you take the floor.
BY MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Saom Met.  I am Fabienne Trusses.  I am the
lawyer for civil parties group number 3.  I only have a few
questions to put to you.
You spoke to us about the conditions, which for you were
extremely harsh, conditions for prisoners who were in the special
unit which you were guarding.  But the question that I would like
to ask you is, do you know what the conditions were for the other
prisoners who were in the other buildings?
A. I did not know what happened to the other people in other
buildings.
Q. Did you not discuss this with the other guards?
A. No, I didn't because the discipline was very strict.  When we
were supposed to guard the detainees then our duty was to guard
the detainee, not anything else.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Saom Met.  You also said in your statement that
Duch was responsible for the prisoners' entry and exit.  You knew
this although you did not know exactly what his duties were; this
is what you stated.  So how could you know this?
A. I knew it because of the group chief or the team's chief
during the meetings.  During the meetings, we were told that
planning was coming from Brother Duch through Hor, Huy and Sre
and then to us.
Q. You also stated that you witnessed torture because when you
were on guard you looked through the skylight and saw what was
going on in the cells.  You are also one of the people who
provided information not provided by other guards.  This is in
particular with regard to some forms of torture inflicted on the
prisoners, such as using electric shocks on the genitals.
Can you confirm this statement, and can you give us further
detail as to what you saw when you witnessed these scenes?  Could
you also tell us on how many occasions you were able to see what
was going on?
A. I would like to clearly state that what I saw and knew was
true and I did witness it at the time, and now I don't want to
repeat what I already said.
Q. Thank you.  You have confirmed this once more.  It is
important in my view.  You are the only one who has provided some
of these clarifications.
Now, I would like to put to you a more personal question.  What
did you feel when you learned that your brother had been
arrested?
A. Upon hearing the news that my brother was arrested, my feeling
of course was not stable.  I was anxious and I did not focus much
on my work at the time, but Huy advised me to be strong and not
to say anything and that he would try to help me by concealing
that information.  That was all.
Q. Thank you.
I would now like to turn to Prey Sar.  Do you know whilst you
were at Prey Sar whether there were prisoners freed there?
A. When I went to stay at Prey Sar it was difficult for me to
clearly see which location was for the prisoners or which were
the prisons itself because my main focus at the time was to work
in the rice fields.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Saom Met.  I have no further questions for you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, I would like to give the floor to the defence counsel if
they have questions to be put to this witness.  You may proceed.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honour.  Good
morning, ladies and gentlemen.
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Mr. Saom Met, you stated that Huy assisted you and if Huy were
to report about you then it would be the end of you.  Is this
correct?
A. That is true.
Q. So regarding the arrest of S-21 staff, if the lower level
subordinates, for example the chiefs of platoons or companies
that did not report to Duch, then Duch would not know about those
arrests.  Is this correct?
A. It's problematic if the lower level did not report to the
subordinate -- to the upper level, to Duch, then Duch would not
know.  During each livelihood meeting we were criticized or we
had to self-criticize and, based on the results of those
criticisms and the qualities, then research would be made and
people would be arrested later on.
Q. You were a guard.  At rooms where you guarded did you ever see
the display of the 10 rules of the Santebal?
A. I did not know about the Santebal rules.  I have forgotten it.
It has been so many years already.
Of course there were strict rules regarding walking, standing,
sleeping, eating, everything.  I just do not know how many of
those rules.
Q. Can you confirm again the 10 Santebal rules that I just said,
were they displayed in the interrogation room or on a wall
anywhere, for example "Rule 1: you had to answer straight to the
question asked and do not stray from it"; did you ever see such
display?
A.   At that time I did not se anything on the wall.  I only
learned the rules during the meetings but it was not written on
the wall.  I'm not sure.  Here I talk about myself.  It might be
displayed somewhere else.
Q. D28/3 in the document 00163563 you told the investigators that
the prisoners were beaten to confess and if they did not confess
they would be beaten to death.  Is this true?
A. My statement was true.  Thank you.
Q. Did you ever see an interrogator torture a prisoner to death?
A. The interrogator did not beat the prisoner to death.  Once the
interrogation was complete the prisoner would be taken out.  Of
course they were tortured during the interrogation but they were
not dead.
Q. So your statement before the investigators that if a prisoner
did not confess the prisoner would be beaten or tortured to death
and now you clearly state to the Chamber that during the
interrogations a prisoner was not beaten to death.
So are you standing by your statement you just made before this
Chamber or the statement before the investigators?
A. At that time I made a statement to the investigators and I
stand by my statement.  That was the opportunity for me to speak
and now I don't think I have that same opportunity before this
Chamber.
Q. So you do not stand by the statement you just made before this
Chamber and you stood by the statement before the investigators.
D28/3 with the ERN 0016353660 a prisoner was -- received the
electric shock and became unconscious but if a prisoner was
beaten then that prisoner would not become unconscious.  Can you
explain to us the difference?
A. I would like to tell you clearly that when a rattan stick was
used then a prisoner was never unconscious but if a prisoner
received electric shock that prisoner would become unconscious.
That is all.
Q. You worked at S-21.  Did you know the S-21 medics?  If so,
were there any female medics or child medics at S-21?
A. Regarding the medics I only knew Try and he was male of course
and he frequently came to the special prison.
I did not see any female or child medic.  There might be those
child or female medics inside the compound.
Q. You guarded S-21.  Did you ever see Duch kill any prisoner
with his own hands?
A. I never saw him kill anyone.
Q. Thank you for your statement that you never saw Duch kill
anyone.
At S-21 did you know if there were any senior leaders above Duch
issued orders to Duch?
A. When I was just an ordinary combatant I would not know
anything about the senior people above Duch.  I guarded a
prisoner inside the room and I would not know anything about any
senior people above Duch or their visits.  I only saw Duch and
Chan at that office.
Q. You were a guard.  Did you ever receive any direct order from
Duch?
A. My duty was not directly ordered or assigned by Duch.  It was
assigned by my team chief during that period.
Q. Thank you for saying that you never received direct order from
Duch.
At the time that you stood guard at S-21, were you satisfied with
your guard duty?
A. I would like to tell you clearly that in my mind, I was not
satisfied with my work at all because people were arrested and
killed so inside my mind that was the truth, but outside I would
not display this feeling, otherwise I would be arrested.
Q. Thank you for saying that you was not satisfied with your
guard duty at S-21 as the rest of the other guards previously
testified before this Chamber.
Now, did you regret your guard duty as you did at S-21?
A. People who used to stay together and work together; of course,
there was regret because we could not understand if there was any
reason for their arrest and detention.  If it is my understanding
that they would not or they should not be arrested, it's like
using a cow or an ox and then kills that cow or ox.
Q. Thank you for saying that you was not satisfied with your duty
at S-21.
My next question is if you were not satisfied with your work at
S-21 why did you not attempts to escape?
A. Fleeing, where you want me to flee?  Outside, there were
walls.  Inside, there were walls.  Where do you want me to flee?
And if I were to successfully escape, then my parents, my
relatives at the Native village would be arrested and brought to
that prison.  They would be killed; that's all.
Q. The staff or the guards who guarded S-21, can you tell us
whether they were not satisfied with their work and they stayed
there because they had nowhere to run to?
A. I could not speak on their behalf because at that time, nobody
trusted anybody.  If we were to trust each other that would not
have happened.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I do not have any question for this
witness and I would like to give the floor to my international
counsel.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel, you may proceed.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you, Mr. President, but the defence has no further
questions for this witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity to the accused
to make his observations regarding this witness testimony if the
accused wish to do so.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to clarify that I have never known
this Comrade Met.  During the confrontation arranged by the
Co-Investigating Judges, I knew Met was a younger brother of
Comrade Mein (phonetic) due to the physical appearance, and that
he was a member of the S-21 staff, a member of the special force
working outside.  And when I saw the face of Met, I was shocked
and regretful that Mein (phonetic) and his wife, Peun (phonetic),
who died at S-21 and that I had a pity on Met who was demoted
from a guard at S-21 and was later transferred to worked in the
rice fields; that was my feeling for Comrade Met.
Second point; regarding the testimony of this Comrade Met, in
general, it is true; however, the point that I went to torture a
prisoner at Tuy's location, I would not deny it, but I would like
to make the point straight: in my role as the Chairman of S-21
and the serious crimes to my understanding, that is, the
political indoctrinations that I provided to those people, for
example, the 18 February 1976 document that I brought in the city
resistant forces and then eliminated their existing views and
indoctrinated them with the views I got from that document, so
with the view of the criminal intent of the CPK and that I had to
give them instructions that anyone who was arrested by the Party
had to be considered the enemy and that was the most serious
crimes that I committed and that I am responsible for the more
than 10,000 lives lost at S-21.
In addition to my acknowledgement, I also wrote what I thought
and that I wrote those documents to my superior and of course,
those documents were written by me and that was my crimes on the
people who were not yet decided to be arrested by Angkar and I
was the one who initiated.  So these are the two focal points
that I would like to raise.
Thirdly, all the crimes committed at S-21, regardless of formal
torture used and regardless whether the special force used or
transported the prisoners to be executed somewhere else -- they
had to do it because of my instructions.
So I do not deny all these crimes; I accept them.  However, in
whatever unit and in whatever society each person fulfilled his
or her task based on the assignment.  A guard had to fulfil the
guard duty and could not do the interrogation job.  And likewise,
the interrogator could not split his time to carry the guard
duty.  And in the role of the leadership of S-21, I would not
have -- I could not spare my time to involve with those
interrogations even if I wanted to do so, and that is the general
principle.
I do not deny that the allegations that it was a serious crime
that I was alleged to beat a prisoner during an interrogation.
Of course, I went to the interrogation location when Brother Mam
Nai received his duty to summarize my -- the confessions that I
worked on.  So I went to that location and he reserved a chair
for me.  And at that time, Chao Seng was detained there and every
couple of months I went there to visit him.
At Pon's location, from my recollection, I went there on two
occasions after the interrogation of Tho Phuon (phonetic), who
was an engineer from Kampong Thom.  After the interrogation was
completed and I saw the scars and marks on his body and Pon
requested me to meet him.
And why Khieu Samphan respectfully had his great deal of respect
and attitude to Pol Pot?  Pon told me that Khieu Samphan was a
person living in a room and fear of Pol Pot.  So Tho Phuon
(phonetic) did not give me any reason for that, but instead he
describes the process.  So that was the first time I went to the
interrogation room of Comrade Pon.
On the second time, when Pon interrogated an English man who came
with a New Zealander -- that British -- I could not recall his
name.  So that Briton came along with a New Zealander and Pon
told me that he was very humble and he behaved like a Cambodian.
And the New Zealander, Hamill, was there and when I went to see
him, yes, he was humble and docile.  So that was the second
occasion I went to visit Pon's place.
I never went to Tuy's place.  Of course I was aware of what was
going on and I knew that Tuy used violence on the prisoners, but
I did not simply react to anything happening at S-21.  I think I
went once to Tuy's location when a secretary from Tuek Phos
(phonetic) district was arrested, named Chao Van (phonetic),
alias Kim (phonetic).
This Chao Van (phonetic) was a former resistant.  He was two or
three years older than me.  He was from the Daun Penh area.  He
was a friend of Son Visoth (phonetic), alias Nikon (phonetic),
the younger brother of Son Sen.  And when Chao Van (phonetic) was
arrested, my superior telephoned me from afar to play politics
with Chao Van (phonetic) in order for him to confess.
So I agreed to do so and, from my recollection, Chao Van even
wrote that I went to meet him and that he was waiting for me, in
his confession.  But I don't want to talk about his confession
before this Chamber now, but I believe it was mentioned in his
confession.
Also, this Khoem -- Chao Van, alias Khoem.  Khoem was the
revolutionary name of Peng.  So Dam Kan was also a friend of Dam
Peng and they all used the same alias, Khoem.  So I believe I
went once to Tuy's location, but in general I did not go.
With the President's leave, I would like a document to be
projected.  That is Tuy's record with the ERN 00077153 on the
document regarding myself and Tuy.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV official, can you project the document with the ERN
00077153 on the screen?
The Court officer is now instructed to check with the AV Unit
whether the document can be projected.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to read.  This is the comment I
advised Tuy.  I said this special group, including Pon, who was
the first person -- he did not write "Comrade Pon" but he used
"Brother Pon" instead.  So this is how I assigned the task and I
did not go there. That's why, after the complaint of Tuy, then I
asked Pon to help.  At any occasion, brothers from the upper went
to the location and the situation was chaotic.  It was because of
the concept to serve the mass, the workers and the peasants and
that our standpoint was not yet strong, and I don't want to
continue anyway.
This document is the document of S-21 and it clarifies that I did
not go there, but I helped try to strengthen the spirit of Tuy,
but Tuy still was embedded with another concept that he relied on
Pon or me.
So I would like the AV Unit also be instructed to roll down to
another page, which is , just the next page of course.
Just scroll down a little bit.
The second reason.  So there were seven points.  Sorry, the
seventh line, second reason, "And we lost the direction to serve
the people".  So every time he saw the upper echelon or superior
came to the location, he just relied too much on them.  So this
is how Tuy worked and I know for sure of how Saom Met expressed
in his statement about the cruelty, about the tortures Tuy would
used on the detainees, but I did not go there to Tuy's place.
And this is the document to prove that I did not go there,
although this is a document as an evidence to prove that I did
not visit the location of Tuy and I accept and I acknowledge that
Saom Met who was the combatant who had suffered a great deal as a
guard in the Special Unit and who later on was sent to S-21 for
re-education, and his Brother, Meng was arrested and executed,
and I really share the suffering and express my condolences to
his family.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The hearing of the testimony of Mr. Saom Met comes to an end.
The Chamber is very grateful to Mr. Saom Met for your attendance
to give your testimony before the Chamber, the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, as scheduled.
The Chamber notes how very difficult this has been for you.  It
is very difficult because you have faced several questions put by
the parties who have the right to put questions to you during
such proceedings, and the questions have already been put to you,
and as you already indicated in the session that your testimony
is not as fresh as it would have been before the office of
Co-Investigating Judges.  However, the Chamber has noted that you
are doing your best to respond to all the questions put to you as
needed.
The Chamber has no further questions to be put to you and we
would like to let you go back home.
The Court officer is now instructed to make any necessary
arrangements and consult with the WESU Unit to make sure that Mr.
Saom Met is well taken back to his home safe and sound.
(Witness exits courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since it is now time to take an adjournment we will take the
adjournment now and resume at 5 to 11.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1037H to 1100H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
For our next proceedings, we will have the greffier read out the
testimonies or statements of those witnesses who are not
summonsed by the Chamber.  Those statements are made before the
investigators of the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges.
The greffier, Duch Phary, you are now instructed to read the
records of interview of Makk Sithim.  The document number is
D28/8 and next would be D54.
THE GREFFIER:
Document D28/8:
"This is the written record of interview of the witness Makk
Sithim, born in 1957.  The record was made on the 30 November
2007 by the investigators of the Office of the Co-Investigating
Judges of the Extraordinary Chamber in the Courts of Cambodia.
Question-Answer:
Q. Please speak about your family prior to '75.
A. My family was well off and we had enough to eat.
Q. What were the reasons that led you to join the revolution?
A. After 17 April, I was still a child and did not know yet how
to put my pants on right.  They had me carry rice at Veal Cha.
Then I joined the children's unit.  Two months later, the
district secretary during the revolutionary era, Uong, took me to
the district for two nights and took me to Sala Lekh pram for two
nights.  They took us in six Chinese trucks.  The one who took us
was Chan Samreng.
After reaching Phnom Penh, they had me rice pick at Boeng Tumpun
for about five months until the end of '75.
Next, they had me go to Boeng Trabek where I cut trees; worked
in the rice fields in the dry season; planted vegetables; and
studied the Khmer language.
I studied and trained at Ta Khmau in '76.  I studied military
strategy and planted vegetables.  I don't remember the names of
the ones who taught me.  I studied for eight months.  I studied
dissembling weapons, throwing grenades and mine detecting.  Then
the course ended.  I don't remember who came for the closing
ceremony.
Next I went to Prey Sar to build a dam and grow turnips.  I don't
remember who my leader was.  I was there for three months.
Next I studied medicine for three months.  I studied in front of
the movie theatre near Phsar Thmei.  Dam was the instructor.
Q. Did you ever see Duch come to watch?
A. No.
Q. How did you study medicine?
A. We studied reading medication labels and medication to be
injected.
Q. Do you know the names of those who studied with you?
A. There was a certain Prum Sokh, a medic.  After '79 he became
an aide of Duch.  Now he is at Kbal Chhay.  His place of birth is
here.
Q. Do you know if any other of the medics are still alive?
A. There is one named Dan, now at Thlong Popok sub-district,
Samaki Mean Chey district.  He is crippled and had one leg
missing.
Q. Aside from him?
A. There was the medic Try, a Cham.  He was an ordinary medic
like myself.  Now he is still alive in Kampong Tralach district
west of Thnal Toting.
Medics Huor and Try, who were chairmen, were imprisoned for two
days when the Vietnamese came, but I don't know if Huor is still
alive.
Q. And then after studying medicine?
A. They had me go to Ta Khmau to study making medication and
stamping out pills.  The one who assigned me to go there was Dam
and Dam was under the command of Duch.  I studied there for eight
to nine months in '77.  Dam was the instructor.
Q. Did you see Duch or the senior leaders come to watch?
A. No.
Q. And after those eight months?
A. Next I served the prisoners at Tuol Sleng until '79.  I did
not know the one who took me there.  There were 15 of us,
including the chairman and deputy chairman.  There was another
one who was a medic with me named Tha but I do not know if he is
dead or alive.
Q. Do you know the reason they arrested Try?
A. I do not know the reason.  As for Huor, the chairman of the
medical team, ordinarily he was the person who issued medicine
for me to dispense further.  The medical unit where I worked was
in front of S-21.
Q. The prisoners you treated, what condition were they in?
A. After they had been interrogated some prisoners had open
wounds on their backs and some had their nails pulled out.  I had
to treat them if they were important people.  The interrogator
would bring them to me for treatment.  The interrogator would
tell me, "Comrade, you must treat this one because I have not yet
finished interrogating him."
During treatment sometimes I saw prisoners die, one or two or
three in a day, and I was the one who buried them along the
buildings outside the prison walls.
Q. Did you ever go to treat prisoners outside the walls of S-21?
A. I treated the battalion chairmen and their wives.
Q. Did you ever go to treat prisoners while they were being
interrogated?
A. Never.  The majority were placed on stretchers and brought
right to the site.
Q. Did you ever treat prisoners whose blood had been drawn?
A. I just treated patients in the three buildings.  I never went
outside.
Q. Was there any sign that blood was being taken?
A. I treated patients whose blood had been drawn.  There were
people whose blood had been drawn because the medic Huor, who was
with my team, told me.  The prisoners whose blood had been drawn
were pale.  I saw about 30 to 40 prisoners whose blood had been
taken.
Q. Where did they take the blood?
A. I do not know, but I saw bad blood bags thrown away near the
concrete house I lived in.
Q. Did Duch ever come to look at the place where you treated
patients?
A. I never saw him.  I only saw him during afternoon meals.
Q. Did you know Duch was the prison chairman?
A. Duch was the chairman supervising the entire unit, including
the medic Try and the medic Huor as well.
Q. Did you ever meet Duch at the place you studied and did
self-criticism?
A. I never saw him.  Only the chairman of the platoons and
companies gave instructions, and the medical chairman. The
medical chairman and the medical team met once weekly.
Q. Did you ever know the chairman of the defence team?
A. Hor was the chairman of the defence team.  There was an
interrogation team but I did not know the team chairman.  As for
the arrest team I did not know them, I just saw the vehicles
come.
Q. Did you ever treat Vietnamese?
A. I never treated any.  I never even saw any.  But as for
Chinese, yes.
Q. During treatment did you see children or pregnant women?
A. For the prisoners with wives and children they were not
shackled, they were placed in a large cell with the door tightly
shut.
Q. During treatment did you ever see Duch come to give orders?
A. I never saw Duch come to give orders.
Q. Did you ever treat anyone who had been in the countryside
with you or who had worked alongside you?
A. Yes, they were arrested just two or three days before '79
but I never treated them.
Q.  Did you ever see prisoners whose blood had been drawn and
who died for lack of treatment?
A. I do not know because that was a different specialty.
Q. Through giving treatment what types of torture did you see?
A. I just saw prisoners who had been interrogated using
electric shocks.  I knew this since the prisoners had told me.  I
gave them medication, Vitamin 12 and Vitamin B.
Q. Did you think the medication and treatment were effective?
A. In general they were ineffective but if it was diarrhoea
some of that could be dealt with.
Q. Why do you think the Khmer Rouge did not have you use French
medication?
A. Because most of the French medication that remained had
expired and there was never any new medication coming in.
Q. During which period did you treat the greatest amount of
prisoners?
A. During the war before the Yuon attacked and came in.
Q. Was there anything else unusual which I did not ask about?
A. There was nothing unusual.  I provided treatment and had to
provide them the treatment so that they would get well.  But if
they did not get well they would take me away and kill me. That
is what the medical chairmen Try and Huor told me.
Q. Did any cadres come to give instructions two or three days
before the Vietnamese came?
A. No one gave instructions to anybody.  We just scattered on
our own.
Q. Which year did you arrive back home?
A. Nearly one year later.  It was the transplanting season when
I arrived.'
One copy of the written statement was provided to this
witness.  The interview was completed and after it was read out
aloud the witness had no objections and agreed to sign or place
his thumbprint."
Document D54:
"This is the written record of confrontation done before the
Co-Investigating Judges of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia dated 29 February 2008 at 9.20 a.m.  With the
presence of defence counsel, Mr. Kar Savuth and Mr. Franois
Roux; the accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch; the witnesses Him
Huy, Prak Khan, Suos Thy, Kung Phai, Mam Nai, Vann Nath, Makk
Sithim, Saom Met who were sworn in pursuant to the Internal Rules
of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.
Confrontation:  Questions by Co-Investigating Judges:
Q. Did you witness the mass execution sins in January 1979?
Witnesses Suos Thy, Prak Khan, Him Huy, Saom Met, Makk Sithim
and Mam Nai:
A. We were not aware of them.
Question by Co-Investigating Judge Marcel Lemonde to witness
Makk Sithim:
Q. Do you confirm your statements on 30 November 2007 regarding
the drawing of blood?
Response by Makk Sithim:
A. I was a medic at S-21 and I treated the sick.  I did not
personally observe any blood drawing but I saw prisoners whose
blood had just been drawn and who were very pale.  I also saw
unused blood bags under the staircase.
Questions by the Co-Investigating Judge Marcel Lemonde:
Q. Mr. Suos Thy, do you still stand by your statement made on
the 18th October 2007 regarding the drawing of blood of the
victims whose names were included in the list to be smashed?
Response by Suos Thy:
A. I confirmed my statements.
Response by the charged person:
First, I would like to ask questions to Makk Sithim.  How many
blood bags did he see?
Response by Makk Sithim:
Maybe 30 or 40 bags but I do not remember exactly.
Question by Alex Bates:
Q. Does the charged person contest Prak Khan's statement made
on the 25th of September 2007 which stated that blood was taken
to be sent to 17 April Hospital and Monivong Hospital?
Response by the charged person:
A. If that sort of blood taking was carried out I do not think
that blood bags were sent to Monivong Hospital which was the
Division 703 hospital or to the 17 April Hospital, the state
hospital, since S-21 had its own Hospital 98 which was under Son
Sen's control.
Response by witness Prak Khan:
A. The doctors who practiced the drawing of blood gave me the
information.  They told me they were sent to 17 April Hospital
and Monivong Hospital.
Response by witness Makk Sithim:
A. I did not know of blood bags being sent to hospital.
After having been read aloud and heard, the charged person, the
witnesses and the civil parties had no objections and agreed to
sign."
MR. PRESIDENT:
After hearing the written record of interviews and confrontations
of the witness Makk Sithim do the Co-Prosecutors want to have any
observations to make regarding the statements of this witness,
Makk Sithim?
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The prosecution has no observations to
make regarding the statements of this witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party counsel, do you have any observation to make
regarding the two statements read by the greffier?
MR. WERNER:
Civil party lawyers have no observation, Your Honour.  Thank you.
MR PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, do you have any observations to make
regarding the statements read by the greffier?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Regarding the statements, I observed that the medic at S-21 and
Makk Sithim, who was a medic at S-21 too, he confirmed clearly
that there were six medics only at S-21 and they were all male
and this is the observation by the defence counsel.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel, do you have any observation to
make in addition to the one made by your colleague?
MS. CANIZARES:
I have no extra observations to make in relation to the one that
was made by my colleague.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now gives the opportunity to the accused to make his
observations regarding the statements of the witness, Makk
Sithim.  If you have any comments or observations to make, you
may proceed.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to separate my observations into two
parts.
First, regarding the crime of drawing of blood at S-21; this
crime, as I clearly stated to the Chamber already, the person who
issued order was my superior, Son Sen, and it was to carry out
sins.
S-21 was under the supervision of Nat, however, it became more
frequent during my chairmanship -- and we already questions
regarding the total number of the prisoners whose blood had been
drawn during the testimony by Prak Khan -- and I said the total
number of the prisoners whose blood had been drawn totalled to
about 100.
And regarding the spoil blood as mentioned by Makk Sithim
surprised me; there were 30 to 40 bags of blood.  I did not know
the reason for the spoilt of those blood.  Besides that, I do not
have anything to say regarding the blood drawing.
And the second part, whether Makk Sithim was actually a member of
S-21, I am still undecided.  It's hard for me to believe his
statement to let me believe that he was a member of S-21 because
his statement is confusing.  He stated that he was born in 1957
and after the 17 April '75, he did not know how to put his pants
on, so it's contradicting.
And for the youth I requested from Kampong Chhnang, there were
only 40 to 50 of them.  There were not up to 100 or so.
And the third point, he only knew a few people around him; for
the actual people from Kampong Chhnang, they would know each
other, but he did not know any of them or some other stuff at
S-21.  So, in conclusion, I am still undecided to acknowledge
that Makk Sithim was a member at S-21.
Regarding the medic Try, as mentioned by Makk Sithim, he was not
a chairman of the medical unit.  He was a Cham from Kampong Cham,
and the other Try was a former 703 Division person.  He lived at
S'ang Prek Tauch in Koh Thom.
And this is my observation, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, Mrs. Se Kolvuthy, the greffier of the Trial Chamber, is now
instructed to read the written report of the interview of witness
Tay Teng, document D28/12.  And the interrogators would be
substituted with the term "Question" and the short form of the
names of the responder should be also replaced by "Response" so
that it is more convenient for the parties to the proceedings to
be able to understand the document.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D28/12.  This is a written record of the interview of
Tay Teng, revolutionary name Dy Teng born in 1958.  This record
was done on the 17th of January 2008 at 10.50 a.m. by the
investigator of the Co-Investigating Judges' Office.
Question and Answer:
"Q. Please briefly describe your personal history before 1970.
At which school did you study?  After the 1970 coup, what did you
do?
A. When I was young, I studied at Koh Khsach Chunlea primary
school in Chong Koh village, Teuk Wil sub-district, S'ang
district, Kandal province.  I studied up to grade 11 and when I
stopped, I stayed with my parents.
In 1973, I joined the Khmer Rouge army as my cousin, Ouk Tem, had
introduced me.  I was in the unit for 12 years old in Division
12, with the duties to carry rice sacks to supply the front at
the field on National Road 2 near Kandal Stueng district.
Q. What did you do after the 17th of April 1975?  In which unit
were you?
A. After the 17 April 1975, they had me work in the rice field
near Au Bek Ka-am.  At that time, I was in Battalion 31 of
Division 12.  After that, they had me stay at Chak Angre and farm
rice at Prek Samraong at Boeng Tumpun, and later at Steung Prek
Tnaot.
Around early 1978, they sent me to work at S-21 and the chairman
of the company, Nang, was the person who sent me there.
Q. What duties did they have you do at S-21?  What is the name of
the Chairman of S-21?
A. They had me guard the outside of the S-21 Detention Office and
I was stationed on the east side, about 200 to 300 metres from
the prison buildings.  The chairman of my team named Huy, Him
Huy.  The Chairman of S-21 was Duch and the deputy was Hor.
Q. Can you explain the routines of your guard duties?
A. During the day they had me farm rice west of the Prek Chrey
pagoda near Prey Sar.  At night they had us guard in two-hour
shifts until morning.  During the day other teams were on guard
duty.  My team stayed in a house east of sewage canal.
Q. Did Huy often hold meetings?  What kind of meetings were they?
A. Once in a while they held an instructional meeting.  They
instructed us to be vigilant and to guard prisoners, not to let
them escape.  The team chairman who lived with me was named Try.
Q. Beside the guard duty there did the team chairman assign you
to do any other duties?
A. Beside guard duty and rice farming he did not assign me to do
any other work.
Q. Did you ever see trucks going in and coming out of Tuol Sleng
Prison?
A. I saw trucks, which were completely covered, coming in and
going out.  Later on I learned that those trucks carried
prisoners.  The incoming trucks transported prisoners to the
detention office.  The outgoing trucks transported prisoners but
I did not know where the prisoners were transported to.
Q. Did you hear that they took people to be killed?
A. I knew that they held people in prison and later took them to
be killed but I did not know where they killed them.
Q. Did you ever see them arrest people and send them there?
A. I did not know where they arrested people.  I just saw them
transport them inside.
Q. At S-21 were there any arrests of personnel and cadres?
A. I knew that there were arrests of people working there.  I
cannot remember the names but there was no arrest in my team.
Q. Did you ever see Duch?
A. I saw him walk in.  Sometimes he drove a motorbike but I did
not know where he went to or where he came from.
Q. Were you ever re-assigned to work in other units?
A. I was transferred to farm rice at Prey Sar because I was
implicated as my cousin, Ouch Tham (phonetic), who was the
chairman of the regiment in Division 703 was arrested.
Uk Savan and Uk Saroeun, who both were his siblings and were
medics at the hospital, were subsequently arrested.  I got
information about Uk  Tem's arrest in a political education
meeting where Duch announced it.
Q. Did you know that they took people to be killed at Choeung Ek?
Did you know how they killed them?
A. I knew that they took people to be killed at Choeung Ek
because I learnt it from my team's members but I did not know how
they tortured or killed them.
Q. While you were guarding S-21 which teams sent people to be
killed at Choeung Ek?
A. I did not know.  Although I worked at S-21 the duties were
assigned differently.
Q. Did you know about the torture on prisoners?  What kind of
tortures were there?
A. I heard prisoners scream out of pain at the houses outside the
prison compound where they interrogated prisoners and while I was
watering vegetables.  I only knew that the prisoners were beaten
and that other prisoners received electrical shocks.  That's all
I know.
Q. Did you ever see them walk prisoners to be interrogated?  What
condition were the prisoners in?
A. I saw them walk prisoners with their hands handcuffed to their
backs and they were blindfolded.  After the interrogation I saw
them bring the prisoners back but I did not know if the prisoners
had wounds or not, since I saw them from a distance and only
through quick glimpses.
Q. Do you know the names of interrogators?
A. I don't know because they were in a separate unit.
Q. Did they ever hold a general meeting for the entire office?
A. No, only section meetings.
Q. What did they have you do at Prey Sar?  What types of people
were sent there and how many?
A. At Prey Sar they had us farm rice, build dykes and dig canals.
People who lived there were allegedly involved in moral issues
and political dissent as their relatives were Lon Nol's soldiers,
for instance.  That place was a tempering site.  There were about
200 people in total living there, both men and women.  They were
divided into groups of 20 to 25.
Q. Who was the chairman of Prey Sar?
A. Huy was the chairman of Prey Sar.
Q. What were the work routines over there?
A. In the morning I worked from dawn till 12 noon and stopped for
lunch.  After lunch I continued working until five or six in the
afternoon.  After dinner they held instructional meetings for
each group, educating us to try and work hard.  At night it was
strictly guarded.  They did not have us work at night because
they were afraid we would escape.
Q. What was the food ration?  How many meals per day?
A. The food was insufficient.  Rice was mixed with banana stumps
and papaya stumps.  There were two meals per day, at noon and in
the evening.  Sometimes we had gruel for one meal and rice for
another.
Q. Was there any torture inflicted on the people at Prey Sar?
A. No, but they blamed those whose work was slow and the sick for
being lazy and they just threatened them.  That's all.
Q. How long did you live at Prey Sar until Phnom Penh fell?
A. For about two months.  Then Phnom Penh was liberated in 1979.
One copy of the written statement was provided to this witness.
After it was read aloud, the witness had no objections and agreed
to sign or place his thumbprint."
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Greffier is now instructed to read the second record, D50/3.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D50/3.  This is the written record of the interview of
Witness Tay Teng, revolutionary name Dy Teng, born in 1958.  This
record was done on the 19th of February 2008 at 10 a.m. by the
investigator of the Co-Investigating Judges' Office of the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.
Question and Answer:
Q. During which year did they send you from S-21 to go to stay at
Choeung Ek?  How many people were sent with you and what were
their jobs?
A. I don't remember the year clearly.  It was probably about
1978.  They sent 10 people at that time.  There was no-one else
at Choeung Ek, just my team.  At that time, they had my team dig
pits.  Each pit was a square of three metres on each side and
about two metres deep.  The pits were dug during the daytime, dug
manually with hoes, and baskets to carry the dirt.
Q. Who instructed your team to dig the pits?
A. Huy instructed the digging of those pits.  Only after we had
instructions to dig did my team begin to do it.  Sometimes they
told us to dig two or three pits in a period of three or four
days.  Each pit could be completely dug in about two or three
days, depending on the condition of the ground -- soft or hard.
Q. Please describe the transport of prisoners from S-21 to
Choeung Ek.  What did they do to them before they killed them?
A. From what I saw, they transported prisoners from S-21 with
Srim as the driver and with Huy and his team coming along in the
trucks each time.  The transport was at night at about 7 o'clock.
There were about 20 prisoners in each truck.  When they arrived,
they let the prisoners down from the trucks and put them in a
room in a wooden house which had an electric generator inside.
Next, they led the prisoners one at a time to be killed at the
pits, which were about 100 metres from that house.
The team that led the prisoners to be killed was composed of Srim
and two or three others whose names I did not know.  The team
along with the trucks that had transported the prisoners.  As for
me and my team, we guarded and we counted the prisoners as they
were brought in and taken to be killed.
Q. Were the prisoners brought to Choeung Ek handcuffed and
blindfolded?
A. The prisoners were handcuffed and blindfolded since they left
Tuol Sleng.
Q. Can you please describe the killing methods which you saw at
that time?
A. First, they sat about one metre from the edge of the pit.
They had two or three sit beside one another and they used a
water pipe to strike the base of their necks.  When the prisoners
fell over, they removed the handcuffs, then they also used knives
to finish killing them, but I don't know if they cut open their
bellies or cut their throats.  I just saw that after the killings
they took away palm-leaf blades stained with blood to wash clean.
They used two kerosene lanterns near the pits for lights.
Q. Did the prisoners ever scream when they were being killed?
A. When they killed prisoners my team was on guard in the rear,
about 100 metres away, defending against prisoners fleeing and
escaping.  I never heard prisoners scream.  I just heard the
sounds of the falling blows, poof-poof.
Q. Your function was to be responsible for counting the prisoners
before they were taken to be killed.  In order to know that the
prisoners had actually died you would have to be nearby to know
that, would you not?  Can you clarify this point?
A. When they took the prisoners from the house, I stood at the
door and counted the number of prisoners at that time.  After
they had been killed, they had my team hoe the dirt back to cover
up the pits.
Q. When your team covered the pits, did you see that those had
been killed had had their throats cut or their bellies cut open?
A. I did not see clearly because it was at night-time, but I
could see blood at the edges of the pits.
Q. How many bodies were in each pit?  And each time your team
covered them what was the highest number of pits used?
A. Each pit had more than 10 bodies and the highest number of
pits was three.  Each time they killed, ordinarily there were
just one or two pits.
Q. Were there children and women among the prisoners killed at
Choeung Ek?
A. There were no children, just men and women.
Q. Can you explain how in one pit there were only skulls of
children?
A. I do not know.  I never saw child prisoners come there.
Q. At that time were there any prisoners of war; Thai, Vietnamese
and other foreigners?
A. There were none.  There were only Cambodians.
Q. Did you ever see Duch at Choeung Ek?
A. No, I never saw him.  I knew he was responsible for S-21 but I
did not know him clearly.  Even he had gone to Choeung Ek, I
would not to have recognized him.
Q. Did you ever know anyone named Hor?
A. Yes, I knew him because he went to Choeung Ek twice.
Q. When he went to Choeung Ek did he give you instructions?
A. He never spoke or gave instructions directly to me.  He came
to talk with Huy and Huy gave me instructions in turn and said to
be vigilant in guarding.
Q. Aside from Huy and Hor did any other leaders come to Choeung
Ek?
A. No, never.
Q. How many times a month did they transport prisoners to
Choeung Ek?
A. It varied; sometimes two or three times a month
Q. Were you and your team stationed at Choeung Ek until the
fall of Phnom Penh, or what?
A. No, I was moved to Prey Sar two months prior to January
1979, before the day Phnom Penh fell.
Q. Did you ever see Him Huy personally kill prisoners and were
you ever there when that happened?  How do you understand this?
A. No, I never saw that.
Q. But Him Huy said that he killed prisoners at Choeung Ek.
A. No, I don't know about that.  But if Him Huy said that, that
was up to him.  As for me, I do not know.  I swear that I'm
telling only the truth.
Q. What was Him Huy's attitude when you saw him?
A. He was fairly mean.  He spoke loudly.  When he spoke it was
frightening.  We feared him but he was not a vicious person.
Q. Can you estimate the total number of grave pits at Choeung
Ek?
A. At estimate, there were only about 20 to 30 pits.  I cannot
remember clearly and that was not recorded.
Q. When you first arrived at Choeung Ek did you recognize any
freshly dug pits there, dug before you had arrived?
A. I never saw any fresh grave pits from before.  There were
only two or three Chinese graves remaining from earlier times.
Q. Had that place been a burial site before?
A. I don't know but I saw just three graves near one another.
Q. Among those in the team who lived with you at Choeung Ek can
you remember their names and where are they living?
A. I can only remember one, Chuun.  Aside from him I have
forgotten them all.  I don't know even Chuun is dead or alive and
I don't know what district he lived in.
Q. What were your feelings while you lived at Choeung Ek?
A. While I was there I was seriously worried.  I did not
understand what would happen to me in the future.  At that time
it was impossible not to obey them.  It could be compared to
living with tigers.
Q. Among the prisoners killed at Choeung Ek did you ever
encounter anyone you had known from before?
A. I never met anyone I knew.'
The original or a copy of the written statement was provided to
this witness. This interview was completed and read out.  The
witness had no objections and agreed to sign."
MR. PRESIDENT:
After having heard the statements read out by the Greffier in
relation to the statement of Tay Teng, both documents D28/12 and
D50/3, do the Co-Prosecutors wish to make any observation in
relation to the statements?
MR. TAN SENARONG:
The prosecution does not have any observations or comments to be
made regarding these two statements.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And the civil party counsel, do you have any observations to make
regarding the content of the two statements of witness Tay Teng
as read out by the Greffier?
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have some observations regarding the
two statements.
It is noted that the statement of Tay Teng is clear that he was a
staff member of S-21 that he has heard, has seen and knew
regarding the prisoners who were seriously tortured before they
were executed.  And, particularly, he and his team were sent to
work at the killing fields at Choeung Ek and that he dug pits and
buried the dead bodies.  Also, he knew the method of the
execution of those prisoners.
So these testimonies are clear that the torture and execution
existed as stated in his statement.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, do you have any observations to make
regarding the statements -- two statements as read out by the
Greffier?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I agree to the observations made by Mr. Hong Kimsuon that this
witness clearly stated in his statements, particularly this
witness also provided additional information that he said he
never saw the accused present at Choeung Ek.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity to the accused
to make his observations regarding the testimony of the witness,
Tay Teng, as read out by the Greffier.
I notice the presence of the international Co-Prosecutor.  You
may proceed.
MR. AHMED:
Your Honours, I don't wish to intervene, but just for your
consideration, my learned friends on the defence may be requested
to clearly indicate whether they do not oppose the reading of
this statement and not calling the witness in this Court.
I am requesting this, Your Honour, in light of Rule 84(1) of the
Internal Rules, which clearly says that the accused has an
absolute right to summon a witness whom he did not have an
opportunity to examine during the pre-trial stage.  In the light
of this Rule 84(1) I would request Your Honours may clearly
request an observation from the defence that they do not oppose
not calling this witness in the Court.
This is my respectful submission.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I do not really understand your submission, Mr. International
Co-Prosecutor.  Can you state again and make it understandable,
especially to make the Chairman of this Chamber understand the
intention of your submission?  And you shall provide us the
grounds and the decisions for not summonsing the witness, and
that decision relies solely on the discretion of the Chamber.
MR. AHMED:
Your Honours, I apologize if there was a lack of clarity in my
submission.  My submission is this.  I am not questioning, with
greatest respect, Your Honours' decision not to call this witness
in the Court.  Because Your Honours are entertaining observations
from the parties I am most respectfully requesting this Chamber
to seek an observation from the defence that they do not oppose
the calling of this witness in the Court.
I am requesting that in the light of Rule 84(1), Your Honour.
Rule 84(1), if I may have the permission to read, says that, "The
accused shall have the absolute right to summon a witness against
him whom the accused had no opportunity to examine during the
pre-trial stage."  Now, clearly the accused did not have an
opportunity to examine this witness at the pre-trial stage.  The
accused is being asked to make an observation about this witness.
Our only respectful submission is for the purposes of clarity of
record and for the purposes that there is no subsequent challenge
under 84(1), the accused may be made to observe that he does not
oppose the calling of this witness -- not calling this witness in
the Court.  I hope I have clarified.  I shall be able to assist
Your Honours if there is still lack of clarity in my
observations.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you may proceed.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I believe that this question has
already been brought up on several occasions; the first time
during the Trial Management Meeting when we spoke about the
compilation of the witness list, and then we said that we were
considering taking out a certain number of witnesses from the
list, among whom the witness whose statement was just read out.
And upon that occasion the defence clearly stated that it agreed
to not have the witness appear in Court.
This does not mean that it did not refuse to make observations
about the statement and, again, these past days we've brought up
this question -- it was, I believe, last week and we again had
confirmation from the defence that it indeed decided not to bring
the witness to the Chamber.  So I do not really understand what
is the exact meaning of the submission presented by the
Co-Prosecutors today.
If there is indeed waiving here, of course that should be done in
accordance with the rules, but I cannot imagine that these rules
were disregarded by the defence counsel.
MR. AHMED:
Your Honours, with that clarification I have no further
objection.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber rejects the observations made by the international
Co-Prosecutor and this is the decision or the observations of the
defence counsel and they did not object the statements or the
decision made by the Chamber not to summon the witness, Tay Teng,
to present before this Chamber.  And the defence counsel already
made their observation regarding the statements of this witness.
The accused is now given an opportunity to make his observation
on the statements and content of the witness, Tay Teng, as read
out by the Greffier.  You take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, before 7 January 1979 I never knew the face of Tay
Teng.  When I met him it was when the Co-Investigating Judges
sent me to Choeung Ek for the reconstruction and that was the
time I knew Comrade Teng was a cousin of Comrade Tem and Saroeun.
These two were in the regiments and after their cousins were
arrested, Tay Teng was sent from the special force to station at
Choeung Ek.  From my recollection, there were four of them and
they were responsible for digging the pits and bury the pits and
guard the ground.
Therefore, Tay Teng was indeed a member of S-21 staff.  I do not
deny this and the content of his statements I agreed in
principle.  This is my observation, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time for a lunch break.  The Chamber will break for
lunch and it will resume this afternoon, starting from 1.30 p.m.
The scheduling for this afternoon's proceedings is to continue
reading the statements of the witnesses who are decided by the
Chamber not to provide testimony before this Chamber.
Security guards, take the accused back to the detention facility
and bring him back before 1.30 p.m.  The hearing is adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1213H to 1335H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
Next, the Greffier, Duch Phary, is instructed to read the
statement of Saom Som Ol, which is D78/6.
THE GREFFIER:
The document D78/6 --
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the international Co-Prosecutor.
You may proceed.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I think that there was also a plan to read Document D48/1 and D58
concerning Tay Teng.  It does not appear to me that these
documents were read out.  Will these documents be read later,
especially with regard to these paragraphs containing Meas
Pengkry?  I would like the Chamber's enlightenment on this
matter.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber has already informed the parties and the public of
the proceedings of reading the statements of the witnesses whom
the Chamber has decided not to summon to appear before the
Chamber, yesterday, and that also includes the statements to be
read by the Greffier; that is, records of interviews, the written
records of confrontation which shall be the last statement to be
read for each particular witness.
So it is clear in the information, as I have informed all the
parties to the proceedings and the public as a whole yesterday
morning.
Mr. Duch Phary, you may continue.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D78/6.  This is the written record of interview of the
witness Saom Som Ol with the revolutionary name Phaon Sam, born
in 1957.  This written record was made on the 1st April 2008 at
3.15 p.m. by the investigators of the Office of the
Co-Investigating Judges of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia.
Q. When did you find out about Tuol Sleng, how, and at that
time what was your position?
A. I was a messenger of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
starting from 1976.  The messenger team leader was named Voeun.
I do not know whether he is dead or alive at the present time.  I
was able to find out about the Office S-21 because my chief,
Voeun, who asked me to take a letter with the following words on
the back:  'To Comrade Duch, Chief of Office S-21'.
Duch's house was located outside the office fence in front of a
tall residence popularly known as Srah Srang.  I gave the letter
to Duch personally.  Chhen and Than registered the letter as
received, as well as the letter number.
Next, I carried a small letter on which Duch wrote, 'Have
received letter number'.  I never took letters from Office S-21
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  I found out that Chhen was
the one who brought letters and documents to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.  Such documents were brought by a CL motorcycle.
The documents were more than 20 centimetres high.  Sometimes
there were few and sometimes there were many.
Occasionally, when I asked Chhen, he replied that he brought
such documents for Uncle to review them.  Duch asked me not to
tell anyone else about bringing him letters.  If I did, he would
tell Ieng Sary to have me arrested.
I saw Chhen bringing the documents to him about once per week.
Most of them were handwritten documents which were confessions of
prisoners.  As far as I know, Chhen died on Kravanh Mountain in
1979 when he was fighting against the Vietnamese
After that I found out the staff of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs had subsequently been arrested.  A little while before
this in 1976 I knew about S-21 because when I was learning how to
make films at B-1 I saw Peng, who came from S-21, arrest people
living around me.
Q. Could you please tell us about the time you were working at
the Vietnamese border?
A. In 1977 I was sent to work at the border for about two
months.  During that period I saw Ta Lvey's and Ta Nat's division
invade Vietnamese territory.  I also saw the soldiers of that
division arrest some Vietnamese soldiers wearing blue uniforms.
There were also women and civilians but most of them were
soldiers.  There were around 40 people, only a few of whom were
women.  I knew the persons who took these prisoners of war to
Office S-21 because they were in Chhen's team.  Their names were
Than, Peng and Hor.  I found out that the soldiers of the
division always shot the captives of war during the night-time.
Only the high-ranking people were exempted.  I knew this because
I found a telegram and I learned about the orders of the upper
echelon through a telegram from Phnom Penh.
I knew only that they were upper echelon but I did not know who
they were.  Not so long after the order from above, the captives
of war were driven to S-21.  They were driven in a Chinese truck
and a Land Rover with sign boards saying S-21 on the back.
Q. Did you ever see Duch participating in meetings with the upper
echelon?
A. In 1977 I saw Duch participate in a weekly meeting at B-1 with
Ieng Sary, Pol Pot, Son Sen, Nuon Chea and Ta Mok.  Duch attended
meetings with the upper echelon about once a week until 1979.
Sometimes Duch only came to see Son Sen or Ta Mok and chiefs of
other zones.  I knew this because I was downstairs and the
meetings were held upstairs.  I always saw Duch holding document
folders which were the same as the documents that Chhen brought
by motorcycle.  They were probably confessions.
Q. Do you still remember who in the staff of B-1 was arrested and
taken to Office S-21?
A. I still remember that Mith and Roeun, whose birthplace was
Takeo province, from Division 310 were arrested because their
leader had already been arrested.
Q. Do you think the leader of B-1 did not know or did not agree
with the arrest of B-1 staff?
A. I think that the leader of B-1 really knew about it because
documents relevant to an arrest were always sent to the leader to
get his comments a few days before the arrest was carried out,
and there were also some meetings, as I have already mentioned.
Q. What did you know regarding Duch's wedding?
A. I attended it.  The participants were Son Sen, Nuon Chea and
Ieng Thirith.  The wedding took place at Duch's home in front of
Srah Srang.  So I think that Duch was an important person, since
there were many high-ranking people who attended his wedding, and
I think that they all knew about Office S-21 and about Duch's
work because Duch was an open about that as well.
I did not know about other prisons, since I was never allowed to
visit local -- visit my native home.
Q. Based on Duch's work, what did you think about his attitude?
A. I noticed that he was satisfied with his work because whenever
I met him he always smiled and he worked actively and sometimes
he asked me to return to my place early to avoid losing time in a
long conversation.  I saw that most of the time he rode his CL
motorcycle which he sometimes allowed his messenger to ride, and
also he sometimes drove a Jeep.
One copy of the written record was provided to the witness.
After the written record was read out to the witness, the witness
agreed to sign."
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, Mr. Duch Phary, you are instructed to read a statement of
another witness, Chey Sopheara, and this is just a brief summary
of his statement, D83/1.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D83/1.  This is the written record of the interview of
Chey Sopheara.  Chey Sopheara is the deputy chairman of the
Directorate of Museums responsible for the Tuol Sleng Museum of
Genocide Crimes and Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts.  In his
statement to the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges dated 25th
March 2008, document reference number D82/3, he has described how
documents including confessions, films and photographs found in
the compound of S-21 and its surrounding areas have been
collected, arranged and conserved."
MR. PRESIDENT:
After the two statements have been read out by the Greffier --
that is the statements of Saom Som Ol and the summary of the
statement of Chey Sopheara, do the Co-Prosecutors have any
observation to make regarding these two statements?  All the
parties are reminded that these two documents are separate but
due to its brief appearance then both of them have been read at
the same time.
If the Co-Prosecutors have any comments to make, you take the
floor.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The prosecution does not have any
observation to make regarding these two statements.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers, do you have any observations to make
regarding these two statements read out by the Greffier?
MR. WERNER:
Your Honours, civil party lawyers do not have any comment for
this witness.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, do you have observations to make regarding
the content of the two statements as read out by the Greffier?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, the defence counsel does not have any observation
to make regarding these two documents.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now gives the opportunity to the accused to make his
observations regarding the two statements as read out by the
Greffier.  You take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the summary of Mr. Chey Sopheara, I do not have
any comments to make.  However, for the witness Chek Sam -- as
said by the accused -- or Saom Sm Ol or Phuon Sam Ol, I would
like to read the questions put by the Co-Investigating Judge,
Marcel Lemonde, to me in the document D47 as follows.
"Questions by the Co-Investigating Judges, Marcel Lemonde.
Q. You said you had no relationship with the senior leaders
besides Son Sen and Nuon Chea, but a witness named Chek Sam who
was a former messenger of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who was
interviewed by DC-Cam with the reference 00054752 to 00054814, in
2002 on the 12th of July that you participated in the gathering
with Nuon Chea, Son Sen, Ieng Sary and Khieu Samphan and a
filming crew from China.  Is that true?  If so why these senior
leaders participated in your wedding?
A. I would like to say that this statement is not correct.  Those
senior leaders were not present at my wedding on the 20th of
December 1975.  Also, there was no Chinese filming crew on that
day.  I did not know why Chek Sam mentioned that.
I think this person was not a messenger from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs; it was likely that he was a member of S-21
staff.  I made a written note on this point and I handed that
note to the Co-Investigating Judges as an annex to this record of
interview.
And I would like to read the written note that I gave to the
Co-Investigating Judges.
This document's reference is 00164353.  I would like to read the
ERN number again, 00164353.  Second topic, The Relationship
Between S-21 and the Central Committee:
"On the S-21 side there was only me, Duch, who was the Chairman,
who could report to the Central Committee, and on the Central
Committee it was only Son Sen, and above him, who was Nuon Chea,
who constantly supervised S-21 regarding the security matter."
Second paragraph:
"Chek Sam, I had an impression that he was a member of S-21
staff.  He was one of the youths that I requested from Kampong
Chhnang on my wedding day.  There was no Nuon Chea, Ieng Sary,
Khieu Samphan attending, and there were no Chinese film crew
making a movie on the day.
Addition, I got married on the 20 of December 1975 at the
military office of West Zone at Longvek barracks.  Rom, my wife,
she was the chairwoman of the south wing office in that zone.
Number two, the dignitaries were San, the deputy secretary of the
West Military Committee, Ron, a member of the West Military
Committee, Nat, chairman secretary of S-21.
Three, the parents of the bride and the groom are my mother, my
godmother and a senior woman, an elder.
Four, the guests whom I knew, including Nuon Chea, Ieng Sary, Son
Sen, Khieu Samphan, they are Brother Mam Nai S-21, Comrade Vorn,
deputy chairman of military hospital West Zone, and It Masivorn,
the wife of Sou Samet.
Five, at that time there were a few black and white photographs
and probably Sreang was the one who took the photos.  He was S-21
staff.
At 17 hours, Nat took me back to Phnom Penh and Nat called the
cadres of the company and platoons to attend in order to make
them familiar with Comrade Kun and my wife, because on the
wedding day they did not attend.
And we had a chicken gruel at House Number 2, and that House
Number 2 was the former house of Mey Samedy and I mentioned that
on the sketch of S-21 that I drew and it was ready only at 23 to
24 hours.
And even at that time, Soeung talked to Rom that he was busy.
And my request at the time were to and I did not even tell
anybody first, I only wanted a wedding for my couple because at
that time a lot of couples were married and, secondly, I wanted
my mother to stand up and give her best wishes to me and my wife.
These wishes were mine.
And this was done on the 19 February 2008 to the Co-Investigating
Judges.'
That is my response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, Ms. Se Kolvuthy is now instructed to read another
statement, D48/1 and D52.  Only the relevant part of the sections
are to be read according to the request by the defence counsel.
The Trial Chamber would like to inform the parties of the
proceeding and the public that previously the statements of the
witnesses before the Co-Investigating Judges already read,
especially document of  Meas Pengkry, since we experienced some
kind of technical glitch that we failed to read the relevant
paragraphs, we are now in the process of reading those relevant
paragraphs.
The Greffier are now instructed to read the paragraphs before the
parties are given the opportunity to give their observation in
relation to these statements.
Please read only the relevant part in relation to the witness,
Meas Pengkry.
THE GREFFIER:
Document D48/1:
"This is the record of the reconstruction before the
Co-Investigating Judges of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia on the 26th February 2008 at 8 a.m. at the
Killing Field of Choeung Ek in Kandal province.
Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, and his lawyers, Mr. Kar Savuth
and Mr. Franois Roux, who are present, witness Meas Pengkry, Him
Huy and Chuun Phal and Tay Teng were also present.
First paragraph:
During the call the charged person stated that he knew only Him
Huy among the four witnesses.  Witness Meas Pengkry stated that
he has never met him but knew him by face.'
Paragraph two:
Meas Pengkry stated that he has returned there once last year for
a film with Him Huy.  The letter indicated that he had returned
to the site several times, including in the eighties, at the
invitation of journalists and NGOs.
Paragraph 3.1:
Witness Meas Pengkry explained that initially he came to Choeung
Ek to deliver wood for building a wooden house.  He brought the
wood, offloaded it and left.  Subsequently he did the same with
prisoners.  He used the same road which is still in place today
-- it was not paved then and was in a very poor condition -- and
entered Choeung Ek through the current entrance and parked his
truck close to where the flagpole now stands.  He would leave
after the guards had received the prisoners.
He stated that he came to Choeung Ek only once or twice.  The
reason is that after having an incident he fell asleep while
driving the truck.  The truck rolled near the Wat Sleng.  There
were no prisoners on board.  He was sent to Prey Sar at Him Huy's
request to work in the rice field and no longer transported
prisoners to Choeung Ek after that.  According to him the
vehicles had registration plates but he no longer remembers the
numbers."
Paragraph 4:
Witness Meas Pengkry pointed to the place where the shack was
stood and added that it was about four metres by eight metres in
size and was two storeys, ground floor and first floor.
Paragraph 5.4:
Meas Pengkry also stated that he did not see any children at
Choeung Ek.
After the re-enactment all the participants left the site without
incident at 12.15 p.m.  An audio and video recording of
re-enactment was prepared and copies thereof were served to the
charged person.  The original of the report was written in both
Khmer and French and was then translated into English.
Document D/52.  It is the record of confrontation before the
Co-Investigating Judges of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia on the 28th of February 2008 at 9.50 a.m.
Mr. Kar Savuth, Mr. Franois Roux, the accused Kaing Guek Eav,
alias Duch, witnesses Him Huy, Tay Teng, Chuun Phal, Meas
Pengkry, who already sworn according to the Internal Rules of the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, were all
present.
The confrontation.  Question by the Co-Investigating Judge Marcel
Lemonde:
Q. The day before yesterday you went to Choeung Ek with us for
the reconstruction.  Do you confirm what you said while you were
there?
Witness Meas Pengkry responds:
A. Yes, I confirm.
Q. Among the people who were present, who did you know?
A. I only know Him Huy.  I do not know Tay Teng but he might know
me because I was driving the trucks.
Q. Was it the first time that you came back to Choeung Ek since
1979?
A. I have already returned to be filmed.  It was at night and Him
Huy was also present.
Q. What was the role of each of you at Choeung Ek?
A. I was a driver.  The first time I went to Choeung Ek it was to
carry wood in order to build a house.  Then I transported
prisoners in my truck twice, but this did not last because one
day I had an accident.  There were only four persons on board --
Him Huy, two guards and me and I was assigned to Prey Sar to be
re-educated.
Regarding arrival conditions at Choeung Ek, the entrance was the
same as the current one but the road was much worse than today.
I parked the truck where there is now a flag and the prisoners
were unloaded from the truck to be taken to the wooden house.  I
showed you the location of this house, which I believe was eight
metres long and four metres wide with two storeys.
It was in order to build this house that I carried the wood but I
do not remember the exact date.  Him Huy instructed me to do so.
He was my superior and it was always him who gave me
instructions.
Q. When we went near the trees said to have been used to execute
children, each of you declared that he never witnessed such a
thing.  Do you maintain this?
A. Me neither.
Q. Mr. Meas Pengkry, regarding the arrests carried out by S-21
personnel outside Phnom Penh, do you confirm that you transported
prisoners from Battambang to S-21 with Him Huy?
A. Yes, that is correct.
The original of the audio-visual recording was sealed before the
charged person and his lawyers and was signed by us, the
Greffiers, the charged person and his lawyers.  A copy of the
original audio-visual recording was provided to the charged
person.  Due to technical reasons it was not possible to give a
copy of the audio-visual recording to each of the persons taking
part in the confrontation, and we provided the witnesses and
civil parties with a copy of the written record.
At 5.05 p.m. we had a Greffier read aloud this written record of
confrontation as recorded.  The written record having been read
aloud and heard, the charged person had no objections and agreed
to sign."
MR. PRESIDENT:
According to the records of the statements of Meas Pengkry,
D28/7, read last week by Madam Se Kolvuthy and that this is only
just a supplementary reading of the record of the confrontation
and re-enactment in relation to the statement by Meas Pengkry and
the statement were made before the Co-Investigating Judges.
Do the Co-Prosecutors wish to make any observations in relation
to this three documents that already read out?
MR. TAN SENARONG:
The prosecution has no observation in relation to the documents
read out.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers, would you wish to make any comments in
relation to the three documents concerning Meas Pengkry?
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The civil party lawyers do not have
any observation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, would you wish to make any observation in
relation to the statements of Meas Pengkry?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  We, the defence counsel, do not have
any observation either.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is an opportunity for the accused to make his observation
in relation to the substance of the testimony of Meas Pengkry --
the three documents, the records on the interview and the
statement in which the records were made during the re-enactment
and confrontation.  The floor is yours.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all I would like to clarify that before
the 7th of January 1979 I did not know Meas Pengkry.  I met him
at Choeung Ek and he challenged me why I didn't recognize him and
I observed his attitude and that of Tay Teng.  I looked at them
from top to toe and these testimonies of the three people were
very consistent.  Him Huy, Tay Teng and Meas Pengkry made very
consistent testimonies, so I believe that they were staff members
of S-21 without any denial.
So in conclusion, it is my position to accept the testimony of
Meas Pengkry, so it is accepted in principle.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, Mrs. Se Kolvuthy is now instructed to read the record of
the interview of witness Uk Bunseng; D78/7.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D78/7; this is the record of the interview of witness
Uk Bunseng, alias Seng, born on the 4th of April 1955.  This
record was done on the 2nd of April 2008 at 10.05 a.m. by the
investigators of the Co-Investigating Judges Office of the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Court of Cambodia.
Question and answer:
Q. Did DC-Cam interview you in March 2003?
A. Yes.
Q. We will read the entire text of that 14th of March 2003
interview by Mr. Phan Sochea of DC-Cam summarized a number of
points and asked for your confirmation if you still accept all
that content.
In 1973 you were coerced into becoming a soldier and began
military and political training at Wat Chroy Sangke.  You said
that you were afraid and did not dare participate in the war.
In late 1974 they drafted you back into the army and at that time
you attended a political indoctrination session which discussed
internal enemies, traitors and external enemies including Vietnam
and Thailand.
After Phnom Penh was brought under control and the people were
evacuated, Phnom Penh City became an uninhabited place and you
entered Phnom Penh with a large group from Sector 25.  You lived
north of the Independence Monument in an area under the
responsibility of Nat who was chairman of the Division 12.
Your initial work was collecting materials like clothing to be
placed in warehouses.  You were sent to Boeng Choeung Ek and went
to a place near Prey Sar two months later for political
indoctrination because you had a bad personal history and had
family relatives who had positions in the previous society.
You were trained and tempered at Boeng Choeung Ek by digging
canals and putting up dams.  There was three teams there.  Team
one was the easy group, team two was the moderately, difficult
group and team three was the heavy tempering group where some
were put in chains at night.  You were in team three for two
weeks before you were sent to S-24.
S-24 was subordinate to S-21 and was located at Wat Kdol and
included the land from Prey Sar to Chaek village.  Wat Kdol was
totally destroyed under the direction of Huy's group, which
reported to Duch.
At S-24 the work was divided into three levels:  a land-clearing
team, a ploughing team and a team raising domestic animals.
Those who did not temper themselves well were sent to S-21 and
never returned.
You claimed that S-24 was a re-education site and S-21 was a
killing site.  You were at S-24 until it fell in 1979.  You
stated that those who had returned from the Kampong Chhnang
airfield work site were sent to S-21 and were all killed.
In 1978 you once went for political study at S-21, where you met
Duch.  Duch gave one week of training at school outside S-21.  In
those studies you saw a number of prisoners arrested and taken
away.  You did not know where they were taken but later you were
told that those people had been sent to S-21 and smashed.  Please
describe the conditions and what you encountered while you lived
at Boeng Choueng Ek?
A. After living at the Independent Monument for two months, they
removed me for tempering to Boeng Choueng Ek to a place located
east of the Choeung Ek killing fields.  Before they removed me,
my squad leader in the 12th Division -- I don't remember the name
of the squad leader -- had me and all the soldiers make personal
histories.  The squad leader reported to the platoon leader and
he reported to the division, and later the squad leader called
out from a paper the names of those who were to leave.
I was at Boeng Choueng Ek for about two months.  Boeng Choueng Ek
was subordinate to S-21.  I did not know who was directly in
charge at Boeng Choueng Ek.  At that time, I heard that the
regiment reported monthly to Duch.  At Boeng Choueng Ek, I was in
a battalion which had approximately 100 persons to be tempered,
all of whom had come from the 121 Division.  Those who were being
tempered were divided into teams of about 30 peoples.
I frequently saw people arrested there.  Those who came to make
the arrest came by truck from S-21, but I did not know where the
trucks parked because it was during the night.  I learned of this
in 1979 when people who had worked at S-21 told me.
When they came to make arrests, they called out names for people
to come down out of their houses and they blindfolded them.
Those arrested and taken away never returned.  I learned through
people who whispered to me that those people had been taken and
killed.  Each time they arrested from two to four persons, about
nine or 10 in total.
At that location there were some people in the special tempering
unit where they were kept in leg chains at night because they had
gone around stealing food during the night.  At Boeng Choueng Ek,
the people being tempered slept in buildings.  The team leader
slept in front of the entrance to the buildings.  People being
tempered could walk around the area of the houses, but could not
leave the designated area for fear they would be seen and
reported to upper echelon.
At Boeng Choueng Ek, the food was irregular.  If the tempering
was strong, they ate just three scoops of gruel.  If the
tempering was moderate, they might have rice to eat.  Work began
at 3 a.m. and, including a meeting, continued until 11 a.m. when
there was a rest.  Eating was done in alternating shifts.
Afternoon work began at 2 p.m. and ended at 5 p.m.  Night work
began at seven until 12 midnight.
There were large meetings which primarily spoke about the
striving to work so there would be food to eat, and there were
small meetings in each team for criticism and self-criticism.
While I was there, a group from S-21 came to photograph and get
the personal histories of those being tempered.  I saw my photo
at S-21 Prison in 1985.
Q. After Boeng Choueng Ek, were you sent anywhere else?
A. After Boeng Choueng Ek, they sent me to Wat Har to dig canals.
Q. Please describe the conditions and what you encountered at Wat
Har.
A. Wat Har was located adjacent to Prey Sar.  I did not enter
Prey Sar but I knew that it was also a tempering site.  The area
from Wat Har to Wat Kdol was subordinate to S-24, and S-24 was a
branch of S-21.
Huy was S-24 chairman.  Huy's office was located between Wat Har
and Wat Kdol and between the living sites of the male and female
youth units.  I will sketch the layout for you.
The sketch is attached with this record.
I saw Huy almost every day because he came to inspect this area
every day.  I did not see Duch since I was busy being tempered.
There were many workers there, thousands.  The people being
tempered and the soldiers who came from various groups dug
canals.  They did not put the people being tempered in chains but
they monitored their activities.  The work there was heavy and
there was insufficient food.  I did not see them arrest people at
Wat Har but I heard that people had disappeared.
In 1978, I saw hundred soldiers come by truck from the East Zone.
They came many times, about 100 soldiers per truck.  They stayed
at S-24 overnight.  They were sent to S-21.  I learned this
information through S 21 security cadres who told me when we fled
after the Vietnamese attacked Phnom Penh in 1979.
While they were staying at S-24, I met soldiers who were picking
sugar palms and those soldiers asked me where I would be sent
next.  I answered that I did not know.  Those soldiers told me
that they had come from the East Zone to draw up personal
histories.
Q. How did you know that Duch was Huy's superior?
A. I knew that Duch was Huy's superior because they announced it
during studies and meetings at S-21.  Those who went to study
were unit leaders and model people.  I saw Duch and Son Sen come
to teach and show about activities of internal enemies and
foreign countries.
Q. What was Huy's physical description?
A. Huy had a large build, tall, dark-complexioned, curly-haired
and had a moustache.
Q. Did you know Huy's wife?
A. I did not.
Q. Do you know if Huy is alive or if he died?
A. I heard that Huy was arrested, was sent to S-21 and was killed
there.
Q. Please describe what you saw when you were studying at S-21.
A. While studying at S-21, I saw them arrest prisoners and drag
them across the street to the buildings.  All of them who were
blindfolded and had their arms tied behind their backs.  It was
then that I learned Tuol Sleng was a prison because someone
attending with me explained it me.
Q. When did you first know Duch?
A. I knew Duch when I attended study meetings at S-21.  I knew
him more clearly when I stayed with him in the Kravanh Mountains
in Pursat province after the fall in 1979.
Q. Please describe fleeing from S-24 after the Vietnamese
attacked into Phnom Peng.
A. When the Vietnamese came, S-21 security people came to tell
us to get ready to run because the Vietnamese were approaching.
I walked with them for three days before reaching Kampong Tralach
and went to Amleang and met Ta Mok in the forest.  In the end, I
reached the Kravanh Mountains, the place where I met Duch.
Q. Please describe what you saw at the Kravanh Mountains.
A. Six prisoners, three females, three males and one child were
arrested by Duch's subordinates and taken for interrogation after
one prisoner made a noise imitating an animal cry similar to the
sound of the name of Pol Pot.  Duch ordered the arrest and the
interrogation and said whether they answered or not to finish it.
I saw one prisoner tortured by stuffing a flaming torch in his
mouth and cutting his throat.  Duch stayed nearby the torture
site and he heard the noises of the torture.  As for other
prisoners, they were probably killed on the mountain.
Q. What was Duch's appearance and his character?
A. Duch had a small build.  He was a pleasant and friendly
person but firm, and if Duch gave an order it had to be respected
and implemented.  This was different from Huy who was a mean
person.  I did not dare look Huy in the face.
Q. Other than Duch and Son Sen, did you know any other leaders?
A. Aside from Duch and Son Sen, I never knew or heard the names
of Ieng Sary, Khieu Samphan at all.  I only heard the name Pol
Pot when I was sent to S-24.
Q. Do you know if any of your tempering group or any of the
other prisoners are still alive?
A. As for the youths who were being tempered, I know a person
named Dos who were tempered at S-24 like me and he is still
alive.  Now he lives in Po sub-district, Koh Thom district,
Kandal province.  And S-21 security cadre named Bo is still
alive.  Now he lives near Damrei Romiel village on the Kampong
Speu - Kampot border.
Some members of the female units are still alive.  I don't
remember their names and recognize their faces because this
occurred a very long time ago.
One copy of the written statement was provided to this witness
at 1700 hours on 2nd April 2008.  After it was read aloud, the
witness had no objections and agreed to sign and place his
thumbprint."
MR. PRESIDENT:
After hearing the statement of Uk Bunseng as read out by the
greffier, do the Co-Prosecutors have any observation to make
regarding its content?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
We think that the testimony is sufficiently clear and we have no
submissions in its regard.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil party lawyers, do you have any observation to make
regarding the content of the statement of Uk Bunseng?
MR. WERNER:
Your Honour, the lawyers for civil parties have no comment on his
statement.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, do you have observations to make regarding
the statement of the witness, Uk Bunseng?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President we, the defence counsel, have no objection to the
statement of Uk Bunseng.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now gives the opportunity to the accused to make his
observation regarding the statement of Uk Bunseng as read out by
the Greffier; that is D78/7.   If you have, you take the floor.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I have never known Uk Bunseng and the documents
related to Uk Bunseng only emerged lately.  I have not seen any
testimony which provides sufficient weight for me to make
judgement that Uk Bunseng was at the rice fields at Prey Sar.
At the same time, his testimony that he went to attend the
training and met Son Sen was likely to show that he was not there
because Son Sen, when he attended a conference in S-21 in 1977 on
the 14th of April, I did not gather any components of people who
were educated at S-21.  Only the cadres were instructed to
attend.
Also, the second point which made me suspicious is the East
group.  The soldiers from East group were collected and smashed
at S-21 and they came directly to S-21 without going to Prey Sar.
The testimony of Comrade Huy a few days ago really shed light on
this point.
And the third point regarding the torture and the interrogation
after 1979 at Kravanh Mountains were the matters which could
never be existed.  At that time, there was no longer S-21.
Everybody fled for their lives.  So both the boss and the
subordinates, they fled and they just tried to stay alive and not
starve to death.
Therefore, in conclusion, the points or the testimony which
caused me suspicion on this person, as I just stated to the
Chamber, that's all my observations at this point.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time for a break.  The Chamber will take 17 minutes
break and we resume at 3 p.m.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1444H to 1506H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
We note that the international Co-Prosecutor would wish to make
any comment.  You take the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to get back to what I
just said previously, which I believe was not completely
translated, and I would like to make a request concerning Tay
Teng.  The relevant paragraphs of the written record of the
transport on the site -- that is to say document D48/1 as well as
the relevant paragraphs of the written record of the
confrontation, which is indexed D52 -- well, I would like these
paragraphs to be read before the Court since they were not read
out this morning.  Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
What could have been the reason that you did not raise this
matter immediately when you were given the floor to make your own
observation in relation to the statement and that the request
only is made at this moment?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
At the end of this morning's session the parties were asked to
provide comments on the two first documents and then the Court
adjourned for lunch, and we thought that the two other documents
would be read at the beginning of this afternoon's session and
then we would have the opportunity to present observations on the
relevant segments of these written records.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
After the record of Meas Pengkry's statement was read out then
the floor was given to the parties to make observations and that
there was a request that the Greffier was asked by the defence
counsel, or requested by the defence counsel to read the
statement.  And by doing so, we can reduce the time to make
observation regarding one particular statement and that only
after the statements have already been read out that we can make
the conclusive comments in relation to the read-out statements.
So please be reminded that the process is followed like this
because we would like to make sure that the proceedings are
moving more expeditiously, but we accept your request and that
the Greffier is now instructed to read document D48/1 in relation
to the portion or paragraphs that related to the testimony of Tay
Teng.  And then D52 and the related portions of Tay Teng are
advised to be read out also.
This morning the prosecutor raised this matter but we now give
the opportunity for the statement to be read out.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D48/1.  This is the record of the reconstruction
conducted before the Co-Investigating Judges of the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Court of Cambodia conducted on the 26th of
February 2008 at Choeung Ek,
kilometres to the southwest of           15   Phnom Penh in Kandal province.
There was the presence of Mr. Kaing Guek Eav and Mr. Kar Savuth
and Franois Roux and witnesses Meas Pengkry, Him Huy, Chuun Phal
and Tay Teng were also present.
Paragraph 1:
During the role call the charged person stated that he knew only
Him Huy among the four witnesses.  Chuun Phal and Tay Teng stated
that they never knew the charged person.
Paragraph 2:
Witnesses Chuun Phal and Tay Teng stated that they were returning
to Choeung Ek site for the first time.
Paragraph 3.3:
Witness Tay Teng confirmed that he was assigned to guarding
prisoners and that he was present whenever they arrived.
Paragraph 4.2:
Witness Tay Teng was somewhat disoriented by the changed
surroundings but he did identify the area where the wooden shack
stood then.  He stated that the generator was near the booth
which is still in place.  According to him, the prisoners did not
stay in the house for very long before being executed.  He
explained that he would have a list for recording those who
arrived and those to be sent away for execution, so as to make
sure that none of them was lost.
He estimated that at any given time there were anywhere between
20 to 30 prisoners but was not quite certain about this.
Paragraph 5.3:
Witness Tay Teng stated that he was having difficulty identifying
exact locations because the trees have since grown much taller.
Paragraph 5.4:
Close to the location where skeletal remains of
children were found, the witnesses all stated that they never saw
children at Choeung Ek.  Tay Teng, who indicated that he worked
at S-21 for five to six months in 1978 until the liberation,
remembers seeing women and men arriving but not children.
He added that the women and men were executed and buried at the
same place.
Paragraph 6.3:
Witness Tay Teng stated that he was not aware of the scene
described by Him Huy because he was inside the house.  He
affirmed that he did not see Duch but only Comrade Hor.  It may
very well be that Duch came to Choeung Ek without being seen by
him but he did not hear anyone say that he did.
Paragraph 7.7:
Tay Teng stated that he was assigned to go to Choeung Ek by Him
Huy, who instructed him, and that his task was to receive
incoming prisoners to dig pits and to bury the pits after the
prisoners were executed.
After having announced that the detainees were sent to the pits,
he said he was in the house and that he did not know much about
it.  He said that the member of the unit was in charge of
execution and he accepted that he sometimes took charge of the
executions but he explained that this was not a habitual task.
After the re-enactment all the participants left the site without
incident at 12.15 p.m. without any incidents.  An audio and video
recording of the re-enactment was prepared and copies thereof
were served to the charged person.  The original of the report
was written in both Khmer and French and was then translated into
English."
"Document D52.  This is the record of the confrontation before
the Co-Investigating Judges of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Court of Cambodia on the 28th of February 2008 at 9.50 a.m.
The defence counsel, Mr. Kar Savuth and Franois Roux, the
accused Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, witnesses Him Huy, Tay Teng,
Chuun Phal, Meas Pengkry, who already sworn according to the
Internal Rule of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Court of
Cambodia, were present.
Confrontation:
Q. The day before yesterday you went to Choeung Ek together with
us to conduct the re-enactment.  Do you still maintain or confirm
what you already stated earlier?
Witness Tay Teng:
A. Yes, I still confirm that.
Q. Among the people who were present here does any one of you
know anyone here?
A. I knew only Meas Pengkry and Him Huy.  I'm not sure whether I
know Duch.
Q. Is this the first time that you are returning to Choeung Ek
since 1979?
Chuun Phal and Tay Teng:
A. Yes.
Q. What was your role at Choeung Ek?
Tay Teng:
A. It is true Huy was my chief.
Q. Mr. Tay Teng, you said that at Choeung Ek your group was in
charge of digging pits and executing prisoners, and you also took
part in the executions, although it was not very often.  Do you
still confirm your statement?
A. I still confirm my statement the day before yesterday.
Q. When we reached the tree used for the execution of the
children, every one of you claimed that you never took part in
such execution of the children.  So do you maintain this?
A. I never saw children either.
The original of the audio-visual recording was sealed before the
charged person and his lawyers and was signed by us, the
Greffiers, to Co-Prosecutors, the charged person and his lawyers.
A copy of the original audio-visual recording was provided to the
charged person.  Due to technical reasons it was not possible to
give a copy of the audio-visual recording to each of the persons
taking part in the confrontation and we provided the witnesses
and civil parties with a copy of the written record.
At 5.05 p.m. we had the Greffier read aloud this written record
of confrontation as recorded.  The written record having been
read aloud and heard, the charged person had no objections and
agreed to sign."
MR. PRESIDENT:
After having heard what has already been read out by the Greffier
in relation to the response of Tay Teng, do the Co-Prosecutors
wish to make any observation?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I only want to thank you for having given the order to read these
segments of the written record.  We do not have any further
observations.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil party lawyer, Ms. Studzinsky, you take the floor.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I have a request concerning the last document that was read out
and related to  of this document where the answer of the
witness Tay Teng was read out.  But to understand this answer,
the answer of Witness Him Huy should be read out as well because
the answer of Tay Teng refers directly to the answer by Witness
Him Huy.  This is on .  And so it could be better
understood what the witness Tay Teng means.  And therefore I
would like to request you to ask the Greffier also to read out
this answer by witness Him Huy starting with "Regarding my
specific role" and so on.  It's, I would say, in the middle of
.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
So on  in which line?  Could you please help the Court?
And how many lines would you wish the Court to ask the Greffier
to read out the related version?  Because if it is not clear then
the decision will not be made precisely as well.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
At right, first -- with the English version, which is on ,
and from the bottom it is the sixth paragraph, answer by witness
Him Huy, and then in the English version starting with "Regarding
my specific role, I was the head of the unit."
To check this in Khmer I would need some time.  Maybe the
Greffier is able to check it.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
If the Greffier of the Trial Chamber is now sure where to begin
with, then please read the portion as requested.
THE GREFFIER:
"Question by the Co-Investigating Judges:
What was the role of each of you at Choeung Ek?
Answer by witness Him Huy:
Regarding my specific role, I was the head of the unit in charge
of the transfer of prisoners from S-21 to Choeung Ek.  Hor
designated our group to accomplish this task.  Hor ordered me to
designate someone to meet and guard the prisoners at Choeung Ek.
Tay Teng's group was in charge of that.  It was made up of eight
persons and had to dig graves and execute the prisoners."
Answer by witness Tay Teng:
That is correct.  Brother Huy was my superior."
MR. PRESIDENT:
Is there any further remarks by the civil party lawyers after
your request has already been granted?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
No, there's no further observation from the civil party side.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, would you wish to make any observation in
relation to the additional reading of Tay Teng's statement and
also the additional portion in relation to the response to
Witness Him Huy?  Would you wish to make such observation?  Then
the floor is yours.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
This morning I made my observation already that I agreed with Mr.
Hong Kimsuon that this witness had made accurate statement and
that he did not see the accused pay a visit to Choeung Ek.  It
has been clear already that none of the witnesses saw the accused
go to Choeung Ek.
And that's all, Mr. President.  I'm grateful.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, would you wish to make any further observation in
relation to the additional statements in the record of the
confrontation and the re-enactment regarding Tay Teng?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I don't have any further observation at the
moment.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, Mr. Duch Phary is now instructed to read aloud the record
of the interview of Han Iem, document D28/5.
THE GREFFIER:
"Document D28/5.  This is the written record of the interview of
Witness Han Iem alias Moeng born in 1953.  This written record
was made on the 29th November 2007 at 8.10 a.m. by the
investigators of the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges of the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.
"Q. Could you describe your background before 1975?
A. I would like to say that I was separated from my mother.  I
joined the army in Regiment 112 of Division 703 in 1975 with Ta
Nat as commander.  After the liberation of Phnom Penh in 1975 I
was in Regiment 112 and later a new regiment, Regiment 142, was
formed with Karin, alias Rith, as commander.
At that time they had me do rice production and I ploughed the
rice paddy at O'Bek Kha'am.  They said that I failed to do a good
job and later they had me do cooking for them.
And three months later they had me prepare my biography in
Regiment 17 of Division 703, which was opposite the Monivong
Hospital.  I spent three days for biography recording.  I did not
know much about the person who recorded my biography.
Then they had me guard at the Preah Sisowath School; i.e., to
guard the senior cadres who were learning there, but I did not
know what they learned.
I was removed after spending one month there.  They had me go to
guard at a prison outside.  It was Dam Pheng prison next to Phsar
Thmei adjoining the fence of Monivong Hospital with small and big
cells and surrounded by iron bars.
During the five-year war, they wrote on the wall in fresh blood.
Dam Pheng is for resistants who were imprisoned.  They painted a
bright red heart and the name Dam Pheng.  Those were painted and
written on the outside surface.  I did not see those with my eyes
but the people inside told me.  I heard people saying that the
chief there was the same person, Duch.
I spent about three months there and it was about the 17th of
April 1975.  I guarded there until 1976.  Then the prison was
moved.  They had me moved and the prisoners were all transferred
earlier.  The prisoners were blindfolded and handcuffed when they
were transferred by trucks.  In the next morning, after the
transfer of all prisoners, they had us all move.
When we arrived at Tuol Sleng we did not see those prisoners.  We
wondered and asked ourselves if the prisoners disappeared.  Then
the group chief said that, "You guards, just do your job as
guards."
Three days later -- it was in 1976 -- they brought in new
prisoners, handcuffed and blindfolded.  They were soldiers,
co-operative villagers and Vietnamese.  Some of the prisoners
spoke Vietnamese and they did not speak Khmer.
I guarded there for about one month.  Sometimes I guarded inside
and sometimes outside of the fence.  There were 12 guards in one
platoon and there were four guards in one group.  My group chief
name Chamreoun and later he was arrested.  And later the group
chief, Sok, was also arrested.
I did not know the reason for Chamroeun's arrest, but Chamreoun
said that when he was on duty he kept advising his subordinates
that, as a guard, we need to exercise our best effort to prevent
the prisoners from committing suicide.
Sok was a deputy group chief and later on he was promoted to be
group chief and later he was arrested at about 12 a.m. and I did
not know the reason for his arrest.
While I guarded inside when the new prisoners arrived, they asked
me, "Ta, do you have any free room?"  If the room was available,
I was the one who took the prisoners to put them in the room,
untied the blindfold, shackled them up and then took off the
handcuffs.  I observed some prisoners with a big build had both
legs shackled -- and told the prisoners to tell me when they
needed to urinate or defecate or when they were thirsty.  There
were small cells on the first or ground floors.
On a daily basis there was a guard to take his shift at meal
times and when it was my turn I came back on duty.  One shift was
in the morning and another in the afternoon.  There were the same
shifts at night.  I had to take two shifts, one in daytime and
one at night.
Q. How did they feed the prisoners?
A. They had the light prisoners cook the rice, raise the pigs or
repair car or trucks based on their skills.
Q. What about the prisoners inside?
A. They brought them two meals a day and there was one plate of
rice and one bowl of soup per meal.  I did not know whether it
was enough because it was the set ration.
Q. And what about their health?
A. Some prisoners got cut on the back and deteriorated after the
interrogation.  Some were dead in the cell after returning.  Some
were emaciated.  There were both male and female prisoners but I
never saw children in my place.
Q. Based on your observation, in what year did you see the most
prisoners arrive?
A. It was in 1977-1978.  I saw that when I was guarding but I
never asked about anything.  When it was time to bring out the
prisoners the outsiders handed me the key to unlock the door and
deliver the prisoners to them.  I did not know whether they were
brought for interrogation or where was their destination.
Q. As you are illiterate, how did you remember the prisoners to
be brought away?
A. For instance, they told to take the prisoner from the small
cell or big cell.  There was only one prisoner in one small cell
but there were more prisoners in the big cell, but no mistake was
made because the prisoner was taken based on his or her identity
number.
Q. Who was the interrogator you were working with the most often?
A. As the inside guard I did not know that.  When they came to
take the prisoners they contacted the guards at the entrance and
those guards brought me the keys.  The entrance guard named
Kheang.  Later Kheang was also arrested under the allegation that
he had connection with Sok and Chamroeun.
Q. Were there many prisoners who were brought out and who never
returned?
A. There were many of those who never returned and most of them
were the emaciated prisoners.  And there were also many new
prisoner arrivals.
Q. Was there any prisoner who died when he or she was shackled?
A. I saw the prisoners dying every day as a consequence of severe
injuries after the interrogation.  Sometimes two prisoners died
per day.  About one month after the arrest of Kheang they placed
me to guard outside of the prison fence.  After spending one week
there I fell asleep on duty and my head leaned over onto the
barbed wire.  Then my superior, Peng, arrived and pushed me
further into the barbed wire.  He said that I was probably from
the same string as the enemy.  I said to him that, "Brother, I am
very sleepy."  Then he advised to come down and take a bath and
he guarded for me.
After having a bath I came to take up my duty and he said that I
should be careful and that if I continued to fall asleep I would
be in danger.  The inside guard heard that and asked me, "What
happened, Ta?"  I told him that Brother Peng arrived when I fell
asleep on duty.  The inside guard said to, "Be careful with that,
Ta."  Then I stopped talking to him because I were afraid that my
group chief would hear.
One week later I was arrested and cuffed, blindfolded, chained
and was the only inmate in one room in the central building, and
they had a small boy guard me.  The one who arrested me was from
the arrest unit.  His name is Huy.  He was a subordinate who
acted under the orders from his upper echelon.  They chained me
and I was not allowed to talk.  I did not know the reason of my
arrest and they deprived me of rice and water for one week.
The young guard, who named Heng, alias Chhak and he was from
Kampong Chhnang from Rolea Pha'ea district, and he sneaked away
from his superior's presence and asked me if I was thirsty.  I
told him, 'Nephew, please watch out for your personal safety.
Let me become a grandfather.'
Then he handed me a bowl of drinking water and then inserted a
piece of cloth into my cell.  He had me drink the water dropping
from the cloth in order to leave no trace and he told me not to
tell anyone that he had given me drinking water.  If they asked
me if I was thirsty and if they found out that he had given me
drinking water both of us would be killed.
Two days later Heng sneaked out nearby and brought me some rice
in a plastic bag.  He told me to eat rice while lying down and I
also thanked that guard.  The next morning they brought and asked
me if I knew about my mistake.  I replied that I did not know
anything.  The last few days I had fallen asleep on duty but it
was not on purpose because I was sleepy.
Tuy was the one who asked me and he was also arrested.  'Did you
know anything other than falling asleep?' he asked me.  I replied
that I only knew how to guard and perform my duty when it was my
turn.  I ate the rice when it was time for meals.  They warned me
not to do that again and then I was released.
Q. Did you have any problem later on?
A. After that they had me guard outside of the zinc wall at all
times.  I saw them walking the prisoners in during the night and
they were handcuffed and blindfolded.  I saw that every month
with an unlimited number but I did not know where they were
brought to.  I saw the big chief, Brother Hor and Huy at Prey
Sar, and Ta Duch was also there.  Ta Duch was always there and
when the prisoners were brought out at night he told the truck
driver that we should know the number of prisoners.  I heard Duch
telling that to the truck driver by own ears when I was guarding
outside of the prison.
Those big chiefs returned to their place after the truck left.  I
saw Duch in a car accompany the truck transporting out the
prisoners.  When the prisoners were brought in the Special Unit
walked them inside and delivered to the inside guard.  The
members of the Special Unit including Huy Tauch with that group.
The prisoners were handcuffed and blindfolded when they were
walked inside.
There were young and old prisoners including women and men and I
did not see any foreign prisoner besides the Yuon prisoners were
in the Vietnamese Army uniform with cuffs -- they were handcuffed
-- and were blindfolded.  Sometimes I saw three or five at a
time, but in total there were approximately hundreds of them.  I
saw the interrogator brought the prisoners for interrogation and
some prisoners got injuries when they were brought in.
Q. Did you ever see a pregnant prisoner?
A. Yes, but I never saw children.  When she was due to deliver,
she told the guard that she was about to give birth and then the
inside guard informed the outside guard who, in turn, called the
medic to get her for delivery.  It was rather often that I saw a
female prisoner delivering a baby.
Q. Were female prisoners detained separately?
A. The female prisoners were detained separately in a big room.
They chained a pregnant prisoner by the ankle.  A female prisoner
was shackled if she tried to create a problem with a guard.
Q. How did the prisoner take a bath, change their clothes or
defecate?
A. The guards, including myself, handed over the water hose to
the male prisoners so that they could take a bath, take off their
clothes and change their clothes by themselves without taking off
their shackles.
They had the prisoners defecate into the ammo cases in their
cells, and they had the light prisoners collect them once a day.
They took off the chains from the female prisoners and had them
walk to a separate room.  They changed their clothes by
themselves.  At that time, I kept my eye on them because I was
afraid that the prisoners would hang themselves and commit
suicide.
Q. Talking about organizational structure, what was Peng's title;
Peng who pushed your head?
A. Peng was in a regiment under Hor and Duch.  Duch was a
chairman and Hor was deputy chairman.  I did not know about the
backgrounds of Hor and Peng.
Q. You said that Huy was in the special unit.  What was that
special unit?
A. The role of the Special Unit was to arrest.  The Special Unit
also went out and arrested people from outside, that is, from the
provinces or co-operatives.  Huy Tauch was in the Special Unit
but I did not know who other superiors were.
Q. At S-21, what was its division into units?
A. Unit 22 was the guards' unit.  Unit 21 was the interrogators
unit, and then they created rice farming units, including Huy
Tauch who had a different numerical code, and I did not know
about anything besides this.
Q. When you were guarding inside did you ever see Duch walking
around and looking about?
A. I saw Duch walking around and looking but I never talked to
him.  Duch met with Peng when a mistake was spotted.
Q. Did you ever see Duch at a different place?
A. I saw Duch twice at the education sessions, that is, when I
attended a political class.  They taught us about our country and
about how to reconstruct our country into socialism, that is,
rice production shall be three to seven tonnes per hectare of
land, and as we all are workers we should work as hard as the
rice farmers.
They introduced a slogan which reads "Diminish the Enemy".  Our
parents were also enemies and they were to be eliminated and only
the good people could be parents.
In the education session that I attended, I only saw Peng and
Duch, but other people attending at the sessions said that Pol
Pot, Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea were also present and teaching.
I heard the students talking about that when they left their
class and when I was on my guarding duty.  They displayed the
photos of Nuon Chea, Khieu Samphan and Pol Pot with captions
right below.
Q. Talking about management, did Duch have a good relationship
with Hor?
A. I did not know what happened.  They arrested Huy Tauch and
later Hor was also arrested and taken out.  I saw them walking
Hor for interrogation.
Q. Was the appointment of staff made by Duch or another person?
A. I did not know that.  I just knew that he was a supervisor and
he never imposed any disciplinary action against me.  Based on my
recollection, the rules at S-21 was that the guard's role is only
to guard; refrain from mingling with another person's business,
and refrain from talking to other people.
Q. Were there any disciplinary action against a guard for taking
a nap?
A. Yes, there were.  They were arrested from every unit,
including the guard unit, the interrogator unit and the Special
Unit.  There were many of them and they were taken to be detained
in the same prison.
Q. Did you ever see Duch inflicting torture?
A. I never saw that.
Q. Do you know any other former staff of S-21?
A. I saw Chan Samreng, who is still alive.  In the last few years
I met him when I went to do a business in Tasda near the border.
He held a rather superior rank.  He was with Ta Duch.
Pon was also arrested and detained in the same prison.  He was
white and a rather short man.  When they walked him, I knew his
face very well.
Medic Hor was arrested but I did not know whether medic Soeung
was arrested nor medic Dan is still alive.
There was Chhen, who was Duch's messenger, but I did not know
whether or not he is alive nor about his birth place.  He was a
white and rather thin man.
Q. Where were you at the time when the Vietnamese troops were
entering?
A. It was not the time for my guard duty that day.  We ran to the
west when we heard the gunshots and we spent two months to reach
Thailand, and we returned to our homeland thanks to the
repatriation before UNTAC election.
One copy of the written record was provided to this witness.
After being read aloud the witness had no objections and agreed
to sign."
MR. PRESIDENT:
After hearing the testimony of this witness, Iem Han, do the
Co-Prosecutors have any comments or observations to make?
MR. TAN SENARONG:
Mr. President, the prosecution does not have any observations to
make regarding this statement.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers, do you have any observations to make
regarding the statement of Iem Han, as read out by the Greffier?
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The civil party lawyers do not have
any observations to make regarding this statement.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, do you have any observations to make
regarding this statement?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The defence counsel does not have any
comments or observations to make.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber now gives the opportunity to the accused to make his
observation regarding the content of the statement of witness Iem
Han as read out by the Greffier.  The statement was provided to
the investigators of the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges,
document D28/5.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, before I make my observation regarding Iem Han's
statement I would like to make correction to my word.  The S-21
conference when Son Sen attended was held on the 27th, not the
14th, of April as I said this morning.  And now I would like to
make my observations regarding the statement of Iem Han.
First, the person was from Preaek Ruessei and, from people I
asked, it was about two and a half kilometres from Ta Khmau.  It
was in Svay Rolum quarter.  So this person said he joined the
army.  I had a suspicion then because at that time they would not
recruit the displaced people to be part of the army.
Secondly, I do not want to talk in details about the PJ Prison
because it was dismantled, but in testimony it's a bit peculiar.
The point is that this Iem Han, alias Moeng said he was arrested
and imprisoned with the order from the upper echelon -- that is,
from me -- because of falling asleep during guarding duty and
that later on he also said he was released, and that was my third
observation of his testimony.
He also said Comrade Tuy, an interrogation cadre of mine, was
arrested and Hor, my deputy, was also arrested.  And Pon, the
interrogator whom I trusted the most, was also arrested.
In conclusion, the testimony of Iem Han was similar to the
testimony of KW-31.  It made me suspicious that this person is
not a member of the S-21 staff and this is the conclusion of my
observations, Mr. President.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The time is now 4 p.m. and the reading of statements needs at
least half an hour, up to an hour, in addition to the
observations by the parties to the proceedings and we only have
15 minutes for this afternoon's session, so it's not going to be
worthwhile to read another statement.  The Chamber therefore
decides to adjourn this afternoon's proceeding and it will resume
tomorrow morning, starting at 9 a.m.
Tomorrow also the Chamber will hear a testimony of witness KW-29
and for the remaining time the Chamber will have the statements
or the records of the interviews of those witnesses whom were
decided not to be summonsed by the Chamber to be read.  So it's
likely the statements will be read out in the afternoon session.
Security guards, take the accused back to the detention facility
and bring him back before 9 a.m.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1601H)
