PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0902H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today the Chamber continues to hear the testimony of the witness
It Sen, and commencing hearing testimony of civil party
2-TCCP-244. Mr. Em Hoy, please report the attendance of the
Parties and other individuals at today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all Parties to this case
are present. Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell
downstairs; he has waived his right to be present in the
courtroom. The waiver has been delivered to the greffier. A
witness who is to conclude his testimony today, namely Mr. It
Sen, is present in the courtroom. We also have a reserve civil
party, namely 2-TCCP-244. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Chamber now decides on the request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea dated 8th
September 2015, which notes that due to his health, headache,
back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long, and in order to
effectively participate in future hearings, he requests to waive
his right to participate in and be present at the 8th September
2015 hearing. Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the
duty doctor for the Accused at the ECCC, dated 8th September
2015, who notes that Nuon Chea today has back pain when he sits
for long and recommends that the Chamber grant him his request so
that he can follow the proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that he can follow the
proceedings. This applies to the whole day.
The Chamber now hands the floor to the defence teams to put the
questions to this witness. First the floor is given to the
Co-Counsel for Nuon Chea. You may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President, good morning. Good morning, Your
Honours, good morning counsel. Good morning, Mr. Witness, I would
like to ask you some questions this morning.
Q. First I would like to ask you a question about your family.
Before the Khmer Rouge took over power in your village and in
your district, did you have family living in Kampong Chhnang,
Pursat, Takeo or Kampot?
MR. IT SEN:
A. No, I was only living in Ampil in Peus commune at the time.
Q. Did you know at the time anything about Cham communities in
those areas before the Khmer Rouge came?
A. My knowledge at the time was that the situation on the ground
was normal before the arrival of the Khmer Rouge group.
Q. But my question was before they came did you know anybody from
Cham communities in those areas?
A. Yes, there were many people living in Ampil village at the
time. Every house -- there was many people living in each house
in the village.
Q. I think something went wrong with the translation, possibly.
My question was: did you know anybody living in Kampong Chhnang,
Pursat, Takeo or Kampot, any Cham living there?
A. I know there were many Chams living in Kampong Chhnang, Kampot
and Battambang but I never went to these provinces.
Q. Very well, thank you. Mr. Witness, I'm not entirely clear as
to which year you said the Khmer Rouge took over, was it in 1971
or 1973?
A. It started in 1973. In fact I was still attending the school
in 1972 but the school was closed down in 1973. At that time the
Islam schools and the Khmer schools were closed down.
Q. From that period and the years before, did you know a man
called Sos Man (phonetic)?
A. No, I don't know anyone by the name of Sos Man (phonetic). Are
you referring to Sos Man (phonetic) or Sos Mat (phonetic)?
Q. I'm referring to someone who I think was the father of a
person called Mat Ly.
A. I know Mat Ly. He works--
Q. Let me start with the father of Mat Ly, do you know who the
father of Mat Ly was?
A. Mat Ly worked in the unit in the East Zone and Tok Mat
(phonetic)--
Q. I will ask my questions maybe a little bit simpler. Do you
remember the father of Mat Ly?
A. No, I don't. He did not live in Ampil village so he might have
lived in another village.
Q. Do you know what the role was of Mat Ly in the Khmer Rouge
movement?
A. Mat Ly was in charge of the army with Tok Mat (phonetic) at
the time and these two were usually together although I myself
did not know his real position. But I usually saw Mat Ly together
with Tok Mat (phonetic).
Q. Do you remember whether Mat Ly, at the time, was encouraging
people from Kampong Cham to join the revolution?
A. Yes, that is correct. He urged the people to enter the
revolution.
Q. And is it correct that Mat Ly was a Cham himself?
A. Yes, he was a Cham person.
Q. Yesterday Mr. Witness, you spoke about measures taken by the
Khmer Rouge as of 1973, you talked about the Cham people not
being allowed to have prayers, women's hair were cut, you weren't
allowed to speak the Cham language, you were in fact forbidden to
practice religion. Do you recall whether Mat Ly was somehow
involved in taking these measures?
A. From what I understood, he did not talk about that. I heard
about the prohibition about practising the religion but it was
not from him, it was from someone else. Personally I did not hear
him say anything regarding the closure of the Islamic religion.
Q. Who was it then that ordered these measures?
A. The order came from the upper level to the village chief and
to the group chief. It was from the Angkar above so that the
village chief and the group chief had to instruct us to stop
practising the religion.
Q. Wasn't Mat Ly himself in fact upper level?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on and the Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have
the floor.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. I think Counsel should ask more
specific questions about his position, we know from his interview
he was a member of the district committee, some people might
interpret that as upper level some might not so I think Counsel
should be more specific in his question.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I think we're always speaking, Mr. President, about upper level
here without ever feeling the need to be specific, however I will
rephrase my question.
Q. Do you know the position of Mat Ly, Mr. Witness?
MR. IT SEN:
A. I do not know his actual position. However he was in charge of
the East Zone along with Tok Mat (phonetic) and these were two
were always together. And he rarely came to Ampil village, he
usually was at the Dambae district and Tboung Khmum. He only came
once in a while to stay in Ampil village.
Q. Have you heard at a later stage maybe that Mat Ly was
appointed in 1976 as a member of the Standing Committee of the
National Assembly?
A. Yes, I do. I know that he was a member of the National
Assembly as he was considered joining the resistance.
Q. Let me move on. Mr. Witness yesterday you spoke about
demonstrations in 1973 or 1974 because of the measures that were
taken against your religion, is it correct that after these
demonstrations you were arrested and detained at Krouch Chhmar
security centre?
A. Yes, that is correct. I was in danger at the time. My cow
became sick after the demonstration so I slaughtered the cows and
as a result I was arrested and detained at a prison in Krouch
Chhmar district. I was accused of killing an un-sick (sic) cow.
Q. How were you treated at Krouch Chhmar security centre, were
you beaten by prison personnel for instance?
A. They did not beat me up or anything but they had to carry out
the investigation first and if that was true, I would be detained
for long time. I saw many inmates were tortured during their
interrogations at the building behind the detention house but my
turn was not yet ready for that as the investigation process was
still underway.
Q. Do you know whether the Krouch Chhmar security centre was part
of the district of Krouch Chhmar or whether it was part of the
sector to which Krouch Chhmar belonged?
A. It belonged to the Krouch Chhmar district. It was a rather
large house, it was a storage house and just on the ground floor
there were four levels where prisoners were detained and both
floors were fully crowded with inmates.
Q. Do you recall to which sector Krouch Chhmar belonged, what was
the number of the sector to which this district that you lived in
belonged?
A. Krouch Chhmar district extended from Kampong Treas to Roka
Khnaor. That was the area under the Krouch Chhmar district and if
you were to make mistake, you would be arrested from these areas
and detained at the Krouch Chhmar detention centre.
Q. Let me assist you because I don't have that much time, Mr.
Witness. Was Krouch Chhmar district part of region, sector rather
21?
A. Yes, I think so.
Q. Do you know who after the liberation in April 1975, was the
chief of Sector 21?
A. No, I don't. I don't know who was the chief at the time.
Q. Does the name Chhan (phonetic) ring a bell?
A. No, I cannot recall that name. I don't know where he lived or
where he worked.
Q. Do you know who was in charge in Sector 21 of economics,
administration, education and organisation?
A. It was comrade Seng from the Southwest Zone who was present
there and besides Seng I do not know who else was in charge of
these sections.
Q. Maybe I will assist you a bit, Mr. Witness. Is it -- have you
ever heard of a name, somebody who was in charge as of these
functions in July 1975, someone with the name Ouk Bunchhoeun.
A. I do not know Ouk Bunchhoeun.
Q. Have you heard of somebody with that name in the present day
context, somebody who is a senator, Ouk Bunchhoeun?
A. No, Counsel, no I don't.
Q. Let me go back to the village level, Kob Sath, who was he?
A. Kob Sath was a village chief at the time -- that is, during
the period of arrest. He was there as a village chief. He was the
one that ordered us to eat pork; we understood that he received
such an order from the upper level.
Q. Was Kob Sath a Cham himself?
A. Yes, he was also a Cham person but he actually was afraid of
the upper level and to my knowledge not long after he was
arrested and killed.
Q. Have you ever heard of someone with the name of Meng Hun?
A. Meng Hun worked for the security. However to my understanding,
not long after he was arrested and put into a sack and thrown
into a truck and drove away. I refer to a person by the name of
Meng in the village and he worked for the security.
Q. Have you ever heard of a man named Leskasen?
A. The name Leskasen does not ring a bell; did he live in Ampil
village or elsewhere?
Q. That's a good question. Mr. Witness, I wanted to ask you that
question. Let me now ask you a general question about the period
'74 - '75. Do you know whether at that time a Cham movement
existed, a movement, which had as its intention, to create a
state within the state, a Cham state, do you know anything about
this?
A. No, I did not hear anything about that or any of such
rebellious nature.
Q. FULRO Champa, does that ring a bell, I'm not quite sure its
translated properly. Yes it is, FULRO Champa?
A. Nobody said anything about that. We the Cham people were
afraid of saying anything about this because if we were to say it
and it was heard, we would be arrested and taken away.
Q. Did you know at the time anybody who was active in a movement
to create a Champa state within Cambodia?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you have the floor first.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes, Counsel Koppe, for the record could you please spell out
the name of the movement you are speaking about. I heard FULRO
Champa but I'm not sure that I understood precisely what it's
about.
MR. KOPPE:
FULRO Champa.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Unless I'm mistaken, I believe the FULRO was something in
relation with oppressed races, the United Front of Oppressed
Races, is that what you're referring to?
MR. KOPPE:
I am happy to guide you where I have it from. E3/387, document
E3/387, it's a statement of Ouk Bunchhoeun in English, ERN
00350206; French, 00441419; and Khmer, 00379487; this movement, I
will quote: "[…] intended to create a state within the state
because the Cham Muslims wished to occupy Cambodian territory on
the eastern bank of the Mekong river to central Anam to create a
state. This was according to their confessions. They had an
organisation FULRO Champa under the leadership of Sabuon Leskesan
in Phnom Penh."
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I'm sorry, is FULRO an acronym or is it actually a name?
MR. KOPPE:
It is in his statement spelled in capital letters, F-U-L-R-O.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
So we may suppose in that case that it is an acronym.
BY MR. KOPPE:
If we would hear this particular individual as a witness here
then I'm sure he'll be able to explain if it was an acronym yes
or no. I don't know I presume so. I don't know.
Q. So you haven't heard of FULRO Champa, is that -- that's
correct, Mr. Witness?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You may now proceed International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. Just a couple of observations, I think
Counsel should be clear of the time period he is asking about, in
response to your question to Judge Lavergne, this was not some
secret pervert thing going on during the Khmer Rouge, this was an
open political organisation but it was in the pre-1975 time
period so he should be clear about what time period he is asking
about. My understanding is that there was FULRO Champa that was
part of the -- a political organisation related to the Cham and
later on that became part of a broader organisation relating to
ethnic minorities called FULRO.
MR. KOPPE:
I think the Prosecution is giving evidence. I'm just reading an
excerpt from a statement of someone who was in fact as of July
1975, deputy secretary of Sector 21 and he is referring to FULRO,
so I think it was an open organisation and possibly the witness
would have heard of it.
Q. But I presume, Mr. Witness ,you haven't heard of it. I would
like to ask you something about a second Cham movement called
Kbal Sa have you ever heard of this?
MR. IT SEN:
A. No, I have never heard of it. I have never heard of it.
Q. Let me ask you in general terms. In the period '73, '74, '75,
have you ever heard of any "rebellious Cham movement"?
A. No, I have only heard the rebellion at Kaoh Phal. Kaoh Phal
rebellion when Cham people were fighting with the Khmer Rouge it
was the only incident that I heard.
Q. Very well. Let's move there. Yesterday you were asked
questions about this rebellion in Kaoh Phal, you yourself were
not there but you had an in-law who gave you information. Do you
know anything about what caused the crackdown of that rebellion,
what happened before Cham people were killed?
A. It happened long time ago, I mean the incident, we were
prohibited from praying, from worship, from fasting, villagers
from Kaoh Phal rose up and opposed to the prohibition by Khmer
Rouge.
Q. Have you ever heard a story that 28 Khmer Rouge cadres were
chopped to death by local Cham people?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You may now proceed, International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
MR. LYSAK:
Counsel is leading the witness and he is leading with a
completely different account then, I think, everyone of us have
read about this incident. So if he has ceased upon some
miss-account of this, he at least he should be quoting it so we
know where this information is coming from, the accounts of this
rebellion talk about one person -- soldier being attacked not 28.
MR. KOPPE:
Q. Let me not focus on 28. Have you ever heard -- although I'm
quite sure I read 28 -- Mr. Witness, have you ever heard of many
Khmer Rouge cadres being chopped to death by Cham?
JUDGE FENZ:
Counsel, generally can you prepare, provide for the benefit of
the record, the basis for the question. I think that's what the
Prosecutor asked.
MR. KOPPE:
The twenty-eight is -- I will get back to you, it is either
coming from Keirnan or Ponchaud, and Cham people chopped a sub
district cadre to death is coming from Ouk Bunchhoeun's
statement. So I will be more general and I will ask the witness
whether he knows anything about killing of Khmer Rouge cadres by
Cham in Kaoh Phal.
MR. IT SEN:
A. I did not witness the incident but I have heard that soldiers
were chopped to death in 1977. I do not know how many of them
were chopped to death. My in-law also told me about that
incident.
Q. You just said '77, but do you in fact mean 1975?
A. Yes, it was in 1975. It was actually before 1975, and in 1975
Cham people were evacuated because of the rebellion.
Q. What did you in-law tell you specifically about killing of
Khmer Rouge cadres on Kaoh Phal by Cham, how did this happen, who
was involved, how many people died?
A. I do not know for sure about the event. Cham people who had
swords, who had knives were killed by Khmer Rouge at that time.
Only these people were shot to death by Khmer Rouge soldier.
Other people who opposed Khmer Rouge at the time were not killed.
Q. Let me move on to how the rebellion was cracked down. Do you
know which forces were involved in the crackdown of the Kaoh Phal
rebellion, were these district forces or were these sector
forces?
A. I do not know about that. The soldiers came from the
districts, they were told to be ready to curb the rebellion at
Kaoh Phal.
Q. Have you heard of military forces with heavy artillery coming
from the rubber plantations in the south, having different kinds
of uniforms, carrying heavy weapons and that they were involved
in the cracking down of the Kaoh Phal rebellion.
A. I did not witness the incident. I heard that artilleries were
put behind Kaoh Phal village.
Q. What do you remember about this artillery?
A. I could not recall. No shooting at that time, but I heard gun
fire and artilleries were put behind Kaoh Phal in Saoy village
and some of the Cham people were tied up at the time.
Q. But do you remember or maybe your in-law remembered people,
soldiers wearing military uniforms and carrying heavy artillery?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You may now proceed, International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. Again, Counsel wants to try to refresh
and use a document that talks about these soldiers in uniforms;
he should reference the material because I believe he is now
mixing up the Kaoh Phal and the Svay Khleang rebellions, two
different events. So, he's shaking his head but none of us would
have to debate this if you would cite the document when you wish
to put evidence to a witness.
MR. KOPPE:
I am asking a general question to the witness, Mr. President,
whether he remembers or his in-law remembers people wearing
military uniforms indicating that these would be regiment or
sector forces rather than district forces.
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, Counsel shouldn't be testifying about the
significance of military uniforms. Again, if he has information
he wishes to present to the Court that's a part of the record, he
should cite it. He's leading here, he's testifying himself.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Again, I'm not testifying at all. I'm asking whether he knows
anything about uniforms of the people of the military shooting
with artillery, that's my question.
Q. Mr. Witness, do you remember anything about the soldiers being
involved in the military attack on Kaoh Phal?
MR. IT SEN:
A. I saw boats arriving at Kaoh Phal and I noticed -- I noticed
there were also artilleries and there was fire -- there was
fighting at that Kaoh Phal for few days.
Q. Do you have any knowledge of artillery; do you know anything
about how many millimetres mortars were at the time?
A. I do not know about that, Mr. Lawyer. I do not know how many
mortars or artilleries.
Q. Have you heard of Battalion 55 of the Sector 21 Regiment?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Koppe, please repeat your question, there was no proper
translation of your question.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. I certainly will, Mr. President. Mr. Witness, have you ever
heard of Battalion 55 of the Sector 21 Regiment?
MR. IT SEN:
A. I'm sorry, Counsel I do not know.
Q. I shall give the name of one of its commanding officers and
and I will ask you whether you know this name. Hun Sen, the
present prime minister, do you know him?
A. Yes, I have heard of the name Hun Sen. But I did not know at
that time where he was stationed I only knew that he also joined
the resistance in the jungle.
Q. Have you heard whether he as a commanding officer was involved
in the crackdown of the rebellion of Kaoh Phal?
MR. LYSAK:
Again, Mr. President, I have no objection to the question, if
it's based on something and not just counsel's theories or
wishes. So, if he wants to put this question, please cite the
basis for it so we all know, he shouldn't be making things up in
the courtroom.
MR. KOPPE:
The basis is actually someone who worked with the Prosecution for
quite a while. But I think I'm entitled to ask that question, Mr.
President, whether the witness knows whether commanding officer
Hun Sen was involved.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Koppe, please provide the basis or the documents that you
quoted in particular the documents which were admitted to be used
before the Chamber. Otherwise the Chamber will prohibit the
witness from answering to your question.
MR. KOPPE:
If you insist, Mr. President, of course I will provide you the
basis of my question. It is E347.3, English ERN 01086027 which
describes indeed the attack on Svay Khleang and Kaoh Phal and the
position which is being put forward there is that the attack was
done by Battalion 55 led by commanding officer Hun Sen. And I'm
trying to establish whether the crackdown was done by the region
or rather by the district, so that's what I'm trying to get at.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Mr. Koppe, can you repeat the reference, I'm sorry, I didn't have
the time to note it down properly I heard E347.3.
MR. KOPPE:
That is correct. E347, so not E3/, but E347.3, it is a Human
Rights watch report on , English ERN as I said, 01086027;
the attack on Svay Khleang and Kaoh Phal is being described as
executed by Battalion 55 of Sector 21, so that's where I have
information from.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Counsel Koppe, are you may be aware of the decision from the
Chamber regarding this document?
MR. KOPPE:
No.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Are you sure? There never was a request to put this document
before the Chamber and the Chamber never ruled on that request,
are you sure?
MR. KOPPE:
I think the Khieu Samphan team did -- that's why -- I know we
didn't but the Khieu Samphan team filed a request.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Well then Counsel Koppe, it seems that Human Rights Report, at
least that segment has not been put on the Case file.
MR. KOPPE:
Well, again, as in other situations you made me explain where my
knowledge is coming from, I was asking questions about which
military forces were involved in Kaoh Phal and it seems that it
was the forces led by the present prime minister who were
involved and the information is coming from Steve Heder which is,
I'm sure, the author of this report and who worked for the
Prosecution for quite a while.
MR. LYSAK:
We heard a impassion speech yesterday about how people need to
rely on the investigation. This rebellion was investigated, I
have been searching for references to Battalion 55 and if there
is a basis for the question, that's fine, but Counsel should move
this document into evidence if he think its reliable it's a Human
Rights Watch Report, Human Rights watch was obviously not at Kaoh
Phal in 1975, so the real issue is, what is the source of this
information. And when Counsel tries to present matters in this
way and stand up in this courtroom and assert something as a fact
when there is nothing in the investigation about it and it comes
from a document that's not been put in evidence, these
proceedings are distorted so we would have no objection if they
move this into evidence but we need to know what the actual
source of this evidence is if this proceeding is going to be
meaningful.
MR. KOPPE:
As I said the actual source is someone who is considered an
expert for this court, who didn't testify as an expert but as a
witness and who is someone who is involved in the investigation
for a long time and I have knowledge that in fact Steve is the
author of this report and he is making the argument that it was
in fact Battalion 55 that was involved.
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, I'm pretty sure Steve Heder was not at Kaoh Phal
in 1975, so again the issue is, what is the source of this? I'm
looking to see if Steve Heder's name is in this, I'm looking for
sources, but the reason I'm having to look now and we have to
interrupt this proceeding because Counsel hasn't put this
evidence properly before us. So I'm here in a position of having
to search this document. So I think it is entirely improper the
way Counsel brings these matters before the Court.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Lead Co-Lawyers, I noticed that you are on your feet; do you have
anything to address the Chamber?
MS. MARIE GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. I was -- what I would like to specify
that this document is not part of the case file that is the
issue. So the point is not whether we're speaking about Hun Sen
or not, here today we see once again the Nuon Chea defence is
using, again, a document that is not in the case file and the
Khieu Samphan defence tried to have this document admitted
according to proper procedural rules and this document was
dismissed by the Chamber. That's the issue; the issue is not whom
we're speaking about but how this document is used by the Defence
whereas the Defence knows perfectly well that this document has
not been put on to the case file nor admitted.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now proceed, Judge Lavergne.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes, for the purposes of the record and for Victor Koppe's
information, the memo is E347/1, that's the index and the
relevant segment is Chapter 2 of the Human Rights Watch report,
in particular paragraphs three, four, five, six, seven and eight.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Thank you -- good morning to all of
you. I have a request for clarification because I believe the
previous decisions including Case 002/01, that the issue of --
when we were faced with this issue of where the document comes
from but since the document is not presented, we felt that we had
the liberty of putting all questions that are necessary. So I
don't know why suddenly that each -- why each question put by the
Defence has to be based on a specific document. Why? If we do not
intend to confront the witness with a particular document, why do
we have base all of our questions on a document? This is request
for clarification because the Co-Prosecutors position does not
seem to be in relation with the Chamber's jurisprudence regarding
this matter.
MR. LYSAK:
If I may respond, the reason is you're leading the witness if you
don't have some basis. You can't just stand up in Court and make
an assertion that Hun Sen was part of an attack without some
evidence and I'm reading this now, there is no cited evidence
here, there's an unspecified interview by an academic without
even identifying the source. So, for Counsel to stand up here and
make these assertions without a proper evidentiary record, he is
leading the witness. Yesterday both of you stood up and objected
when I asked this witness, how many Cham people lived in his own
district. Now you want him to an expert on the entire structure
of the East Zone.
MR. KOPPE:
It is a pathetic and shameful attempt to cut the Defence off to
try to find--
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Koppe, you will have the last say on this matter. And now
the floor is given to the lawyer for civil parties.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Thank you, Mr. President. I would like to make an observation on
this matter. In fact we, the civil parties, have put questions to
civil parties and witnesses and usually the defence teams would
rise and demand the sources that we quote in those questions. And
to play a fair game I believe both sides have to refer to the
sources that you extracted or that you relate them to your
questions to the witness. Thank you.
MR. KOPPE:
On the record, Mr. President, what's happening here is an attempt
to avoid evidence which might incriminate present government
members as the perpetrators of the actual genocides, if there
were any, in '75. So I think it is perfectly appropriate to find
out what happened in '75, especially in Trea village which is
about to follow. So the Defence is perfectly entitled to find out
what happened in '75 and whether Ouk Bunchhoeun and Hun Sen were
involved in the killings.
MR. LYSAK:
I am sorry to rise again but I cannot let that be unresponded
(sic) to, no one here is trying to do that. You are perfectly
entitled to pursue that, you need to do it by proper evidentiary
means; you cannot just make up things in the courtroom. So feel
free to prove that we have no objection, you need to do it by
proper means of evidence, Mr. President, that's our position. Not
that he should be precluded from doing this.
MR. KOPPE:
As said, it's Steve Heder who is implying this and you know him
very well.
MR. LYSAK:
There is nothing about Steve Heder in this document. He's making
that up.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Fenz, you have the floor.
JUDGE FENZ:
Well, it cannot come as a great surprise. I mean, this is how
criminal proceedings work; if you want to confront the party with
something if you put forward an allegation you have to cite the
basis for this. If the basis is a document which hasn't been
admitted during the proceedings or actually specifically rejected
as in this case, find another basis and move on.
MR. KOPPE:
And that's exactly what I didn't do because I know this is going
to happen in this Court. Trying to hide the truth of what really
happened.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel, you have to follow the standing practice and procedures
in this courtroom so please move on.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Something I would of course do in any other court, Mr. President,
but I'll move on.
Q. Mr. Witness, do you know how many people were killed at Kaoh
Phal and Svay Khleang?
MR. IT SEN:
A. No, I don't know how many people were killed. I knew people
were killed but not the number of those killed.
Q. Is it correct that hundreds of Cham were massacred by East
Zone forces?
A. As I said people were killed but I did not know how many as at
the time I was hiding in a house in Ampil village.
Q. There was another massacre in '75, wasn't there in Trea
village, is that correct?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. LYSAK:
Again, Counsel is leading and again I think he's got his
information mixed up. There was another incident in Svay Khleang
in '75 and Trea was 1978. If he has some other information he
should be specific, he shouldn't stand up and lead the witness
with incorrect information.
MR. KOPPE:
At least read your sources, Mr. Prosecutor, I have it from
Kiernan who is quoting Ponchaud, describing a massacre which was
executed, in pretty much the same way as described yesterday by
this witness, in November '75. I'll be happy to read it for you.
"Ponchaud adds that in November '75, Chams in Trea village of
Krouch Chhmar also rebelled. Then the Khmer Rouge tore the
village apart with B40s and smashed the heads of any survivors
with pick handles. The corpses were thrown aside and left. They
even stuck heads on pikes and exposed them along the banks of the
Mekong." Ponchaud .
So I'm trying to figure out whether this massacre in Trea that
the witness described yesterday wasn't actually in '78, but
rather in '75.
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, I have no objection, again, he should read the
document first, ask the witness if he is familiar with an event
in Trea village in 1975, but he shouldn't stand up and suggest
that what he just read is any way similar to what the witness
described as happening in 1978 in Trea village, they're
completely different. So he shouldn't be characterising and
leading. If he wants to present and ask about what happened in
Trae village in 1975, go ahead.
MR. KOPPE:
Q. Fine. Mr. Witness, do you know if there was a massacre of
Cham; Cham being killed, thrown in the river in '75 November?
MR. IT SEN:
A. No, it was not in 1975. Seventy-five was the year that
villagers were evacuated from villages.
Q. Do you know for the fact that this French person that I was
referring to, Francois Ponchaud, wrote his book in 1976. So at
the time he didn't know what is going to happen later so I think
we can be convinced that it was in '75. Have you never heard any
stories about the cruelties that I just described?
MR. LYSAK:
Again, Counsel is leading, he is misstating the evidence. This
witness has described one event that took place in Trae in 1978.
This book describes a completely different event in 1975 and he
shouldn't be leading and trying to mischaracterise the evidence
when he's asking questions here. This is utter deceit.
MR. PRESIDENT:
In order for us to proceed, the Deputy Co-Prosecutor please
provide your grounds for your objection so that we can use it as
the basis for our ruling. For example, whether there was no
citation in the questions or whether it was a leading question,
for example. And if your objection is not based on any firm
ground I think it's just back and forth between two sides.
We, as the Bench would like to facilitate the proceedings and
issue our ruling based on the grounds that the Parties provide to
the Chamber in order to proceed in an expeditious manner. And you
all have been in this courtroom and involved in the proceedings
for so many years already so please try to avoid a relapse of
this lack of grounds.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. The ground is that Counsel is leading
the witness; he's leading and suggesting to him that event in
1978, was the same as a different event in 1975. That is a
leading question.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I don't think it was a question. It was a possible theory that
this witness might be very afraid of telling what happened in
Trae village in '75, and rather shifted to '78. But my question,
a very factual question was, whether he knows anything of mass
atrocities which are in certain details quite similar as to what
he described yesterday? That's my question, does he know of any
mass atrocities in November 1975 in Trae village?
MR. IT SEN:
A. Counsel, I don't understand your question at all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, you do not need to answer a question that you don't
understand.
Let us take a short break and resume at 10.30.
Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room for
witnesses and civil parties during the break and invite him back
into the courtroom at 10.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1013H to 1034H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is back in session.
Before I give the floor to the defence team for Mr. Nuon Chea to
resume his line of questioning, the Chamber would like to remind
all Parties that yesterday I informed the Co-Prosecutors,
together with the Lead Co-Lawyers, in relation to questioning of
this witness. I instructed Co-Prosecutors and Lead Co-Lawyers
that the questions should be simple and precise, and also short.
This witness, as I said yesterday, has difficulty in speaking
Khmer, because as far as we are concerned, he has a different
language, different culture and tradition from that of Khmer. So
in order that the Chamber can ascertain the truth in this case,
the questions should be short and precise.
I noticed that Parties in the previous session changed their
position when they address the Court. They appear to deliver
speeches to the Chamber. So, once again, the Chamber reminds
everyone to stick to the form of questions allowed by the
Chamber, and we have allowed such practice for over seven years.
And in addition to this, the Chamber wishes to inform that a
Party has to adhere to their professionalism when they address
the Chamber. Please avoid any disparaging speech here in this
courtroom.
Now, the Chamber gives the floor to the defence team for Mr. Nuon
Chea to resume his line of questioning. You may now proceed.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Before I start, Mr. President, both the
Khieu Samphan defence team and we are a bit concerned about the
time that we still have left. We notice that I was objected to
about nine or 10 times. Yesterday, there was also an additional
20 minutes for the Prosecution. So we are enquiring as to how
much time both defence teams still have today?
MR. PRESIDENT:
We are not competing each other here. However, if you made a
request to have 20 additional minutes for your time to question
this witness, the Chamber may grant you the request. However,
questions with no basis, or irrelevant questions, will not be
allowed in this courtroom. And when one Party is objecting to
questions put by another Party, please make it clear. Try to
avoid delivering any lengthy speech before the Chamber. So we
have to be clear on this matter.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, please. I need to react here. Since we will be
speaking last, the issue of extra time of course will concern us
particularly. So, I would like to inform you that we're going to
ask for 20 minutes of extra time so that we can finish our
cross-examination. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I told you already that 20 minutes will be granted to you when
you put significant or necessary questions to the witness.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Thank you, Mr. President. Mr. Witness, let me go back to
November 1975. You went from Ampil, your village, to Preaek Achi;
is that correct?
MR. IT SEN:
A. Yes, that is correct. I went to Preaek Achi.
Q. And when you went from Ampil to Preaek Achi, did you follow
the river and pass through Trea? Or did you go another route?
A. I went on the boat along the river. I then arrived at Stueng
Trang, and after Stueng Trang, we were taken to Sangkae before we
reached Preaek Achi.
Q. Do you remember roughly how many days or weeks after the
rebellion in Kaoh Phal and Svay Khleang you went to Preaek Achi?
A. I am not quite sure on this matter. I did not know how long
before I reached Preaek Achi. After the rebellion, we were
evacuated to Preaek Achi. We were woken up at the night time, and
we did not dare to say anything. Villagers in all houses were
woken up and taken to Preaek Achi. And as I said, after -- the
event took place after the rebellion.
Q. And when you went by boat from Ampil to Preaek Achi, following
the Mekong and passing Trea, did you see any dead bodies? Any
corpses without heads?
A. No, I did not see any corpses at the time.
Q. And when you arrived in Preaek Achi, did you hear anything
about what had happened just before that in Trea?
A. No. I did not know anything else besides the rebellion.
Q. So is it correct to say that in those three years that you
were in Preaek Achi, you never heard anything about killings in
Trea village?
A. I was living in Preaek Achi. I have never heard of any
killings at Trea village. In fact, when I was living in Preaek
Achi, I did not hear any events about killings in Trea village.
After I returned to Preaek Achi, that I heard about the incidents
of killings.
Q. Now, because of time, I will move on to the end of your stay
in Preaek Achi. You were told, you said, that peace had arrived,
and that you were allowed to go to Ampil; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. And after the replacement of the
Southwest Zone, we were told that we could come back to our
village.
Q. And how many other Cham families went from Preaek Achi to
Ampil?
A. Regarding Preaek Achi village, it was a rather big village,
and I did not know how many villagers came to Ampil village at
that time, but there were many of them living in Ampil at that
time, and Saoy village.
Q. Do you know whether any other Cham families who were in Preaek
Achi could go back to Trea? Or could go to Trea, rather than
Ampil?
A. Yes, villagers from Trea village were allowed to go and live
in Preaek Achi village, and some people from Preaek Achi village
were taken to be killed after they arrived for a few days.
Q. I will make my question simpler. Were there families who had
been living in Preaek Achi for three years, were sent to either
Trea or to Krouch Chhmar, or to other villages?
A. I'm sorry, Counsel, I do not get your question. Could you
repeat it, please? I cannot get it.
Q. You said you had been living with your family in Preaek Achi
for three years. Then you were told you were allowed to go back
to your home village. Do you know whether other Cham villagers
were also allowed to go back to their home villages?
A. Yes, we were told as such, that we were -- we would be allowed
to go and live in our respective houses. And I did not know where
did these people go to. Later on, I learnt that people from
Preaek Achi were told to go back to their respective villages.
However, they were taken to be killed.
Q. You went with your family to Ampil. Is it correct that you
stayed there with your older sister, Afiah?
A. Yes, that is correct. I was living with my older sister.
Q. You also said that in Ampil there were about 20 or 30 or 40
Cham families; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. Yes, about that number living in Ampil
village.
Q. You also stated that you stayed for about a fortnight in Ampil
village; correct?
A. Yes, it is about right. I stayed there for about a fortnight,
after which we were transferred to Kampong Thom.
Q. Kampong Thom?
A. I'm sorry, I may have confused. After Preaek Achi, I was sent
to Trea, and at that time that they intended to take me to be
killed. I'm sorry I was not evacuated after I left Preaek Achi.
Q. Let me go back to Ampil again. You were in Ampil, and you
stayed a fortnight, and you had to go because there was not
enough food; is that what you said yesterday?
A. I was not given any food rations to eat. I did not have any
meal to eat before I was told to return.
Q. So when you moved then from Ampil to Trea, did your oldest
sister, Afiah and those 20 or 40 families, stay behind in Ampil?
A. Some people stayed behind in Saoy village, and some others
stayed behind in Ampil village.
Q. How about your older sister, Afiah? Did she stay behind in
Ampil?
A. My older sister had not been evacuated from Ampil, so she
stayed in Ampil village, from the time that I was evacuated until
the time that I returned to Ampil village.
Q. You're now saying -- and maybe that's the translation --
evacuated. I thought you said that you decided yourself to leave
Ampil because of food?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You may now proceed, International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
MR. LYSAK:
Yes, our objection is that the Counsel is leading the witness and
misstating the record. The witness testified that he was
instructed, along with others, to go from Ampil to Trea. He never
testified that he decided to do this himself.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. I will rephrase, Mr. President. When you went from Ampil to
Trea, did you tell the person who instructed you that the
Southwest Zone cadres in Preaek Achi had just before said you
were allowed to go back to your home village?
A. Yes. The Southwest Zone cadres came to replace the previous
cadres, and we were told that we could return back to our home
villages. After -- during the fortnight period in Ampil village,
we were told that we could go back to live in our home villages.
At that time, Comrade Seng told us to leave for Trea village.
Q. But you were already in your home village, Ampil. So you left
Ampil to go to Trea, but Trea wasn't your home village; correct?
A. My birth village was Ampil village. We were instructed to go
to Trea village at that time.
Q. I understand. But just only 14 days before, you were
instructed to go back to your home village, Ampil. And you stayed
with your older sister. So why were you instructed to go to Trea?
A. There were too many villagers in Ampil village, and we were
not allowed to stay in Ampil. The order from upper level went
through village chief to order some of us to go to Trea village,
because there were too many people already in Ampil village.
Q. But do you remember at the time thinking, to say, "Well, I can
stay with my older sister. There is enough food with my older
sister." Maybe.
A. No, I could not stay in Ampil village. The village chief would
know that I insisted on living in the village, Ampil. And my
older sister did not dare to put me in her house. It was a strict
order at that time.
Q. But why go to Trea? Why not go to Krouch Chhmar? Or to Svay
Khleang? What was the reason to go -- to have to go to Trea?
A. Soldiers, military, were living in the whole area of Trea
village. Trea village was the place where people were put and
killed. People were placed in the houses in Trea village, and
killed afterwards.
Q. But when you were instructed to go to Trea, you didn't know
that at the time, I presume?
A. No, I did not know. We were riding our ox carts. Kitchen
tools, blankets, sleeping mats, and our belongings were placed on
the ox carts.
Q. I'm trying to understand something, Mr. Witness. You were
instructed to go to Trea. You said then your family was killed
because they were Cham. But your sister, who was also Cham, was
allowed to stay in Ampil. Can you explain that to me?
A. Because my older sister had been living in the Ampil village
for so long. Because I returned from Preaek Achi to Ampil, I was
not allowed to stay in that Ampil village. And Base People, who
had been already there in Ampil village, were allowed to stay in
that Ampil village.
Q. But you also said there were about 20 or 40 Cham families in
Ampil. Were they also, like your sister, allowed to stay?
A. Yes. It was the same situation for those families. Since they
had not been evacuated elsewhere, then they were allowed to stay
in that Ampil village.
Q. What happened to those 20 to 40 families? What happened to
your older sister when she was in Ampil?
A. My elder sister lived in Ampil, and nothing wrong was done to
her. However, later on, she was assigned to go with the group to
deal with the house construction. She was with other 20 families.
And later on, people kept disappearing, and that's after I
returned from Trea village.
Q. I will finish. I have still many questions. But, Mr. Witness,
can you explain why your direct family was killed in Trea because
they were Cham, as you've said, but nothing happened to the
families, the Cham families, in Ampil? What was the reason? Were
you unlucky? Or what -- what is the reason? Do you know?
A. After we were evacuated from Preaek Achi to the village, and I
did not know why we were considered the new Cham after we were
evacuated from Preaek Achi. Because previously we had lived in
that village, and nothing happened. And after our return from
Preaek Achi, our right was not as equal to that who had lived in
that village.
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, I am mindful of the time already passed, another
minutes. For the record, I still have many questions to this  
         10   witness, but I will give the floor now to the Khieu Samphan team.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel. And the floor is now given to the defence
team for Khieu Samphan.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Mr. It Sen. My name is
Anta Guisse. I am International Co-Counsel for Mr. Khieu Samphan,
and I have a few questions to put to you. The first question is
as follows. You referred to the Koah Phal revolt, and in answer
to a question put to you by the Co-Prosecutor, you stated that
when the revolt took place, you were forbidden to cross over to
get back to the village. So my first question is as follows: who
forbade you to cross over to get to Kaoh Phal?
MR. IT SEN:
A. It was the soldiers who were guarding in the area. We were
prohibited from going. And if someone insisted on going, the
person would be arrested and tied up.
Q. You state that it was the soldiers. Do you remember what force
those soldiers belonged to?
A. I do not know which unit they attached to, but those soldiers
could come from the district or the sector. And allow me to
remind you that it was the rainy season, and some people had to
go and collect grass for the cattle on boat. The soldiers would
stop them and arrest them.
Q. Can you confirm that Ampil, like Preaek Achi and Trea, were in
the East Zone?
A. Yes, that area belongs to the East Zone. Later on, when the
Southwest group arrived, they accused the East Zone cadres of
having a Vietnamese head.
Q. Can you tell me, if you do know, who were the persons in
charge of the East Zone at the time of the Kaoh Phal revolt?
A. I do not know anything about that. I do not know who was
leading the revolt.
Q. I will put my question to you again, because there may be a
problem of understanding. Do you know who were the leaders of the
East Zone at the time of the Kaoh Phal revolt in 1975?
A. No, I don't. I don't know who was the chief at the time. I
heard about Tok Man (phonetic), but Tok Man (phonetic) was not in
my area that often. He was usually based at the rice fields area.
Q. To be very specific, when you were at Ampil before you went to
Preaek Achi, do you remember who was the chief? Whether you are
talking of the district or the commune, was in office at the
time?
A. I do not recall the names of the commune chief or the district
chief. Li and Lah were chief of the village, but for the commune
chief of Preaek Achi, I cannot recall the name.
Q. Who ordered you to leave Ampil and go to Preaek Achi?
A. It was the security force, the village chief, and the commune
chief who gave us that order. And they said that the order came
from the upper level, and the order came through the chain of
command for us to go.
Q. You have referred to security forces. Do you remember the name
of any person who was chief of the security force, who issued you
that order?
A. I remember some in Ampil village, namely Meng (phonetic) and
Horn (phonetic). Horn (phonetic) is still living today, but he is
very old. And there was another person, named Meng (phonetic),
who worked in the security in Ampil village. Later on, Sath was
chief. Kob Sath was the chief.
Q. When you say that Kob Sath became chief subsequently, when
exactly did he assume his duties?
A. That happened during the time that people were being killed.
But about 10 days after, he was taken away and killed too. At
that time, those village chiefs, and other chiefs, were taken
away and killed, and replaced by new chiefs.
Q. So if I understand your testimony correctly, you are situating
that event in 1978; is that correct?
A. Yes, that was the year. That's when it happened.
Q. And according to you, in which commune was Kob Sath exactly?
Was he in Ampil or in Trea?
A. Kob Sath was in Ampil. His parents also lived in Ampil.
Q. So if I understand correctly, you knew that he was chief
during the 15 days you spent at Ampil after your return from
Preaek Achi; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. You made mention of a person called Seng on several occasions.
Can you tell us what his exact position was?
A. I heard people saying that he was the Krouch Chhmar district
committee, as he was in charge overall in the entire Krouch
Chhmar district.
Q. Do you know what was his Zone of origin? And when he was
appointed?
A. When the Southwest group came from the other side of the river
to liberate the area in the East Zone, then the East Zone cadres
scattered, and from that point onward, he was known as the
district committee. And that's when the killing started.
Q. In E3/5195, your record of interview, you made mention of Kob
Sath, and this is what you stated. And the ERN in French is as
follows: 00274728; ERN in Khmer, 00004429; and in English,
00242095. "Kob Sath then became village chief, in spite of his
race, his Cham race. The situation got worse progressively. We
were neither authorized to write nor to read the Cham language."
End of quote. Now, did that situation deteriorate only in 1978?
A. No, the situation intensified in 1978, until 1979 -- that is,
until the day of the liberation by the prime minister.
Q. Are you sure that Kob Sath was appointed village chief only in
1978?
A. It happened in 1978. That is when they started killing people.
And as I said, he didn't work there for long. He only worked for
a few months, and then he was taken away and killed.
Q. Do you know whether Seng had other duties outside of his
functions as district chief, as you pointed out?
A. No, I don't. However, I saw him riding his motorbike every day
at that time, and he issued instructions to soldiers.
Q. Still document E3/5995, document 00274718 in French; ERN in
English, 00242095; and Khmer, 00004430. And this is what you
state, and you are giving more details on Seng. Osman, relates
what you said: "Seng was at the same time military chief of the
commune and commune chief." End of quote. Does that refresh your
memory? That's in paragraph 6.
A. Yes, it does refresh my memory. And what you read out is
correct.
Q. When you were led to Trea, and you got there, did you know who
was in charge of Trea? Who was the village chief?
A. I do not know who was the village chief of Trea at the time. I
saw many soldiers stationed in the village, and I saw comrade
Seng going backwards and forwards on his motorbike to Trea
village.
Q. If I properly understood your testimony, you stated that when
you got to Trea village, you were all separated into groups of
women and young girls. Did I understand you correctly?
A. Yes, that is correct. At the mosque, we were instructed to sit
there for a while, and then we were separated into different
groups: the men, the single unmarried women's group, and the
women's group with children, the young children.
Q. You stated that you then came out of the mosque, and you were
led to traditional houses. Do you know whether women remained in
the mosque?
A. Men were taken out first, and the women's group were allowed
to remain -- or were ordered to remain in front of the mosque,
although some of them wanted to go with the men but they were
prohibited from going. And later on, I did not know where they
took those women to. They disappeared. As for men, we were then
tied up, under the house.
Q. Let us now talk about the time when you got in the traditional
houses on stilts. You said that there were many houses around
that particular location. My question is: how far was the nearest
house to the house in which you were held in custody?
A. The distance, or the gap, from one house to another was
between two metres to three metres or four metres. And you could
see through the cracks of the wall of people in the adjacent
house as rows of houses were built along the riverbank in Trea
village.
Q. If the houses were built in rows, would I be right in saying
that you could speak to people who were in houses to the left of
your house, or to the right of your house? In which case, you
were able to communicate with people in houses to your left or to
your right? That is, left or right of the house where you were
held?
A. Yes, that is correct. We were not allowed to speak to one
another, even if among us within one house. We were warned by
soldiers not to speak to one another, let alone speaking to
others in the adjacent houses.
Q. Mr. It Sen, I'm putting this question to you because I
understood from your answer to the Prosecutors that you did say
that you knew that there were Cham in all the other houses,
because you were able to communicate with them. Should I
therefore understand from what you've just said that you were not
able to communicate with the people who were very close to you?
A. When we were walked by soldiers from the mosque, we could
speak to one another. And actually, I was asked where I was from,
and I said we came from Ampil village. And that conversation took
place in the house that I was detained. And after that, we were
prohibited from speaking to one another.
Q. So if I understand your answer correctly, it means that from
the time when you arrived in the house, you could no longer speak
to people in the other houses; is that correct? You were not able
to talk to them anymore?
A. Yes, that is correct. We could not communicate with one
another in the same house, nor to others in the adjacent houses.
Q. You also stated that, at the time of your flight, it was dark
and it was raining. And that is what made it possible for you to
flee without being noticed by the soldiers. Did I properly
understand your testimony?
A. Yes, that is correct. At that time, it was dark and it was
raining. And that was a chance for me to slip through, and to
slip away.
Q. And if I understood your testimony correctly, you also
explained that since it was dark and raining, when you arrived
next to a pile of clothes, you did not see the clothes, but you
kind of felt that they were there; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. I felt the clothes -- that is, after I
crawled from the house. And actually, I felt and touched my water
container amongst the piles of the clothes. So once I touched the
water container, I realized that it was a pile of clothes.
Q. I ask for this clarification because in Ysa Osman's work,
document E3/9334, this is what you stated. Let me give the ERNs:
in French, 00274725; in English, 00204443; ERN in Khmer,
00204438. And I quote:
"At midnight, having noticed that the Khmer Rouge were resting,
or to drink, I came out and I saw a big pile of clothes. I got
across those clothes. I later arrived on the riverbank, and then
I saw a pile of clothes belonging to my family. And it was my
wife who had been in charge of those clothes when we left. And I
therefore understood that my wife and child were dead. And I also
saw a canteen next to that. It was also mine. I took it, and
walked into the river with it." The French translation is very
bad. "And I floated along with the current, clutching that
canteen." End of quote.[Free translation]
My question to you is as follows: is it correct that what
happened was that you caught a glimpse of a pile of clothes, and
then you swam to flee. And you finally stated that you didn't see
your wife and child, who were dead. And all this has nothing to
do with the extract I've just read out to you.
A. I was sure about that.
Q. Let me put the question to you again, because I think there
was a misunderstanding. So, I read out to you an excerpt in which
you -- it is indicated that you recognized the clothes from your
family. But here before the Chamber, you said that you had not
seen the clothes. So can you tell me which is the true story?
A. I touched the clothes and water container. I did not know
whose clothes was it. However, I recognized that the container
belonged to me, because there was a string tied to that
container. And there were clothes at the place where I crawled
to.
MS. GUISSE:
Mr. President, I am done with this line of questioning, so it
might be a good time to break for lunch.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. It is now lunch break. The Chamber will take a break
from now until 1.30, to resume our hearing.
Court officer, please find a proper room for this witness during
the lunch break, and please invite him back into the courtroom
before the Chamber, at 1.30.
Security personnel are instructed to bring Mr. Khieu Samphan back
to the holding cell downstairs, and please have him returned into
the courtroom before 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1133H to 1332H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is back in session and the floor is now given to the
defence team for Mr. Khieu Samphan to resume her line of
questioning. You may now proceed.
BY MS. GUISSÉ:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good afternoon, Mr. It Sen. I still
have a few questions to put to you before I give the floor to my
colleague, Kong Sam Onn.
Q. During your interview with the investigators of the OCIJ in
July 2008, is it true that Mr. Ysa Osman was also present?
MR. IT SEN:
A. Yes, he was there at my house.
Q. Is it true also that you had met him before this interview?
A. Yes, that is true. I met him once already before that time.
Q. And do you remember the date when you met him?
A. I cannot recall the date. I met him -- I spent one whole day
from the morning until the evening talking to him.
Q. And if I tell you the date or if I speak about March 2001,
does that somehow refresh your memory?
A. Yes, I agree to what you said.
Q. You said that you had spent the entire day with him. Did he
contact you again after this meeting in 2001 to cross-check the
account that you had given to him?
A. I told him what I know.
Q. Between the first meeting and the moment when you saw him with
the investigators of the OCIJ, did you see him again?
A. No, it was the only one time that I met him; once at Ampil
village and another one at Ampeak.
Q. A last point of clarification now. Regarding the people who
had responsibilities between '75 and '79 in your district, do you
know a surname Ban Siek alias Ho?
A. No, I do not know this person.
Q. And my last series of questions now. Do you know a Cham by the
name of No Satas?
A. No. No Satas, I do not know this person either. Perhaps we are
not living in the same village.
Q. Do you know a person by the name of Ahmad Sofiyah?
A. No, I do not know either, Ahmad Sofiyah.
Q. And finally, do you know a surname Yusuf Romly alias Ly?
A. I do not know the individual you are referring to, Romly or
Ly.
MS. GUISSÉ:
Thank you for these answers. And I will now give the floor to my
colleague Kong Sam Onn.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. Loek, Mr. Sen, I have a few questions in relation to the holy
text of Koran. Do you hold any position in relation to your
religion?
MR. IT SEN:
A. No, I have no position. But I was tasked with taking care of
the mosque.
Q. Thank you. This morning in relation to your statement --
rather, my apology. Yesterday, at around 16.03.43, you were asked
by Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties in relation to the killing of
a woman, and the woman was tied to a plank and her neck was cut,
and the body was thrown into the pit. Your answer at that time --
you stated that "I have never heard -- I did not witness the
incident but I heard people say that she was beaten and thrown
into the pit. That is why I said I do not know about this
incident." I want you to clarify what you said yesterday. Did you
witness this incident or did you hear about the incident from
someone else?
A. I did not witness -- I did not see the pit, but I was told
that there was a pit close to the wall. It was a big pit. People
were taken to the pit and they were placed at the pit.
Q. Mr. Witness, I want to interrupt you. I would like you to
clarify a point in relation to a woman who was tied to a plank
and her neck was cut. You were asked by Lead Co-Lawyer for civil
parties yesterday, so I need your clarification whether you
witnessed this incident or you only heard from someone about the
incident.
A. I did not witness that incident by myself.
Q. Thank you. Who told you? Where did you hear this incident
from?
A. Those who were with me during the time that we were detained.
I did not know whether that was the actual incident taking place
during that time.
Q. Do you know that individual's name?
A. No, I do not know. Some of them had been taken away and
killed.
Q. Thank you. I would like to ask you about the events at Trea
village. You made mention that you were arrested and placed in a
house near the river. And you also stated that the distance from
the house where you were detained to the river bank was about 50
metres away. Could you once again tell the size of the house that
you were detained and what did that house look like?
A. It was a traditional house, a stilt house. And it was 11
metres long and 6 metres wide.
Q. Thank you. How about windows, how many windows?
A. Two windows at each side. And there were doors in the front
and at the back. And doors and windows were locked at that time
when I was detained inside.
Q. So now, from my understanding, there were windows on each side
and there were two doors as well. So now concerning the windows,
so there were four windows on -- two windows on one side and
another two windows on another side; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Thank you. A while ago, you stated that there was one door in
the front and another one at the back. Besides the windows and
the doors, were there any windows and doors on other side of the
room?
A. No. My apology; there was only one door in the front; no back
door. The door was in the front.
Q. Thank you. You have stated that doors and windows were locked
completely. What about the walls, what was the wall made of?
A. The wall -- they were made out of plank and there were cracks
in between the planks. And there were cracks and holes that we
could see what happened inside the house.
Q. Thank you. Could you tell the Court the size of the cracks
that you could look through it?
A. It was about the size between my two fingers and I could see
the outside through the cracks.
Q. You showed to all of us that the size of the cracks were the
-- of the size between my two fingers. Could you give an estimate
how large was the cracks?
A. It was the size as the microphone.
Q. For proper record, so how large was it -- could you specify it
in centimetres? Was it the size of one finger?
A. I could not get your question. What do you want to know from
me?
Q. You raised your finger and showed to us the size of the
cracks. So now could you tell the Court whether the cracks were
the size of which finger on your hands?
A. So it was the size as the -- the space between my two fingers.
Q. Now, if compare to your thumb, was the -- were the cracks of
your thumb size?
A. The cracks were smaller compared to my fingers or thumbs.
Q. Thank you. You stated that the distance from the house to the
river bank was about 50 metres, were there any trees in front of
the house?
A. There was a large tree near the wall of the house. And there
were bamboo trees as well -- there were bamboo trees close to the
house. And near the river bank, there was a pier that the boat
stopped.
Q. What about vegetables, were there any vegetables or fruit
trees?
A. No. There were only bamboo trees along the river bank and
close to the house.
Q. And how large were the bamboo trees?
A. The bamboo were rather large; it's about -- some of them were
about three metres long.
Q. Thank you. Could you tell the Court where were you sitting in
the house? You made mention yesterday that you were standing in
the rear that made you be able to untie the rope and made an
escape. Did you sit or stand in one particular place, or were you
able to move around in the house?
A. It was about 7.30 or 8 p.m. that night when the military or
soldiers came into the house. I was at the back behind others.
The soldiers were tightening the ropes. And some soldiers were
relieving themselves near the house. And during that time, I was
able to untie the rope and slid open the planks so that I could
flee. So those who were in front of me could not see what I was
doing at that time.
Q. Mr. Witness, during the day of -- during the daytime, where
were you sitting?
A. We were sitting close to one another in the house, and our
hands were tied to a rope.
Q. You stated that there were many of you inside the house. Does
it mean you were sitting in the front -- inside the house in the
front, near the door or at the back? So where were you at that
time?
A. I was sitting on another side -- rather, at the back of the
house. I was sitting close to the wall on the left side.
Q. Thank you. You stated that you could see the boats -- the boat
towing the prisoners who were tied to the rope or strings. So
where were you at that time that you could be able to see the
boat?
A. I was inside that house and with my hands tied to the rope.
Q. I want to know the position where you were sitting in the
house. So could you tell the Court about the position, the exact
position where you were sitting in the house?
A. I was sitting close to the wall and I told others to look
through the cracks, and we could see the boat through the cracks
of the walls. All of us inside the house could see the boat.
Q. Did you see the boat clearly? You have just told the Court
that there were bamboo trees close to the house.
A. The bamboo trees did not block our view. And the bamboo trees
were 70 metres away from the pier. So the bamboo trees did not
block the views. The bamboo trees were to the west of the house.
Q. You stated that you could see the boat towing people the whole
day, entire day, and that you have stated that you were sitting
at the back of the house. So could you tell the Court again the
position where you were sitting in the house?
A. I was sitting close to the wall. I could see the whole
incident when the people were tied -- their hands were tied to
the string attached to the stand of the boat. Those people -- 30
of them -- were tied to a rope. I could see it clearly.
Q. Thank you. Now I want to know about the time when you were
able to flee the house. And you stated that it was raining while
you were fleeing. Could you tell the Court when it was when you
fled the house, what month was it?
A. I cannot recall the month exactly. It was raining during -- on
that day. I cannot tell you the exact month when I was able to
flee.
Q. What about the river, the water in the river -- the situation
of the water in the river. You stated that you had a water
container and you filled the water in that container. So can you
tell about the situation of the water during the time?
A. If I stood on the bank, I could see the river below the bank.
And from the house, I could see the boat. And the water was not
high in that season.
Q. During that time, was it a rainy season or a dry season?
A. During that time, the water was receding.
Q. What about the water flow, did the water in the river flow
very fast?
A. Yes, the water did flow very fast in front of Trea or
(inaudible) villages.
Q. So how long did you -- how many kilometres or metres did you
swim during that time when you went into the river?
A. I cannot remember how many kilometres that I had to swim.
However, when I left or when I started swimming, it was around
12.30 midnight. And I arrived at the side of the embankment at
around 4 o'clock in the morning. So I cannot estimate how many
kilometres that I had swum.
Q. Did you actually swim across the river or did you swim along
the river before you reached the embankment on the other side?
A. I was actually swimming in the middle of the river. There was
an island in the middle of the river near the Trea village.
Q. What was the distance from the middle of the river to the
embankment?
A. I can only provide you an estimate. It was pretty far, it
could be four to five kilometres long. However, this is a very
rough estimate.
Q. I'd like to put a question to you in relation to the event
that took place at Kaoh Phal. This morning at around 09.47, you
testified about the preparation by soldiers for the attack at
Kaoh Phal, and later on, a fight broke out. Could you tell the
Court how long or how many days did the soldiers prepare
themselves in the advancement of the fight?
A. I do not know for sure as for how long. My elder sibling told
me that soldiers -- many soldiers arrived at Kaoh Phal by boat.
However, I did not know how many days they had spent.
Q. Can you confirm whether you learnt of the event at Kaoh Phal
via your elder brother?
A. Yes. In fact, I learned it of my elder in-law. Since at that
time, I was living in Ampil and my elder in-law fled to my
village.
Q. So am I correct to say that you never witnessed what took
place in Kaoh Phal?
A. Yes, that is correct. I did not witness it personally.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. Witness. And Mr. President, I am done. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The hearing of the testimony of Mr. It Sen is now
concluded. And Mr. It Sen, the Chamber is grateful of your
testimony as a witness for the last two days. Your testimony may
contribute to ascertaining the truth in this case. You may now be
excused and return to wherever you wish to go to, and the Chamber
wishes you all the best.
Court officer, please in collaboration with WESU, make necessary
transportation arrangement for the witness to return to and usher
the civil party, namely, 2-TCCP-244 into the courtroom.
(Civil party 2-TCCP-244 enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Civil Party. What is your name?
MR. SOS MIN:
My name is Sos Ponyamin.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Sos Ponyamin. And when were you born?
A. I was born in 1954.
Q. Thank you. And where were you born?
A. I was born in Village 5, Svay Khleang commune, Krouch Chhmar
district, Kampong Cham province.
Q. Where is your current address?
A. I still live in the same native village. However, now it is in
Tboung Khmum province, rather than Kampong Cham.
Q. And what is your current occupation?
A. I am a rice farmer.
Q. What are the names of your father and mother?
A. My father is Sos Man and my mother is Ya Fatima (phonetic).
Q. Thank you. And what is your wife's name? And how many children
do you have together?
A. My wife's name is Hak Fatima (phonetic) and we have seven
children.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And Mr. Sos Ponyamin, at the conclusion of your
testimony as a civil party, you will be given an opportunity to
make an impact statement of suffering that were inflicted upon
you during the Democratic Kampuchea regime, if you wish to do so.
And that's pursuant to Rule 91bis of the ECCC Internal Rule.
The Chamber will hand the floor first to the Lead Co-Lawyer for
civil parties to put question to this witness, Sos Ponyamin. And
the combined time for both the Co-Prosecutors and the Lead
Co-Lawyers for civil parties are two sessions. You may proceed.
MR. PICH ANG:
Thank you, Mr. President. And good afternoon, Your Honours. I'd
like to assign Lor Chunthy, a civil party lawyer to put questions
to the civil party and then my colleague, Marie Guiraud, will
continue putting questions further.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. LOR CHUNTHY:
Good afternoon, Your Honours. Good afternoon, everyone in and
around the courtroom. My name is Lor Chunthy. I am a lawyer for
civil parties, and I actually came from the Legal Aid of
Cambodia. And good afternoon, Mr. Ponyamin. I'd like to put some
questions to you in relation to the experience you went through
during the Democratic Kampuchea regime from 17 April 1975 to 6
January 1979.
Q. My first question is the following. Where were you after the
17 April 1975? And were you ordered to leave your hometown?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. Allow me to respond to your question, Counsel. In fact, before
1975, I was still living in Svay Khleang village.
Q. And after 1975, were you still living in Svay Khleang village?
A. As I said, before 1975, I was living in Svay Khleang -- that
is, in my home village. And after 1975, I was evacuated to Dambae
district in Kampong Cham province.
Q. And before that, that is while you were still living in your
home village, what did the Khmer Rouge do to you and to other
Cham people there?
A. While I was living in Svay Khlaeng village -- and I had lived
there since I was born -- allow me to put it in a timeline. Under
their initial control, their policy was so good. They made a
propaganda for us to join their action in order to liberate the
country; they respected our religion, and that happened before
1975. However, everything changed after April 1975 -- that is,
after the liberation of Phnom Penh.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence Counsel, you may proceed.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, thank you. I'd like to put a -- I'd like to submit
a question to you, to instruct the civil party in order to use a
proper language, not to use any inappropriate language. For
example, the word "vea" in Khmer refers to an animal or to an
object and not a human being. And here, before this Court, we
have an Accused who is charged to be a leader of the Democratic
Kampuchea regime. For that reason, it seems to be a contempted
(sic) word when the civil party used the word "vea" toward the
regime.
MR. LOR CHUNTHY:
I'd like to respond, Mr. President. The way Mr. Ponyamin says it
is very dialect. It's a kind of slang used by him.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And Counsel, if you know the way your client speaks or says, then
please make your question short and instruct him to respond
precisely to the point, otherwise it will be a waste of time.
And Mr. Civil Party -- Mr. Ponyamin, please adhere to proper
language. Here you are present in the court of law and you should
not use any inappropriate words that might have an impact or
might affect other individuals. Please, show your respect in this
courtroom. Thank you.
BY MR. LOR CHUNTHY:
Thank you. And Mr. Civil Party, the Chamber has just instructed
you to please use appropriate language with respect.
Q. Before the interruption, you spoke about what happened in your
village. Can you please tell the Court what happened during those
first few months in your village?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. In 1975, the regime started to impose a restriction on our
religion, forced us to eat pork, and they did not allow us to
fast. The restriction was imposed also on the food ration
compounded by hard manual labour. And that made us very difficult
to survive.
Q. You just spoke about the restrictions imposed by the Khmer
Rouge. Was the restriction also applied to the language or only
to your religious practice?
A. Allow me to clarify it. The restriction was for us problematic
since we were not allowed to speak the Cham language. And the
restrictions applied almost to every aspects of life: on food, on
clothing, and women -- Cham women were forced to cut their hair
short. So the way of our living was extremely difficult.
Q. So you said they imposed restrictions on your community. And
now in terms of food, were you forced to eat food that you should
not?
A. We were forced to eat the food that we could not eat. And if
we did not eat, we would be accused of not giving up to our
religious practice. And that would be subject to be monitored. If
we opposed any of the principles they imposed, then we would be
accused of being an enemy of Angkar.
Q. Were there clear instructions as how you should act or should
perform?
A. Please be more specific in your question.
Q. Thank you. What I mean is that, were there meetings held in
your village, for instance, where instructions were told, where
restrictions were informed, for instance?
A. They had their principles and instructions. And whenever they
wanted to impose those instructions, we would be called to the
meetings so that those instructions would be relayed, and
subsequently imposed. Usually, the cooperative chief or the
commune chief would present such impositions.
Q. Please direct your response to the Bench when you answer my
questions. So when such meetings were held where instructions or
restrictions were announced, what would happen to anyone who
violated those regulations or restrictions?
A. Allow me to inform the Chamber that as I just said, if anyone
violated the principle, the person would be accused of being
enemy. For that reason, people were tied up and arrested almost
every night. I can say that out of the 30 days in a month, 20
days where people were arrested and tied. So it is my
understanding that those people who were arrested were accused of
violating their regulations or restrictions. And usually, they
came to arrest those people at night-time and put them on a horse
cart and took them away.
Q. Mr. Civil Party, please try to avoid and try to refrain from
using the word "vea". You should refer to a particular person,
for example, a commune chief or village chief. Thank you.
So you said people were arrested. And who made those arrests? And
where were those arrested sent to?
A. I am sorry, Mr. President. I try my best not to use the word
"vea", but it's very difficult for me to make a change suddenly
as I have used the word throughout my life. I know he is being --
he is under protection by law, but we also have to remember that
he killed the people during the Democratic Kampuchea regime at
his own discretion.
Q. Mr. Civil Party, please respond to my question.
A. I apologize, Mr. President. I never been in a courtroom
before, so please mind my words.
And Mr. Counsel, please repeat your question. I am lost.
Q. You just stated that people were arrested, and my question to
you was the following: Who actually arrested those people and
where were they sent to?
A. I did not know where those soldiers -- who those soldiers were
when they arrested people. I did not know whether they were
security force from the commune or from the district. They
actually arrested those people and they were detained at the
security centre of the district. But I cannot make a conclusion
that they were killed. However, I never saw them again. And if
they were to survive, they would be more than 100 years old by
now. So it is common sense that they died. But legally speaking,
I cannot say that they were taken away and killed because I did
not witness it.
Q. Can you please tell the Court what kinds of people were
arrested or what mistakes did they make that led to them being
arrested?
A. I cannot tell the Chamber what mistakes those people made. And
importantly, we could not say whether they made a mistake or not.
If they wanted to arrest someone, they would do so. And those
people to me, I could not say they make a mistake. Some of them
never even knew Phnom Penh or they could not even count form one
to 10, but instead they were accused of being a military colonel.
Q. So you just stated those people were arrested and sent to be
detained at a district, and which district are you referring to?
A. They were sent to the detention centre of Krouch Chhmar
district.
Q. So that's what happened in your village -- that is, people
were arrested. And can you tell the Court whether later on you
joined forces to involve in a revolt?
A. At that stage, in fact, we gathered around and there were
about seven of us. Due to the extremely difficult living
condition and we were thinking that if we did not revolt and we
did not do anything, then our days would come, that's when we
would be taken away and killed. For that reason, we gathered up
amongst the seven of us and we organized a revolt -- that is the
plan. We knew that we would be killed anyway because we did not
have any weapons to attack them, and that we would be shot dead.
But we did not have any choice except opting for a revolt. And
that's what we did.
Q. Within your group, who actually initiated the gathering of the
forces to involve in the revolt?
A. I was -- and Rotanak (phonetic) and Srei Tam (phonetic) were
spearheading the gathering of the group. And we gathered up to
seven people, including us. And before our plan was broke out and
actually, I learnt that that night, 80 people would be arrested.
As we knew that they -- throughout the day we knew those people
were being asked whether they knew about the Holy Koran. And at
night time, there was a plan for their arrest.
Q. And how did you come to know about the arrest of the 80
people? Who were those 80 people? To me, it's unclear from what
you just said.
A. Allow me to expand it a little bit because this event took
place many, many years ago. And I try to piece together the
information. That day was the last day of the Ramadan period, the
Raja day. We were not allowed to celebrate anything, any of our
holy day. But it was rather strange, that day -- that is, on the
Raja day, we were allowed to celebrate our holy day. And those
people did not know at all that they were being monitored. So we
celebrated the Raja day that day. And at night time, my younger
sibling worked for the commune youth, and then a meeting was
held, and said that there was a plan to arrest the 80 infiltrated
enemies that night. And that's how I learnt about the arrest.
Q. You stated that they allowed all of you to celebrate the Raja
or Ramadan on that day. How did they know that you, all of you
wanted to revolt?
A. From my understanding, I believe that I would not achieve what
I wanted. But in my mind, if I did not do it or revolt, I would
be killed. And at the time, during the time of the revolt, we
were able to collect the name list of 80 people to be arrested
and burn it. So they did not know who should be arrested. I,
during the time, went to collect a name list and burnt it. My
relative or cousin Mat (phonetic) was also in the list. Tess
(phonetic) and Hin (phonetic) had been arrested by them at that
time. And because of the arrest, the revolt took place.
Q. Thank you. Regarding the incident, when did it happen, what
year was it, what month was it? Did the fighting happen at that
time?
A. It happened in the night of 10 October 1975.
Q. Where did the fighting start first? And how did it happen?
A. The revolt took place in the night of 10 October 1975 during
which I was guarding my uncle Ya Sleh (phonetic), Ya Ysa
(phonetic), and Ya Mah (phonetic). I knew during that night that
my three uncles would be arrested. Ya Sleh (phonetic) and Ya Ysa
(phonetic), and Ya Mah (phonetic) were siblings. And they were
accused of being linked to Lon Nol period. My uncles actually did
not know even Phnom Penh during that time. I was guarding my
uncles during that night. Nothing happened. I invited my seven
friends and discussed with them that if we kept silent, we would
die the day after because they had the name list. And I initiate
and suggested that the revolt should start. And I had a
discussion with my seven friends how to start the revolt. During
the discussion, I told my seven friends to guard my uncles, and I
was the one who went to collect the drum. The mosque was closed
down and the drum was placed in that mosque. It was around 9.00
or 10.00 that I went to collect the drum from Siek (phonetic).
Villagers, people, Cham people in other places also went to
collect drums because drums were used to signal each other in our
Cham tradition. During that night, I decided that I had to start
the revolt and attack the Khmer Rouge. If I did not attack or
chop the Khmer Rouge, I would be killed afterwards.
My apology, I am now still using the word "vea" because I am not
used to use the proper word. My apology, Judges.
Q. When you all encountered the militiamen, there was fighting
and the revolt started at that time; is that correct?
A. At that time, I screamed to the one who was in charge of
making sound by using the drum to beat the drum. And everyone
came to help and the fire started from that night.
Q. Did the Khmer Rouge soldier come to surround all of you? When
was it -- what time was it that the Khmer Rouge came to surround
all of you?
A. Regarding the Khmer Rouge soldiers, I did not know at that
time where they were from. I don't know either what districts
they were from. There was a change of fire and there was fighting
erupting at that time. I did not know at that time whether the
soldiers belonged to the centre or belonged to any districts or
communes.
Q. After the encounter, did people die form that encounter?
A. During the fighting or revolt, many people -- many of us died.
I cannot tell you how many of us died. Some died in bushes close
by.
Q. Thank you. After the crackdown by the soldiers or militiamen,
what did the militiamen or soldiers do to villagers?
A. After we were surrounded, we were ordered to leave our
villages; children and everyone were ordered to leave the
villages. Men and women were separated from each other. We were
placed in hospitals and schools. Hospitals during that time were
quiet; no patients were allowed to be hospitalized. The men were
put in the place where the medicines were made. As for women,
they were placed in a pagoda under chrey (phonetic) tree.
Q. After you all were placed in various areas, were all of you
interrogated and tortured?
A. Torture did happen in those places. We were put in those
places for further selection. Forty of us were put in a school or
classroom. We were interrogated and the bayonets were pointed to
our necks and we were questioned who started the revolt. There
were many questions put to all of us, and I could not recall all
of them. The interrogation happened at night time. After a few
days of interrogations, three or 10 of us form different
classrooms were taken away. For instance, there was one room with
50 Cham people in that room and only a few remained, because some
others were taken away.
Q. You stated that those people had been taken away, where were
they taken to?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness, you have to observe the microphone
before you speak.
MR. SOS MIN:
A. I cannot tell you where they were sent to, but I can tell the
purpose of transfers because during the time that villagers were
taken away, hoes were with the soldiers. These people were taken
to the jungle and I did not know what the soldiers did to these
villagers.
BY MR. LOR CHUNTHY:
Q. Was food given to those who were locked in the classrooms?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. We were given a ladle of food per meal. And the meal was
cooked in a container. And when the meal became less, they took
the water from the river and filled in the container. I would
like to inform the Chamber that I myself ate also grass. During
the time that I had the permission to relieve myself, I would
fetch leaves, grass leaves or other leaves to fill my stomach.
And I had to eat those leaves secretly. I put those leaves in my
waistband. I ate all of those leaves during night time only to
eat up the gruel that we were allowed to eat.
Q. Concerning your close colleagues who joined the revolt with
you, were they also arrested by the Khmer Rouge at that time?
A. Sres Stam (phonetic) my close associate was arrested on the
second day, and Reap Van Mon (phonetic) survived the period. He
passed away two or three years ago.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Civil Party Lawyer. It is now time for break. The
Chamber will take a short break from now until 3 o'clock.
Court officer, please find a proper room for this civil party
during the break time and please invite him back into the witness
stand in the courtroom at 3 o'clock.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1450H to 1503H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is now back in session, and again, the floor is given
to the Lead Co-Lawyers for civil parties. And for this afternoon
we will grant the Lead Co-Lawyers and the Co-Prosecutors 10 more
minutes. So you will have until 4.00 -- 10 past 4.00.
You may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good afternoon to everyone. Good
afternoon, Mr. Civil Party. I will have a few follow-up questions
for you. And I would like us to start by revisiting a period
prior to 1975. And I will put questions to you on your village
and on the arrival of the Khmer Rouge in your village. My first
question is as follows:
Q. Does Village 5 is Svay Khleang (phonetic) where you were born,
a Cham village or a village composed of people of mixed
ethnicities.
MR. SOS MIN:
A. That village only had Cham people lived. Khmer people lived in
the next village but there were no Khmer living in Village 5.
Q. Thank you. Do you recall the period and the date on which the
Khmer Rouge arrived in Village 5?
A. No, I cannot recall it.
Q. Can you tell us whether that was long before 1975, since you
said it was an important date? And can you give us a rough idea?
Otherwise, would you like me to refresh your memory? Was it in
1972 or in 1973?
A. Please rephrase your question since I don't understand it.
Q. On what date did the Khmer Rouge arrive in your village? Was
that in 1972 or in 1973? Do you recall that?
A. I recall that it was in later 1973.
Q. Thank you. Was your village chief -- Were the village chiefs
replaced when the Khmer Rouge arrived?
A. Please repeat your question; I don't get it.
Q. I will try to speak slowly. When the Khmer Rouge arrived in
late 1973 in your village, was the village chief changed?
A. The village chief title was used only during the Khmer Rouge
regime and under the Lon Nol administration such title was not
used.
Q. During what period was the first village chief appointed by
the Khmer Rouge?
A. It was from the day that they entered our Village 5. They
organized their administrative structure in the village.
Q. Do you recall who was appointed village chief?
A. I recall that Kao was village chief at the time. And later on
Kao was taken away and killed.
Q. Was that person a Cham?
A. Kao was a Cham person.
Q. Do you know how many families were in Village 5 at the time?
A. Before 1975, there were 1,242 Cham families living in the
village.
Q. I will put the question to you again because the interpreters
did not translate the figure.
Mr. Civil Party, do you know the number of families that lived in
Village 5 when the Khmer Rouge arrived?
A. Before 1975, there were 1,242 families living in Village 5.
Q. How did you come by that information?
A. I learned of that information when I was asked to assist the
people who were preparing the statistics released, and I saw the
figure on the statistics.
Q. Do you recall on what date that census was carried out?
A. It occurred in 1974.
Q. So if I understand you correctly, that census was conducted
when the Khmer Rouge were already in the village? Did I
understand correctly?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Thank you. A while ago in answer to a question put to you by
my colleague, you stated that the 17 of April marked a turning
point in the manner in which the Khmer Rouge treated the Cham in
Village 5. I will put a question to you regarding what happened
before the 17 of April 1975 in order for us to know how the Khmer
Rouge treated people in your village. Can you tell the Chamber
whether specific measures were taken against the Cham in Village
5 before April 1975?
A. In fact, I stated about this already during my testimony and
it's better for me not to repeat it. I actually told Lor Chunthy
about the living condition of the Cham people prior to 1975.
Q. Was there a mosque in your village or were there one or
several mosques in your village?
A. Before 1975, there were two mosques in our Svay Khleang
commune since there were many Cham people, so two mosques were
built to accommodate the congregations.
Q. Were those mosques closed subsequently?
A. After the liberation the Khmer Rouge dismantled the mosques.
Q. Thank you. I will now put a few very short follow-up questions
to you regarding the October 1975 revolt. You told my colleague,
Lor Chunthy, that there were seven of you at the head of that
movement. Can you tell us the names of those persons? And can you
also tell us whether those persons played different roles in the
revolt?
A. The other four individuals did not have any role; they were
very civilians and they were young. They -- their age was about
17 to 18 years old.
Q. So, do I take it then that there was a group of three people
of whom -- of which you were a member and another group of four
persons? If I properly understood your testimony?
A. No, that is not correct. I already testified the three of us
were the initiators. However, in total there were seven of us in
that group. So there was actually one group and not two separate
groups.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Civil Party. And I crave your indulgence for
putting repetitive questions to you, but unfortunately we have
not received all the information in the interpretation we
received. That is why I am asking you all these questions again.
I simply did not understand all that you said.
I would like to ask you now what happened to you after your
arrest. You told my colleague, Lor Chunthy, that you were
detained in a school with other persons who had participated in
that rebellion. For how many days were you held in that school?
A. I and other Cham people in Svay Khleang commune were detained
for a period of 29 days.
Q. You told my colleague, Lor Chunthy, about interrogations you
were subjected to at the school. Do you remember the questions
that were put to you and the manner in which such interrogations
were carried out?
A. I can recall part of it -- that is, the way they treated me.
However, as for the questions, I cannot recall them. It happened
almost 40 years ago. I am aging so I cannot recall them.
Q. Do you recall the number of persons who questioned you at the
time?
A. No, I cannot.
Q. Can you explain to the Chamber where you went after the period
of your detention?
A. After I survived detention I was allowed to reunite with my
family. However all the residents of the village were not allowed
to enter the village again; we were evacuated to live elsewhere,
including in Dambae, but not to return to our native village.
Q. How were you evacuated to Dambae?
A. We were put on a boat and we had to row the boat ourself. And
for example, out of the 50 boats we had to row in a straight
line. If a boat has to go left or right that boat would be shot
at.
Q. For how long did that trip on the boat last?
A. The boat trip was throughout the whole night. In fact, we left
at 6 o'clock in the evening and we arrived at the destination at
12.00 noon the next day.
Q. You are talking of 50 boats. Do you recall approximately how
many people were on each of the boats?
A. From my estimate, the boat length was between seven to 10
metres. So it could accommodate 20, 30 people. And for the larger
boat it could accommodate up to 50 people.
Q. To the best of your recollection, the people on-board those
boats, to repeat what my colleague is whispering to me, were
those people Cham or Khmer as well.
A. All people on the boats were Cham people. There were no Khmer.
Q. Can you describe to us the trip, the conditions of that trip
and what was the weather like? Was it a very difficult crossing?
If yes, what do you remember about it?
A. During the boat trip, it was raining all night unfortunately.
And, some young children and the new-born, some of them died. We
were not allowed to rest at all during the boat trip. We were so
exhausted and starving but we had to row the boat. And actually,
when we arrived ashore, we had to walk all day before we could
reach the village of destination without any food.
Q. A while ago, you said that you had to row and if you stopped
rowing you were shot at. Were you monitored or accompanied during
that boat crossing?
A. We did not travel just by our group. We were being watched
over and there were soldiers on about 10 boats who actually
escorted us while we were on the boat trip and we had to comply
with their instructions. They escorted us until we reached the
village.
Q. A while ago, you talked about children and new-born children
who died because of the bad weather. Is that something you
witnessed with your own eyes, for instance, in your own canoe?
A. What I say is true. And of course, what I said was what I saw
on my boat. I cannot tell you about what happened on other boats,
but I could only speak about what happened on the boat that I was
on
Q. It is very clear, Mr Civil Party.
Which members of your family accompanied you on that boat trip?
A. Of course, there were other families traveling on that boat
because the boat has to be full with people before it could
depart.
Q. How about you yourself? Which members of your family crossed
with you and arrived in Dambae?
A. My relatives who were on the boat included my mother; and Man
Sen, that is my elder sibling; and Man So -- Man Hap So
(phonetic), that is my elder sister; myself; and my younger
sister Man Om Na (phonetic); and another younger sibling Man Sata
(phonetic); and Koh Ly Joh (phonetic), my cousin.
Q. Thank you. When you arrived at your destination after walking
as you said a while ago, can you explain to the Chamber what
happened to you? For instance, where were you housed? I will
start with that. Where were you housed when you arrived at
Dambae?
A. When we arrived in Dambae, we were allowed to stay at Svay
Kambet -- Svay Dambet (phonetic). That's Svay Bet (phonetic) in
Dambae, and we were instructed to live -- to mix with the Khmer
people.
Q. Did you have any kind of special status back then when the
Khmer -- did the Khmer Rouge tell you anything about your special
status?
A. I did not have any role; I was a -- just simply a son of a
peasant family and the Khmer Rouge did not pay any attention to
me, as I was a young youth at the time. And I did not involve in
any work for the Khmer Rouge.
Q. Back then, did you ever hear the expressions "New People" and
"Base People"?
A. Of course, I heard it and I lived there. We, the Cham people,
were considered New People and the people who were living there
were considered the Base People or the Old People. But for the
evacuees from my area or from Phnom Penh, we were considered New
People. So we were in the same status as those New People who
were evacuated from Phnom Penh and we did not have any right.
Q. Do you remember for how long you remained in Dambae?
A. I remember that I lived there for more than two years. And, in
fact, I involved in three evacuations to Suong and to another
area so I cannot give you any precision on the movements in the
areas that I was evacuated to.
Q. Thank you. When you were in Dambae, were you allowed to
practice your religion?
A. No, it was forbidden. Everything to deal with the religion was
forbidden. We were not even allowed to speak the Cham language.
And young children did not understand when we spoke the Khmer
language.
Q. Can you describe to the Chamber the living and working and
eating conditions when you were in Dambae?
A. Under the Khmer Rouge, the food condition was the same across
the country, to my understanding. And the food that we had was
gruel. No cooked rice was given.
As for the manual labour, we had to do it day and night.
Q. When you were in Dambae, did you ever witness any executions?
A. No, I did not. However, I saw dead bodies when I walked. But I
did not witness the execution myself.
Q. Did you ever witness any arrests back then?
A. Are you asking me when I was at Dambae or at Village 5 or you
mean throughout the Khmer Rouge regime?
Q. When you were in Dambae. The two years you spent in Dambae.
A. Yes, I witnessed the arrests.
Q. Can you describe what you saw or what you remember regarding
these arrests?
A. Not Cham people were arrested. Khmer people were arrested
during that time. Khmer Rouge from the Centre came to my village
and the Eastern Zone cadres were accused of having Khmer body,
Vietnamese head. So, at that time I saw Khmer people were
arrested and put onto trucks.
Q. Thank you. Did you lose any members of your family? Did anyone
in your family die when you were in Dambae?
A. I lost one younger sibling because of her illness. She
contracted malaria in the jungle. She died from malaria. In
relation to my relatives, I lost seven -- I lost my relatives,
seven families.
Q. I am going to put to you a last question, Mr. Civil Party, in
order to give time to the Co-Prosecutors to put question to you
as well. You said to us earlier spontaneously that after Dambae
you were transferred to Suong. And, if I am not mistaken then you
were transferred to Kampong Thom. So when did you go back to your
home village? And can you describe what you saw when you returned
to your home village?
A. After I had returned from Kampong Thom, at the time I spent
one month on foot travelling from Kampong Thom and also I was on
cart. I did not recall when I left Kampong Thom but I could say
that it was after 1979 liberation. If I happened to return from
Kampong Thom during the Khmer Rouge time I would have been
killed. Khmer people had lived already in the village in my
hometown when I arrived. Khmer people were kind and they allowed
all of us to go and live in our houses. Some Khmer people felt
sympathy on Cham people at that time. Upon my arrival in my
hometown, Khmer people left our houses and we were given back our
houses. Some of Khmer people even gave rice to us to eat.
Q. Did you know back then how many Cham families were left in
Village 5 or Svay Khleang?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Civil Party, please observe the microphone before you speak.
MR. SOS MIN:
A. Later on I learnt very well that only 170 families remained in
Svay Khleang village. Among 1,242 families, only 170 families in
that Svay Khleang village and some families came to live in Svay
Khleang and the number of families reached 190.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. Civil Party, for your patience and for having
answered my questions. I am through with my questions, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. I now hand over the floor to the Co-Prosecutor team.
You may now proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours. Good afternoon everyone
in and around the courtroom. Good afternoon Mr. Witness. I am
Seng Leang, I am the National Deputy Co-Prosecutor. I think we
still have only 30 minutes more which I have to share with my
esteemed colleague from the International side so I will put very
short questions to you, I have only a few.
Q. First I would like to ask you about the detention of Cham
people after the revolt in Svay Khleang. How many people were
detained at the time after the revolt?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Civil Party; you may now proceed, Counsel
Kong Sam Onn.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. I have an observation in relation to
geography. I heard civil party mentioned about Svay Khleang
village and civil party also made mention about Village 5. It is
confusing to me. So I would like the Co-Prosecutors to clarify
with the civil party whether Svay Khleang was a commune or
village.
BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Mr. President, I would like to respond to the observation. I
heard civil party's mention of Village 5. Village 5 is the
current name referred to by the villagers. In the past, Village 5
was known as Svay Khleang village.
Q. Is it correct, Mr. Witness, what I said?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You can move on, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.
BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Q. Mr. Civil Party, how many of you were detained by Khmer Rouge
at the time?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. To better understand what I said, at the time I did not know
how many people were detained by Khmer Rouge. What I can say is
that the detention took place after Khmer Rouge surrounded all of
us and we were placed in different places and all of us were
transferred to live in different district, communes, at the time.
Q. You stated that prior to 1975 there were Cham people living in
Svay Khleang village and the number reached 1,242 families. You
state that Cham people were detained by Khmer Rouge after Cham
people were selected and gathered up. So after detention, how
many Cham people remained?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold, Mr. Civil Party on; you have the floor now, Mr.
Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. In this particular circumstance I have
an objection against the use of the word "Khmer Rouge". It's not
very helpful when we speak about arrests, etc., at this time, to
only speak about Khmer Rouge, it could be the district forces, it
could be Sector 21 forces, East Zone forces, so I think
Prosecution should be very specific now and not only speak about
the Khmer Rouge.
MR. SENG LEANG:
I do not really understand why the Khmer Rouge word cannot be
used here because before 1975 that area was under control of
Khmer Rouge troops already and the troops which were sent to
crack down the revolt belonged to the Khmer Rouge, so why am I
not allowed to use the term "Khmer Rouge"?
MR. PRESIDENT:
We have a clear guideline that there should be no two objections
from -- there should be no second objection from the Party, from
another Party, so please be clear on this matter.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber does not prohibit completely the word "Khmer Rouge"
to be used before the Chamber. However, I instruct the Deputy
Co-Prosecutor to use specific term when you want to refer to any
specific force because Khmer Rouge is a generic term and if you
use the term liberated soldier or front, it has its meaning. So
please use specific term. There are terms combatants, militiamen
in the district level, so please make sure you refer to specific
force when you want to refer to.
BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Who detained all of you, were they combatant or militiamen?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. I cannot tell you whether soldiers were from the district
level or provincial level. I think when I referred to Khmer Rouge
soldiers I mean it is a general term that I can use. I do not
know where those soldiers were from; I could not recognise their
origin. So it is very difficult for me to specify for you which
district or level those soldiers belong to.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, you can use the term, the general term because you
are an ordinary citizen but the problem here is the Parties. I am
referring and instructing the Parties before all of us because
all Parties have been here for many years and they may have been
aware of the specific terms to be used.
BY MR. SENG LEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Civil Party, let me rephrase my question. After you had
been detained following that revolt, after all of you were
screened, so how many of you remained at the time?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. I could not have the full grasp of the information. I cannot
tell you how many families remained after further transferred. I
can tell you that they were further transfers to Kampong Thom and
other places. Later on cadres from the Centre came into my
village and people started to disappear one after another. Some
of them were put on to a boat and some disappeared and I do not
know whether they were killed or not. As I told you, after 1979,
only 170 families remained in my village and 25 other families
came to live in the village so the number reached around 190
families.
Q. Because of time I will ask you another question. It should be
my last question. During the time that you were living in Svay
Khleang, did you ever attend the wedding held by Khmer Rouge
according to Cham religion?
A. I was living Svay Kambet for a period of two months. No
marriage took place in that village.
Q. When did you get married?
A. I got married in late 1978 or early 1979 during Pol Pot time.
I did not get married at Svay Kambet village; I in fact got
married at Ta Kduoch Suong (phonetic).
MR. SENG LEANG:
I am done with my questioning, Mr. President; I would like to
hand over the floor to my esteemed international colleague.
QUESTIONING BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Civil Party. I want to ask you a few
questions about the religious leaders, the Cham leaders in Svay
Khleang and what happened to them. First of all, are you
presently the Hakim of Svay Khleang?
MR. SOS MIN:
A. I understand your question. Are you referring to the previous
period or the current time?
Q. I was asking whether you are today the Hakim of your village.
A. Currently, I am a Hakim and also I am in charge of the
district.
Q. And did your village have Hakim before the Khmer Rouge arrived
and could you tell us what happened to the Hakims after the Khmer
Rouge came to the area?
A. In every regime, there are Hakims and religious leaders within
our community. Before the Khmer Rouge time there were also
Hakims, however I could say that Hakims before Pol Pot time had
already been arrested and they were the first target of the Khmer
Rouge.
Q. Do you remember when it was that the Hakims were arrested by
the Khmer Rouge?
A. Hakims and Tuon religious leaders or teachers in Islamic
religion were arrested in 1974.
Q. Thank you. The next question I want to follow up on is: do you
know what happened to the Korans in Svay Khleang village after
you were no longer allowed to practice your religion?
A. Regarding Korans, we were prohibited from worship and prayers.
Korans had been collected and placed in their office. All Korans
had been collected whether the small holy books of Korans.
Q. You talked about in your interviews, findings some of the
Korans that had been collected on the first night of the
rebellion in Svay Khleang. Can you tell the Court where it was
that you found these Korans?
A. I could not get your question, Mr. Co-Prosecutor; could you
specify it for me so that I can give the response.
Q. In your interview, you talked about on the night, the first
night of the rebellion in Svay Khleang, you discussed finding
some Korans, could you tell the Court where it was that you found
these Korans on the night of the rebellion?
A. Korans that I found were at village chief's house.
Q. You've been asked questions about the rebellion in your
village, we heard from the witness before you about another
rebellion that took place in Kaoh Phal. Do you know when the Kaoh
Phal rebellion took place; was it before the rebellion in Svay
Khleang or after?
A. My apology; I could not get your question, Mr. Co-Prosecutor,
I did not hear the full interpretation.
Q. My question was about the rebellion at Kaoh Phal and whether
that took place before or after the rebellion in Svay Khleang.
A. Rebellion in Svay Khleang happened 15 days before Kaoh Phal
rebellion.
Q. I just to want to make sure that I understood, did you say 15
days before or 15 days after the Svay Khleang rebellion?
A. Kaoh Phal rebellion happened first and later on, 15 days later
there was a rebellion at Svay Khleang.
Q. Thank you for clarifying that. When you were -- the people
were organising to rebel in Svay Khleang, were you aware of what
had happened at Kaoh Phal 15 days earlier?
A. I have nothing to do with Kaoh Phal rebellion. I did not know
about rebellion at Kaoh Phal. It was Kaoh Phal's business at the
time, no one was allowed to move freely or trespass into other
village area.
Q. Thank you. You mentioned that although you organised to fight
and resist, that you didn't have weapons. Can you tell us when
there was fighting between the Cham and the Khmer Rouge, what
weapons did the Cham have and what weapons did the Khmer Rouge
have?
A. Back then there was a fighting and there were Khmer Rouge
soldiers who were armed with different kind of weapons and for
Cham people we had only two rifles: one AK and one Carbine. And
in addition to the two rifles, we had swords and knives.
Q. Do you remember how many swords the Cham people in Svay
Khleang had?
A. I do not recall the numbers clearly. At the time there were
many of us.
Q. And you talked about the weapons of the Khmer Rouge, were
there boats -- did the Khmer Rouge have boats that were firing on
your village?
A. They had marines; they had various types of weapons. They did
not use boats to fire at us at the time because we were on the
same -- we were on land.
Q. And did they have fire artillery shells into your village?
A. They did not use only the light weapons; they had heavy
weapons as well. The sounds of gun fire deafened our ears. I
could not tell you whether there were different types of weapons
used, I cannot draw a conclusion about the weapons.
Q. I want to ask you now about couple of follow up questions
about the period when you were moved to Dambae district. Can you
tell us when you arrived in Dambae, where it was that you were
asked to live and to sleep?
A. I told my response to the lawyer already and now you have a
follow up question. I will clarify it for you. I was allowed to
stay in Svay Kambet village, Seda commune, Dambae district. I
cannot recall when I arrived in that village. We were depressed
at the time and we did not focus on the day when we arrived in
the village. We left our place at night and we arrived in Svay
Kambet village the following day at mid-day.
Q. My apologies, I was asking you something more specific. Let me
approach it this way. Do you have an older brother named Man Sen?
A. My elder brother's name is Man Sen.
Q. And was he with you when you were sent to Dambae?
A. He was with me and we shared the same village and our houses
were close to each other.
Q. I want to read to you and get your reaction on something your
brother told the Court when he was interviewed. This is document
E3/5205: Khmer, ERN 0021850; English, 00275163 to 64; French,
00293922; again it is E3/5205. This is what your brother said
about Svay Kambet village. "The villagers in those villages were
all ethnic Khmer. Some of us lived in rice storage huts, some of
us slept underneath their houses. They did not permit us to
observe our religion or traditions. There was no medicine to
treat malaria." End of quote. What I wanted to ask you about, Mr.
Witness, is: Is it correct that some of the Cham people were
required to sleep underneath the houses of Khmer families?
A. That is correct from my understanding.
Q. And the group of Cham people that --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Co-Prosecutor, do you still have many questions to put to
this civil party?
MR. LYSAK:
I may have 10 minutes or 15 minutes if I would be allowed to
continue tomorrow. I can continue now, I don't want to disrupt
the bus schedule but I can continue now but I have about 10 more
minutes or 15 minutes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. So we will adjourn now and so you will be allowed to
use 10 minutes or 15 minutes additionally tomorrow.
It is time now for the adjournment, the Chamber will resume
tomorrow Wednesday, 9 September 2015. The Chamber will continue
to hear the testimony of Sos Ponyamin, and then we will start to
hear 2-TCW-832.
Thank you very much, Mr. Sos Ponyamin. The hearing of your
testimony as a civil party has not come to an end yet. You are
therefore invited to be here once again tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Court officer, in collaboration with WESU, please send Mr. Sos
Ponyamin to his desired destination or the place where he is
staying at the moment.
Security personnel are instructed to bring Mr. Khieu Samphan and
Nuon Chea back to the detention facility and please have them
returned tomorrow at 9 a.m.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1614H)
