PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0904H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is back in session.
The Chamber is going to continue hearing the testimony of
witness, Pech Chim.
<The Court greffier,> Ms. Kolvuthy, may you please report on the
attendance of the Parties today.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, today all Parties are present except for <Son
Arun,> the National <Defence Counsel> of Mr. Nuon Chea who is
absent for health reasons. Nuon Chea is in the holding cell
downstairs and is following the proceedings from there. He filed
<a> request <to waive his right to be physically present in the
courtroom. The waiver of the accused Nuon Chea has been delivered
to the greffier. The witness, Pech Chim, will continue his
testimony today. He and his duty counsel, Mr. Moeung Sovann, are
already present in the courtroom. Thank you, Mr. President.>
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. <The Chamber now decides on the request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated the
22   April 2015, which notes that due to his health: headache, back
pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long, and in order to
effectively participate in future hearings, he requests to waive
his right to participate in and be present at the 22 April 2015
hearing. He affirms that his counsel has advised him about the
consequences of this waiver, that it cannot in any account be
construed as a waiver of his right to be tried fairly or to
challenge evidence presented to or admitted by this Court at any
time during this trial.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the Accused at the ECCC, dated 22 April 2015, which notes
that Nuon Chea has dizziness when he moves and has severe back
pain when he sits for long, and recommends that the Chamber grant
him his request so that he can follow the proceedings remotely
from the holding cell downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via audio-visual means. The Chamber instructs the AV
Unit personnel to link the proceedings to the room downstairs so
that Nuon Chea can follow. This applies to the whole day.>
Now the Chamber is going to give the floor to the
<Co->Prosecution <to> continue examining witness, Pech Chim.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, Mr. Pech Chim.
We were discussing yesterday the positions in Tram Kak district
and you had told us that you attended regular district meetings
during the time that Yeay Khom--
MR. PRESIDENT:
Apparently there is a problem in the interpretation, <we> do not
hear.
JUDGE FENZ:
Did you press the button, we could -- is it only me or does
somebody else have a problem. Same here.
QUESTIONING BY MR. LYSAK:
Let me start over.
Good morning to everybody, Mr. Witness, Your Honours.
We were talking about the positions held by the people in Tram
Kak district and the structure in the district and you told us
yesterday that you regularly attended district meetings during
the time that Yeay Khom was district secretary.
Q. Can you tell us where were those meetings, the district
meetings, where were they usually held?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. Good morning, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours.
<First,> I would like to provide a bit of clarification on the
<terms> district committee, district chief and <party> secretary.
The district secretary corresponds to district chief. <The term
'district chief' has been used since the past> and I was only the
fifth member of the district committee.
Now with regard to the gathering place, the meetings were held at
the district office<, but the number of participants was limited.
At Trapeang Thma, we held meetings> in the village under the
trees and in terms of education sessions, this took place at the
Party school at the sector level. <There were many people
attending.> And <> now with regard to the day-to-day meetings,
they took place under trees <and at people's houses>, sometimes I
could attend these meetings, sometimes <I could not attend the
meeting. They held meetings wherever they were based. If I could
not come to join the sessions I informed them.> That's all I have
to say about that.
Q. You mentioned a sector level Party school. Where was that
located?
A. <It was located behind> the Samraong commune in Tram Kak
district and in Paen Meas village. <The sector Party was based in
this area. As for> district <Party, it was based at the commune
location in Trapeang Kaoh village near Theat Trapeang Thnol>.
Q. Were meetings ever held at the Angk Roka pagoda?
A. Yes.
Q. What type of meetings were held at the Angk Roka pagoda?
A. Mr. President, Your Honours, I do not remember the kinds of
meetings that were held there. <Please> stick to everything that
I said in my previous statements because back then I had a
sharper memory now I have memory problems, so I'm afraid of
giving you an answer <that> does not correspond to my previous
statements which of course would question the veracity <and
quality> of what I'm saying. <So, I am testifying to the best of
my ability.> So please, I would like to apologise for this.
Q. If you don't remember anymore, Mr. Witness, you can say that
and if I need to refresh you on your prior statement, I will
certainly do that. My last question about district meetings
before I move on, were there occasions were Ta Mok was present
during district level meetings?
A. No, never. He only attended education sessions at the sector
level and the district office was used as <the sector> school, as
a training centre or as a gathering place. <The area was quite
large and used as the sector location.> There was a training
session that lasted close to <one> month and there was a
<congress> that lasted three days which Ta Mok attended. On that
day, <the Khpos Trabaek> dam broke and <the sector Party>
therefore assigned me to manage the works to fix this <dam>, so I
wasn't able to attend this <congress till the end> and the
content of these education sessions <covered too many topics for
me to detail>. They <ranged from progression, good elements and
strategic and tactical paths, war strategy, people, social
classes and class positions. I already mentioned these in the
previous statements. Class> struggle <was discussed as well. And
one week before this kind of training <came to a conclusion>, <we
were required> to do a bit of self-criticism <to reflect on what
we had learnt> and we had to say <both> good things and bad
things that we had in order to improve ourselves. <We had to keep
on improving good things and correct what we had done wrong. That
led to numerous deaths. Several people hung themselves to death.>
So that -- the struggle back then was at such a degree that we
risked losing our lives at any moment. <After the training
sessions, we heard that some people committed suicide here and
there. The training was the root cause.>
Q. Thank you for that answer, Mr. Witness. In the years 1975 and
1976, did Ta Mok have an office or a residence in Tram Kak
district where he would sometimes stay?
A. He was not staying in Tram Kak. He <was mobile and> would
often travel <to Kampong Speu or Amleang>. He did not live in a
specific place. From time to time he came to Tram Kak for one or
two days and then he would leave. <He was mobile.> So, he would
travel all the time and -- with the sector level soldiers. He
would organise meetings during his trips but I was not aware of
the content of these meetings because I never participated in
these meetings but <I knew what happened through> the sector
meetings <where the plan for> agriculture production <and force
mobilization was announced>.
Q. Thank you. Let me go back to the timeline of district
secretaries in Tram Kak. In your OCIJ interview, E3/4626, at
Khmer, 00373467 through 68; English, 00380135 through 36; and
French, 00426206; you described how Yeay Khom fell sick in early
1976, and later moved to Kampong Som. You stated that at that
time, her deputy, Ta Keav, became district secretary but only for
about two or three months, you testified. And you said that after
two or three months, sector secretary Saom came to tell you that
they were transferring Ta Keav to the sector. And you testified
that this is what Saom told you. "Ta Saom told me that Ta Keav
would be sent to work at Comrade Choeun's office which was then
called the Tnaot Toul re-education centre, located at the border
of Kiri Vong and Treang districts. This security centre was
previously called Security Centre 160." End of quote.
My question for you is; do you know whether, when Ta Keav left
Tram Kak, whether he was assigned a position at this security
centre or was he sent there to be detained? What do you know
about what happened to Ta Keav when he left Tram Kak district?
A. <As for Ta Keav, before> leaving, before his departure, <the
sector> asked him to <go to> work with Choeun and he went on his
own to work with Choeun who was an office leader or the head of a
<youth> re-education centre rather. Back then this centre was
<also> called re-education school for soldiers. <When they left
this school, they became soldiers.> I do not know the rest. I
only know that after his departure he stayed there to work <once
and for all> and I never travelled to that place myself after he
left. I don't even know where this centre is located. I only know
its name and its number, <that is,> Office 160.
Q. After he left Tram Kak district, did you ever see Ta Keav
again?
A. He came to the district office <once>. Apparently he went
<back> home and he came to visit us. We invited him to <have a
meal as> his <messenger like before. I asked him how he was and
he said he was fine and that he joined another committee there.>
I asked him what he was doing over there. He told me he did not
have any specific duties but that his job <was> helping <other
people, only filling the vacancy> and I answered him, "well, you
have to make efforts." <Then, we went apart.> That's it. So we
were just friends <and held each other in regard>.
Q. One last question on Ta Keav. Some of the witnesses who have
testified here have suggested he may have been arrested at some
point. Do you have any information on whether Ta Keav was ever
purged or arrested?
A. No. I was not aware of that. It was only later, much later
that someone told me that Ta Keav had been sent to Sector 35, he
was no longer with Ta Choeun.
Q. So let me move on then. After Yeay Khom and Ta Keav, the next
chairman or secretary of Tram Kak district was you and you have
given a number of statements, eight interviews already in which
you have stated that you became the acting secretary of Tram Kak
district, District 105, in May or June 1976. That you served as
district chief for a little more than six months and that in
February 1977, you left Tram Kak to go to Kampong Cham and were
replaced as district secretary by your brother Kit and in
interview E3/4628, at Khmer, 00373390; English, 00379306; French,
00426197; you provided a specific date for when you left Tram Kak
district. You stated that you were, I quote: "transferred to the
Central Zone on 12 February 1977." My question for you, is there
some reason that you remember the specific date of 12 February?
A. I was building a <dam at Khpos Trabaek> and something
happened. I just came from Angk Ta Saom <then Takeo>, Ta Mok rode
by with his motorcycle. He asked me to go to Takeo <in a short
time. He said we would be going to the north>-- he was very
direct <in saying words 'going to the north'>. He said Sy would
soon come to pick me to see him at Takeo. Then Sy arrived in his
car and I went into the car. <On the way to Takeo, Sy told me
about being moved> to go to Kampong Cham<;> that was on the 12th.
So, that day he <wrote a letter and> sent <his> messengers <to
deliver that letter to the district office, asking all communes
to> gather <together that evening>. <Forces from all communes
came together and Kit was also present.> I gave the stamp to
<him> that day. <Then, we made a plan for all communes that would
leave for Kampong Cham with us to gather forces and come
together> the next day, <that is>, the 13th <and we> arrived in
Phnom Penh on the 13th <during the day time. And,> on the 14th we
<spent one day in Phnom Penh before Bong Pauk came to meet and
pick us up to> Kampong Cham. It is this succession of events that
allowed me to remember that specific date. That is to say, we
<prepared our journey> on the 12th and <departed on the 13th and>
we arrived <in Phnom Penh on> the 14th.
Q. Thank you for clarifying that. Let me now ask you -- turn to a
few questions about who the leaders of Sector 13 were. You have
again -- you have stated in your many interviews that in 1975,
the sector secretary was Saom alias Than, and the deputy
secretary was a man named Phen. And Meas Muth, at least in early
part of 1975, was the sector member. And in interview,
.4, at answer 1, you testified that Ta Saom was still the
sector secretary when you left for the Central Zone, in February
1977, but that he became sick and was replaced by a cadre from
Sector 25, named Prak. And what I want to ask you about is, one
of your next statement in that same interview at answer 8, you
testified that, quote: "later they assigned my brother to replace
Ta Prak." How did you learn that your brother Kit had been
assigned to be the chairman of Sector 13, replacing Ta Prak?
A. Some people told me about that. These were people who were
travelling back and forth. There was no official appointment.
During an assembly at the time, when someone left or was
dismissed, another person would replace him or her <on a
temporary basis>, there were no official appointments. People <>
had to serve as acting officials for three or <six> months <or
two months or one month>, it was a war situation and there were
no official appointments. There were no specific procedures,
sometimes you were assigned <by Ta Mok> under a <coconut> tree,
you were asked whether you understood the instructions, whether
you could remember them, whether you understood orders that were
given, orders that were often given erroneously. <Then, we had to
work them out carefully.> Those who were not intelligent had a
hard time understanding those instructions. Those who were
intelligent could understand them.
Q. You told us yesterday that you came back to visit Tram Kak
district later in 1977, when you came back for that visit, had
your brother Kit been appointed sector chief at that time or was
he still district chief?
A. He was <still the> district secretary. He had not yet gone to
the sector level.
Q. Correct me if I misunderstood, I believe that you said that
your brother Kit died shortly after the fall of the regime in
January 1979. How many times did you see your brother Kit between
the time that you left Tram Kak district and the time that he
died?
A. I only saw him once. <I saw him when I went to Tram Kak. I saw
him at Angk Roka. Later on, I never saw him again. But, his
messengers came to look for coconuts and collect rubber latex for
the people to mend the broken bicycle, motorcycle and car tyres.
I asked them for some coconuts to be planted. When I asked them
about him they told me that he had already come to 25. That's all
that I know.>
MR. PRESIDENT:
<There is a problem with the interpretation again. Court
officials are instructed to deal with this problem and report to
the Chamber immediately.>
<(Technical problem)>
<Mr. PRESIDENT:>
Please proceed, <the International Deputy Co->Prosecutor.
<Mr. LYSAK>
<Thank you, Mr. President.>
<Questioning by Mr. LYSAK>
<Mr. Witness, may I ask you to repeat your response because there
was no interpretation a moment ago?>
<Mr. PRESIDENT:>
<Mr. International Deputy Co-Prosecutor, please pause for a
moment.>
<Let's break for a moment.>
<(There is a technical error).>
MR. PRESIDENT:
It appears that there was a technical problem in the
interpretation booth because two interpreters are ill. <So, the
interpretation from one language to another is a bit slower than
usual. But, let's make another try and see what's going to happen
next. It> is, <therefore,> important for you to <speak a little
slower> when you are questioning the witness.
<The> International <Deputy Co->Prosecutor, please proceed <with
putting questions to the witness>.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. I will speak slowly.
Q. My colleague tells me that you indicated that you saw your
brother, Ta Kit, once after you left Tram Kak and that was at the
Angk Roka. Can you tell me if that's correct, and can you also
tell me whether you saw him on the trip where you returned to
Tram Kak that you already described, or whether this was some
other occasion?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. I saw him at Angk Roka when I went back to my native village.
That was to take care of logistical and economic matters. I went
to the district office which was <the concrete> house. I did not
meet Kit and then I left again.
Q. Mr. Witness, do you know whether some time in 1978, your
brother Kit, left his position in Sector 13 and became the
secretary of Sector 25 in Kandal province?
A. I do not recall the date<, day, month or year>. I was very far
from where he was but I heard that he had been appointed sector
chief. I was not able to go and meet him; I did not <ask anyone
about him and never came to see him> because I was very busy.
People who <travelled to and from that area> informed me that <he
had been appointed as chief of Sector 25> after the departure of
the former sector chief.
Q. What I want to clarify with you, was there a time in 1978 when
your brother transferred from being the chief of Sector 13 to
become the secretary of Sector 25 in Kandal province.
A. I have already answered your question.
Q. It may be the interpretation. Is it correct that your brother
at some point became chief of Sector 25 in Kandal, is that
correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. I want to turn to another subject, relating to the
establishment of cooperatives in Tram Kak district. You testified
in your interview E319.1.18, at answer 26, that cooperatives were
created in or around June or July 1975. And we have heard some
testimonies in this Trial, that cooperatives and communal dining
had previously been tried in Tram Kak in 1973, but that there
were problems and it had been discontinued in 1973, and not
started again until later. Do you remember the Party trying to
implement cooperatives in 1973, and can you tell us what happened
at that time?
A. I do not remember. Cooperatives were set up during that period
but I do not recall what happened. <There were two scenarios at
that time.> It was necessary to establish cooperatives in all the
communes<; one village was designated as a cooperative in a
commune,> but <one opinion was, how could that be possible? Where
should we keep people's plates and pots in each commune? Who
would cook for collective dining? People lived far away from one
another. How would they come to have meals collectively? Where
would they sleep? So, both commune chief and I were unable to
comprehend the cooperative affairs. Then,> Ta Mok <and Ta Sy>
came. <Ta Sy blamed us, asking who on earth made us set up
cooperatives and we said it was Angkar. He said he was also
Angkar, but how come he didn't know about that? So, there was an
internal problem. Then,> Ta Mok <said, "Now, let's do whatever we
know how to do and don't touch upon what we don't understand. We
will take care of that later". So, we made the first step
followed by more steps. Then, while they were doing it the
internal dispute ceased and they carried on the process. But,
there were both difficulty and comfort. It was hard for people to
go to have their meals. But, it was easy to handle rice, fruit,
food and vegetables. However, the people could not fill their
stomach and the food was not good. Perhaps, you all here
understand this. The pots were so big, but only one kilogram of
meat or fish was cooked with a little vegetable in those large
pots. So, there was a problem with food. When the cooperatives
had high productivity we were able to fill our stomach, but the
productivity was low we could not fill our stomach at all. When
people could not eat to get full problems arose. They had health
problems. Living conditions were terrible. People became
physically weak. When their health was deteriorating they fell
sick. Arguments broke out. People became exhausted. So, they were
disobedient.>
Q. Thank you for that response, Mr. Witness. Another subject that
we've heard testimony on in this Trial from a number of
witnesses, including the head monk of Kampong province, was about
how monks from all of Takeo province were gathered at the Wat
Angk Roka pagoda following 17 April 1975, and later in 1975,
early 1976, they were forced to disrobe and leave the monkhood.
What can you tell us about what happened to the monks who were
gathered at Angk Roka pagoda in 1975?
A. <There was a> committee of monks at the level of the province
which <the chief> was in charge. I was in charge of the New
People, their living conditions, their health; I was in charge of
meetings and the kitchens. <So many people were sick. So, I
prepared food for them. One person was> very hungry; <so he ate>
so <much food> that <he> fainted. He did not die, but nearly
died. We divided our roles.
As regards the monks, what I can tell you is that they were
<defrocked> but I do not know why. <But, my> idea at the time was
that they should be kept, they shouldn't be <defrocked since they
were already old> but <we should not allow more people to be
ordained. I said that, but I did not dare to say it loud enough
to be heard. I talked and walked the talk at the same time, but
for fear, I did not dare to talk loudly. The state of life was
like that.> I was at the pagoda. <I looked after it>. I <used the
wooden boards to tightly close the> doors and the <walls> in
order to protect the statue of the Buddha <from being taken
away>. After the war <ended>, the statue was there. It was Ang
Montreay (phonetic) pagoda in Kus <commune>.
Q. Mr. Witness, what about the Angk Roka pagoda, did you go there
in 1975, while monks were gathered at that pagoda?
A. No. I did not even attend the assembly of the monks. It was
the <Provincial Sangha Committee> who was in charge of that job.
<I did not do that.> But as I stated, I stayed in one of the
<monks' houses in> the pagoda. I <used the wooden boards to cover
its wall very tightly and> made sure <all> doors were <shut. I
used the> 10-centimetre nails to <tightly close the doors.>
Q. Mr. Pech Chim, to perhaps refresh your recollection, let me
read a couple of excerpts of testimony that we've heard. First is
from the reverence Em Phoeung, the head monk of Kampot province.
He testified in this Court on the 16th of February this year at
, between 9.43 and 9.46 in the morning. He gave the
following testimony. Quote: "Those monks who came to stay at Angk
Roka, most of them came from Takeo province. They were told to
stay in this pagoda to be ready to do other work for the new
regime. On my first arrival, I was not ordered to do anything but
later we were told that you cannot be staying as a monk. Any monk
should leave the monkhood or be defrocked and they will not allow
anyone to be in the monkhood." And later the same day at 10.58 in
the morning, he testified that the Khmer Rouge cadre who chaired
the meeting at Angk Roka came with armed militia men. And we also
heard from a witness Vann Soan, a former messenger and guard at
Krang Ta Chan. He testified that the meeting at Angk Roka at
which the monks were defrocked was chaired by Yeay Khom, Ta Mok's
daughter, the Tram Kak district chief. This is E1/ -- this is a
testimony on the 3rd March 2015, at 14.04 to 14.06 in the
afternoon.
Does that refresh your recollection, Mr. Witness, that the
district committee and specifically the district chief, Yeay
Khom, were involved in defrocking the monks at Angk Roka pagoda?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, have you understood the question or didn't you
understand the question which explains why you are not answering
the question?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A.I heard the question but I do not understand the question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, please rephrase your question because the witness
did not understand it. <That's why he didn't respond.> Please
rephrase it.
Q. The question, Mr. Witness, is it correct that Tram Kak
district chief, Yeay Khom, was the one who ordered the defrocking
of monks at the Angk Roka pagoda?
A. Yes, that's true. I would like to specify that the ceremony or
the meeting took place in several steps or rather each person had
to manage his own part. I was in charge of <production dealing
with the living conditions and rice> supplies <for the people>
and Yeay Khom was in charge of <her own group which was assigned
with different tasks>. Not everyone <was called to do that>
because everyone had his or her specific tasks.
Q. Can you tell us, Mr. Witness, did the -- did Yeay Khom decide
to do this herself, or did the Tram Kak committee receive
instructions that the monks were to be disrobed?
A. The district committee of Tram Kak could not give orders to
<Mr.> Khom because <Mr. Khom> was the <chief>. The district
committee was only there to obey <Mr. Khom> but Khom would
receive orders from the sector or from Ta Mok, personally.
Q. Were you aware of the orders that Yeay Khom received from
either the sector or Ta Mok, regarding the disrobing of monks?
A. No. I did not know.
Q. Let me turn to another subject, Mr. Witness. This regards the
Vietnamese--
MR. PRESIDENT:
Time has come for a break. <Due to lack of human resource, the
interpreters request for support as the work is too overwhelming
for them. We take a break now and resume at 10.30.>
< Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room
reserved for witnesses and experts during the break time and
invite him, as well as his duty counsel, back into the courtroom
at 10.30.>
(Court <recesses> from 1003H to 1031H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Chamber <is back in session and> gives the
floor to the <Co->Prosecution to continue examining the witness.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Thank you Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Witness, I want to turn to the subject of the Vietnamese
people who lived in Tram Kak district. What can you tell us about
what happened to the Vietnamese people who lived in Tram Kak and
Takeo province after the 17th of April 1975?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. At the time <> Vietnamese soldiers were everywhere in Tram Kak
district. It wasn't only civilians. There were soldiers
everywhere including in the forest <buying and selling
commodities. They contacted us to buy pigs and rice. On the one
hand, we had our soldiers and the Vietnamese troops on the other.
Before they came in to buy stuffs they needed to ask for
permission from us. We didn't just let them trade freely. At that
time, we sold rice in bulk.>
<Later on, Angkar and> the Party <facilitated> with the
Vietnamese <to let them return to their country. Later,> the
Vietnamese <returned and all> the Vietnamese <soldiers returned>
to Vietnam. <It took them only two nights to empty the area.> I'm
talking of <only> Vietnamese soldiers. <At that time, we> also
requested that Vietnamese civilians be repatriated <along with
the Vietnamese troops>. So they went back to Vietnam one after
another. And that is how we were able to restore peace between
Cambodia and Vietnam. <Everything went back to normal at that
time.> There were <no> armed conflicts between Vietnamese and
Cambodian <soldiers>. Vietnamese civilians and Cambodian
civilians also lived in peace. That is what happened.
Q. And what was the reason that Vietnamese civilians, as well as
soldiers, were repatriated? What was the reason that all
Vietnamese and not just the soldiers were asked to leave the
country?
A. The decision was taken by Angkar. I was a low-level officer
and I could not understand the principal underpinning such
decisions. They <> accepted our request that they be returned
back to their country in order to live together <in peace and
without conflicts>.
Q. Did the district receive any instructions on what to do if
there were Vietnamese who refused to leave and who stayed in Tram
Kak?
A. No. <Some> Vietnamese had married Cambodians and had children
<who were> mixed blood<.> Vietnamese were authorised to live
together with their spouses. There were no problems with that
category of people.
Q. Just to make sure I understood correctly, you're saying that
Vietnamese who had married Khmer were allowed to stay at this
time? Did I understand that correctly?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And do you remember whether there were any Vietnamese who were
not married to Khmer who refused to leave and stayed in Tram Kak?
A. I do not remember.
Q. Do you remember whether in this arrangement with Vietnam,
whether there were exchanges in which when the Vietnamese were
sent to Vietnam, Khmer Krom were sent to Cambodia?
A. All I remember is that Vietnamese were sent back to Vietnam<.
But, no> Khmer Krom <was exchanged by being sent to> Cambodia.
That is all I remember.
Q. Could you explain what you meant by that? In the translation I
got,  was that Vietnamese were sent back by Khmer Krom. Could you
explain what you meant by your last answer?
A. I would like to specify that the Vietnamese army was organised
in the territory of Cambodia following some negotiations with
Cambodia and after that, Cambodia asked Vietnam to repatriate
Vietnamese back to Vietnam and we subsequently asked Vietnamese
civilians to go back to Vietnam so they all left and went back
together to Vietnam. But as for mixed couples - that is,
Vietnamese who are married to Cambodians, <they> were allowed to
continue living in Cambodia.
Q. Mr. President, with your leave, I would like to provide a
document to the witness to see if -- refresh his recollection on
this. It's document E3/2048, at Khmer, ERN 00079090; English,
00276563 through 64; and French, 00611660. Again, it's E3/2048.
With your leave, may I provide a copy to the witness?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please proceed.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. Mr. Witness, the document that I've provided to you is a
report sent from Popel commune, a person named Chorn (sic), in
early May 1977 and the reference I want to ask you about is the
first paragraph which states - refers to 64 Khmer Krom families,
a total of 228 people, having been received in an exchange with
Vietnam. Does this refresh your recollection on whether there
were exchanges arranged in which Vietnamese were sent to Vietnam
and Cambodia received Khmer Krom from Vietnam?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. I do not recall the details of such an exchange. The person in
charge of this particular task was Khom <who> worked in
collaboration with Chorn. Chorn was tasked with assembling all
war-<displaced people> in all the communes and all the districts
<in the whole province. Chorn was the one who responsible for
that.> And he would report the number of these persons the
district officials. <The communes were already> informed and the
officials at the district <level had to be informed as well
because they had to distribute rice and> clothing to those
refugees. So there were very specific sections tasked with such
work. <But, not everyone was involved in this. Only Chorn and
Khom did.> That is all I can tell you.
Q. Can you tell us who Chorn was? What was his position in Tram
Kak?
A. Chorn was a mobile worker <in the province in the sector>. He
moved about in the sector running errands. At the time, all
<people working in> Sector <13 of Takeo province were
concentrated in Tram Kak district. So, Chorn was in Tram Kak and>
he went about carrying out work <in Treang, Angkor Chey, Kiri
Vong or Prey Kabas. He went around> to find out how many <people>
were <evacuated from 108, from Kiri Vong, Treang and so on to
Tram Kak. The lists of these people were in his hand. So> he was
the one who knew <how many> Vietnamese were <present>. As for
myself, I was only in charge of clothing and rice supplies. That
is the summary I would give of the situation at the time. May I
also point out that Chorn was not one of the district <authority>
officials, nor was he an official at the level of the province.
<He> was a <mobile, floating> cadre. <When he went to 109, he met
with people at 109. Whenever he went to Treang he met with people
there and this applied to Kiri Vong, too. So, he made and
received reports wherever he went. He communicated to those
people in this manner. When the people he met reported about any
problems concerning the living conditions and health of the
people, he would take note and try to solve them.>
Q. This person, Chorn, who we've been talking about, was this the
Chorn who was the husband of Yeay Boeun?
MR. PRESIDENT:
<Pech Chim>, please answer the question because your microphone
was not on when you were speaking.
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. Chorn was indeed Boeun's husband. Boeun was the Party head at
the level of the commune - that is, Cheang Tong commune.
Q. And at some point, did Chorn become the chief of Popel
commune?
A. Yes, he was chief of that commune at a point in time, for a
very short time. That was because at the time there was no one in
charge of that commune. He was subsequently removed to take care
of <the overall> mobile units <in the province. Again,> someone
came to replace him in that position.
Q. You've described how Chorn had this task of assembling all
refugees and then reporting to his superiors. Are you referring
to people who were Khmer Krom refugees who had left Vietnam and
entered Cambodia? Is that who you mean by refugees?
A. No. (inaudible) track of all those refugees. <Let me clarify.
During the war time, people in Kaoh Andaet and Kiri Vong tried to
have a grasp of the refugees.> In fact, he did not assemble those
refugees. All he did was -- do <was preparing the lists> of those
refugees and <sent the lists> to the district <and sector> level.
He was not a cadre of <any specific> district committee. He was a
cadre at the level of the sector and was assigned to carry out
<mobile work activities>.
Q. And the one thing I want to clarify and make sure I understand
because of translation, the people that Chorn had responsibility
for reporting on, who you call refugees, were these just people
who had came - come to Tram Kak from Kiri Vong or were these all
evacuees - all New People who had come to Tram Kak after 17 April
1975?
A. Everyone, all the refugees, all the war-displaced persons. His
task was to <list the number> of all those people.
Q. And one more, just so I'm clear on this, did this include the
people who had been moved from Phnom Penh starting on 17 April
1975?
A. The evacuees were counted at the level of the district and
<Chorn alone could not handle it> since there was a lot of work.
<Ta Mok was in charge of the Zone Military. When evacuees arrived
at any house in any village, Chorn would walk around to collect
their information.> That was the situation at the time<. As for
me,> I was in <the> village.
I <held meetings,> cooked <Khmer> noodles <and distributed rice>
in order to feed all these evacuees. I also housed them in the
homes of the villagers. <Some women still breastfed their
children while others were pregnant.> Some of the refugees were
widows and they were housed in homes where there was some space
for housing such people. They were also sent to cooperatives
where they were given ordinary food rations, on the same footing
as the others - they received the same rations. They were also
<given> huts <with> thatch<-roofs and bamboo panel floors or
wooden floors according to the ability of the cooperatives. I
held meetings to supervise and educate them. Then, they were
fighting with one another. So, I entertained them with some art>
performances <and dancing> for purposes of educating them. <Then,
they stopped fighting. I did that to the best of my capacity>.
Our objective was to make sure everyone lived in <peace,
happiness and harmony and that our country was prosperous and
resilient. We stood united as one nation and had to guarantee
that. Let me clarify.> There were six million inhabitants in our
<liberated areas and another> six million <people> evacuated from
Phnom Penh. So food ration <was one can of rice> for <three
people> and <then one> can for six people - <that was in the
place where life was better off>. As for places where there
wasn't enough food, <life was even> harder.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. Let me turn to some questions -
specific questions about the New People - the evacuees who came
to Tram Kak after 17 April 1975. Did you know a pagoda in Ta Phem
commune called Wat Champa Leuk?
A. The Popel pagoda. I know the pagoda but what you have said is
not quite accurate. I know Popel pagoda. That pagoda is not the
Champa Leuk pagoda. Popel pagoda is <near Slar Ku (phonetic)
bridge> but the Champa Leuk pagoda is in Angk Ta Saom, it's in
Angk Ta Saom, to the west of Angk Ta Saom.<These are the two
different pagodas>.
Q. Yes, I think we're talking about the same place. My question
may have been translated - my understanding, it was in Ta Phem
commune not Popel commune but you knew this Wat Champa pagoda. My
question; was Wat Champa one of the places where evacuees were
gathered when they arrived in Tram Kak district?
A. I do not remember. I welcomed them on the national road and I
took them to the commune and then they were very few who
travelled to Champa Leuk pagoda where commune representatives had
come to welcome and feed them. So<,> commune <clerks> had come to
welcome them in order to bring them to their respective communes.
<But, not all of them were kept at Champa Leuk pagoda. From the
west on the road to Tram Kak, the commune chiefs lined up to
welcome them>, Ta Mok was there and the number of evacuees that
they were to take in had been decided by their superiors and once
they arrived at their destinations, they were housed and
<provided with clothes>, they were fed. That's all I can say
about this.
Q. Let me see if I can refresh your recollection a little by
reading a little number of the - some of the testimony that we've
heard so far about Wat Champa Leuk. A witness who testified in
this trial, Kev Chandara - this was in , on the 2nd of
February 2015, at 13.46 to 13.49 in the afternoon - he lived
right next to the Wat Champa Leuk pagoda and testified that he
saw thousands of evacuees gathered there and that he also saw Ta
Mok there. And before the Chamber, is an OCIJ statement from a
cadre who worked at the Tram Kak district office, who I must
identify now as 2-TCW-822. In his statement, E319.1.32 at Answer
113, he gave the following testimony:
"Question: 'What do you know about the killing of soldiers,
families of Lon Nol soldiers and civilians in Takeo province?'
Answer: 'At that time, the Khmer Rouge announced their victory.
Phnom Penh is defeated. After that, people were evacuated from
Phnom Penh to Wat Champa Leuk pagoda located three kilometres on
the west Angk Ta Saom, Tram Kak district. For seven days, the
Khmer Rouge made propaganda that they were seeking soldiers with
rank to register their names. Having rounded up these people,
they took them away. This was their common practice. Hundreds and
thousands of people were taken away. Having taken all these
soldiers with rank, for example second and first lieutenants,
only ordinary people remained.'" End of quote. Now, Mr. Witness,
does that refresh your recollection about what happened at Wat
Champa Leuk pagoda after the 17th of April 1975?
A. Back then, I did not partake in this kind of work. Khom was
present. <She was the party chief.> She was representing the
Party. I had not yet been promoted to member of the district
committee. The district chief was in charge of the logistics<,
managing and dealing with living conditions and food for the
people in all communes>. So, I was in Cheang Tong, <Popel and
Leay Bour communes> back then and Khom was in charge of <all
communes> but I saw nothing regarding the officers of the Lon Nol
army. I suspected that these kinds of measures had been taken
against the bad elements but no one dared to say anything.
Everybody was quiet because we had to toe the line, follow the
political line. We were expected just to do our work and just to
focus on our work. As we say in Khmer, <"Your hair is on your
head".> .
That's it. So I experienced this terrible regime like everyone.
<You should know about this. Life was not easy.> Thank you.
Q. You mentioned a little while ago that Ta Mok was in Tram Kak
following the 17th of April, when evacuees arrived. How long was
Ta Mok in the district and do you know whether he was at Wat
Champa Leuk?
A. He stayed there for a while but I cannot tell you how long
exactly. At Champa Leuk pagoda he was there, as well as at Angk
Ta Saom. He would eat over there and he would work elsewhere, so
he never stayed put. He never would stay put in a given place. So
he -- in fact we had to move around because it was wartime.
Q: Mr. Witness, there are also a number of references to Wat
Champa Leuk and to what happened to Lon Nol officers immediately
after evacuees arrived in Tram Kak. There are a number of
references in some of the surviving documents that I would like
to read to you now to get your response. In document E3/2107,
E3/2107, and this is a Krang Ta Chan notebook, and the notes at
Khmer ERN, 00068050; English, 00290205 through 06; and French,
00655726; these are notes for a prisoner named Chou Sovann and
they state as follows, quote: "His father was subdistrict chief.
Angkar made the assignment from Wat Champa. He is dissatisfied
that Angkar arrested his father and took him away." Mr. President
there are two documents that I am going to be using with this
witness, this E3/2107, and also a notebook, E3/4095. With your
leave I would like to give those to the witness and his counsel
so they have the opportunity to read the names as I ask these
questions. So I'd like to provide, with your leave, documents
E3/2107 and E3/4095 to the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please proceed.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. So, Mr. Witness, and perhaps your counsel can help you with
this, in E3/2107, the reference I just read was at Khmer page,
00068050. It was a reference for a person -- notes from the
interrogation of a person Chou Sovann. And the second
(inaudible), 00655751; these are the notes for a prisoner named
Som Phy (phonetic) which read, quote: "Husband in the military, a
second lieutenant in Phnom Penh. Angkar arrested the husband
right after they arrived." End of quote.
In the other notebook I provided, E3/4095, if you look at Khmer,
00271130, that's 271130; English, 00747296; French, 00721270;
there's the following note for a prisoner named Sok Siny, a
former primate in the Takao military police, quote: "Shortly
after the liberation Angkar listed and took away all those with
military ranks, none of whom are staying with us nowadays. Now
it's making the military list once again targeting us or someone
else." End of quote.
And the last excerpt I want to read to you is from document, a
different document, E3/2048, E3/2048, at Khmer, 00079089;
English, 00276562 through 63; French 00611659. This is a report
to Tram Kak district Angkar from Cheang Tong commune identifying
two former Lon Nol ranking officials. The note though, that I
want to refer you to, says the following: "His father was a map
draftsman in Takao. When we liberated it he came out to Wat
Champa and our Angkar removed him."
So, I've read to you, Mr. Witness, a number of excerpts from
documents recounting removal or arrests of Lon Nol ranking
officials when people arrived in Tram Kak, including at Wat
Champa. Does this refresh your recollection that there were
arrests and removals of ranking officers following the 17th of
April 1975, in Tram Kak district?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. I was not aware of this. Khom was the district representative
and I was at a lower level.
Q. Let me ask you about something that you've previously
testified about then. When you came to this Court in 2013, on the
1st July 2013, and I'm citing here to your trial testimony; it's
, at 11.39 in the morning. You were asked the following:
"Question: 'Is it right that Angkar gave instructions about
purging enemy officers?' Answer: 'Yes, it is correct'". And in
the afternoon you were questioned by Defence Counsel about how
you knew this, and you gave this testimony, and this is the same
day at 15.04 through 15.08 of the afternoon. Quote:
"Question: 'How did these instructions reach you? How did you
know that such a policy or plan apparently existed?' Answer:
'There were meetings. These kinds of things were not learned
during education sessions, but they were learned during meetings
at the sector level,'" Continuing below: "Question: 'Who
instructed you, or who told you to purge enemy officers?' Answer:
'The people at the upper echelon, because at the district level
we reported to the sector and the sector to the zone. So we
followed the instructions from the upper echelon'. Question: 'But
what kind of instructions and who were the people telling you
this?' Answer: 'People at the sector level who instructed this.
They had to conduct purges and thorough inspection would be
carried out before people would be purged. In other words,
investigation into the people's conduct and whether they were
falling into the categories of those who had to be purged."' End
of quote. My follow up question to you about this testimony you
gave is who was it at the sector level who gave these
instructions?
A. It was Saom, alias Than.
Q. And when and where was it that sector secretary Saom gave
these instructions?
A. Normally -- well it was the Party line in fact. We had to
distinguish the bad elements from the good elements, but he did
not give us instructions to purge these people. When I said that
this kind of solution had been the right one, maybe I was
mistaken. So, maybe my answer was not quite right, and sometimes
I answered erroneously to the questions and I could not correct
myself. I could not <follow the questions>. That day I was really
tired and I was bombarded with questions so I said, I would just
say yes<>. So please accept my apologies for my mistaken answers.
So I would like to indeed correct my answers now.
Q. Could you explain what you mean by that? You just said that it
was the Party line to purge bad elements. How did you know that
it was the Party line to purge bad elements, Mr. Witness?
A. Well, according to the politics of the Party when we were told
that they were bad elements, this meant that these were not good
elements for the Party. That's all I understood from this policy,
from this Party policy.
Q. Let me ask you a very specific question, Mr. Witness. The
instructions that were provided to the district, did the district
receive instructions from the sector about whether there were
certain ranks of Lon Nol officers who were to be purged?
A. I don't understand your question clearly; can you please be
more specific?
Q. Let me try this another way. One of the key pieces of
testimony this Court has heard came from the former deputy chief
of Tram Kak district hospital. A witness named, Riel Son. And in
his testimony at this trial and in his OCIJ interviews,
specifically I'll reference E3/5511, at answer 9, and also
E319.1.21, at answer, starting at answer 40. He gave the
following testimony about instructions that were provided in Tram
Kak district. Quote: "The chiefs of the district, the communes,
the villages and unit members were invited to attend a
conference. The conference participants were informed of what
categories of people to be purged. The conference was attended by
the district committee. There was a planned purge. People who
were targeted to be purged included; soldiers from the rank of
adjutant or warrant officer and above in the army and from first
deputy chief and above in the administration." End of quote.
Now, Mr. Witness, did the district chief or district committee
have authority itself to decide that certain groups were to be
purged, or was that something that could only be decided at a
higher level?
A. Back then it was Khom who <announced the plan in a meeting>
aiming at eliminating officers and I didn't do anything <and I
did not remove anyone>. The communes <got the instruction or the
plan and> executed that <plan> instead of me. Back then during
the meeting, I said that there were good people and bad people.
So, since I did not do this work; the others took charge of doing
that work instead of me, that's all I dared to do back then.
Q. Mr. Witness no one is saying that you were responsible for
these purges. We're trying to find out where these instructions
came from. My question to you was, did the district chief have
authority to make a decision like this, herself, to decide that
certain groups were to be purged? Or was that something that
could only be decided by a higher level than the district?
A. This kind of decision could only be taken at the higher level.
Q. Now in your testimony back in 2013, you also told the Court
about a political training session you attended for about 20 days
in Phnom Penh at which Nuon Chea was the instructor. And at
of your testimony, at around 11.31, you gave the
following testimony.
"Question: 'When Nuon Chea was teaching you did he ever cover
subjects like internal and external enemies?'" This was your
answer: "Yes he did, he covered all aspects. Without having
covered the subject of enemies, people would never know how to
identify enemies from friends." End of quote.
My question for you today, at this 20 day long political training
session run by Nuon Chea, or the district secretaries, did he
talk about Lon Nol officials and soldiers or remnants of the
former regime? Are you able to remember - I realise this is a
long time ago - are you able to remember any discussion by Nuon
Chea on that subject?
A. I do not remember because that was a very, very long time ago.
Regarding study sessions and the Party line which consisted in
making the distinction between <friends> and the enemy in the
liberated zone, it was said at the time in the liberated zone
that those who served the interests of the enemy were considered
as the enemy and those who had been in the <enemy's> zone<, but
served those who were in the liberated zone were considered to be
friends. I also questioned this, but no one could respond.> As
regards the people who were evacuated from Phnom Penh, <I asked
who were friends and who were enemies. Some> of them who took
part in our struggle <by providing us and our soldiers with> rice
and they supported us, but <at that time, we lost touch with them
and could not trace where they were. We did not go in search for
them, either. So, how could we find them?>
If we considered everyone as the enemy we would have lost, we
would have lost a lot of our supporters. That was what was said
at that time during the <study session and> meeting<. Then, no
one could find a solution. Uncle Nuon mentioned the class enemy
in a general sense of the Party line and in term of the rich and
the poor.> They also talked of the class struggle, the repressed
class, and the oppressors, the class that was oppressing the
others. <So, I studied very hard and tried to follow the lessons.
I also straightened myself along the line. They did not say so
and so was flexible or inflexible. They only referred to classes.
They also said that those in high positions were not good. They
also referred to those who used to hold high positions and ranks.
They> were <very> afraid of Lon Nol's men, <they> had to be
vigilant <for Lon Nol's people>. Well that is all I can tell you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Pech Chim, thank you. Thank you, Prosecutor. It is time for
us to take the lunch break now. The hearing will resume at 1.30
p.m.
Court officer, please take the necessary measures to ensure that
the witness is able to properly rest <in the room reserved for
witnesses and experts> during the break and bring him as well as
his duty counsel <back at about 1.30>.
Security officers, please <take> the Accused <Khieu Samphan> back
to the holding cell <downstairs> and bring <him> back to the
courtroom at 1.30 p.m.
The hearing is <in recess>.
<THE GREFFIER:
Please rise.>
(Court recesses from 1136H to 1331H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. We are resuming our proceedings, and we'll give
the floor to the Prosecution to continue examining the witness.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. Just one preliminary matter: we --
obviously, we're moving a little slower because of the
translation and other issues with this witness. I anticipate that
I have -- this is obviously a very important witness. I have one
more session of questions relating to Tram Kak, Kraing Ta Chan
and maybe a little more, and then I'd like to pose questions to
this witness also on the Central Zone. I'm assuming we will not
be calling this witness back later in the trial. He has
information relating to that.
So, in view of the -- having to go a little slower with this
witness, and his importance, we would -- I've talked to the civil
parties, we would request to have an additional session, which
means that I would finish today and they would use the first
session tomorrow morning. So that's our request in order to be
able to cover the issues that this witness has.
JUDGE FENZ:
Just to clarify, the request for an additional session is a
combined request from the Co-Lead Lawyers and the -- yes, thank
you.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Are you asking for a session today, or you need the entire
morning period tomorrow as well?
MR. LYSAK:
We're just asking for the first session tomorrow morning, so we
would finish by the morning -- morning break, combined between us
and the civil parties.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
MR. KOPPE:
Just to be clear, we're completely unprepared for any questioning
on issues relating to the Central Zone. I wonder why this request
is coming now, and not earlier. I'm also asking myself the
question how far the upcoming questions on matters relating to
the Central Zone is in fact within the scope of this second
trial? So, there's all kinds of questions that I have that are
not answered at this stage. So, I would like to have some more
clarity and clarification from the Prosecution as to what exactly
- I mean if he questions on the rubber plantation, I suppose
that's fine, but if it goes beyond that, then I would have a
problem.
MR. LYSAK:
I can respond very easily to that. He shouldn't be baffled at
all. I specifically brought up this issue when we were talking
about the witness statements, the new witness statements that
have been obtained. The purge of the Central Zone is a direct
issue in this trial. This Chamber has already said --
particularly with elderly witnesses -- that we're going to cover
all of the relevant issues, and not be in a position where we're
having to call back witnesses. So, no one should be surprised at
all that this witness is going to be examined on this issue,
which is one of the direct issues that are part of this trial.
MR. KOPPE:
I'm trying to keep up with all this, Mr. President, Your Honours,
but I'm simply -- I'm not prepared for this, for these questions.
I mean, there's all kinds of new statements that have arrived in
our case file. There are so many issues. I don't see any reason
why we should expect that this witness couldn't come back at one
point in time. He seems quite fit. So, I really don't see the
necessity to move ahead to an issue that we have at this point
very little, or relatively little, grasp of. So it's -- I find it
very problematic that we move about -- that we move on, on this
issue, like it is a very normal request. It isn't.
MR. LYSAK:
I'm sorry, Mr. President, but the procedure in the first trial
was that every witness would be examined on the entire scope of
the trial. And with elderly witnesses in the first trial, the
scope expanded beyond Case 002/01 to include all Case 002 issues.
So it has always been the order of this Court that all witnesses
are examined on the full scope of the trial. We have never wanted
to put ourselves in the position of having to repeatedly call
back witnesses. So, I take great issue with this -- with this
assertion.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Prosecution application has been objected to by the Nuon Chea
defence. The Chamber needs to consider a number of relevant
points. It therefore cannot rule on this matter now. It will
render its decision after the break.
Mr. Prosecutor, please proceed with your examination of the
witness.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. Witness, I've provided you and your counsel with a couple of
documents. I want you to, if you could, refer to E3/2107,
E3/2107, and particularly at Khmer ERN 00068051, that's 68051;
English, 00290207; French, 00655727. And this is a note in
relation to prisoner Thou Thip, which states -- I quote: "After
Angkar held a meeting on 24 January 1977 to announce that Chan
Raingsey's group had all been smashed by the Revolution, and not
a single man remained." End of quote.
Q. My question to you is: Do you know -- do you remember who Chan
Raingsey was?
MR. PECH CHIM
A. Mr. President, I only heard his name. I didn't know who he
was. At the time, I was a child. I heard the name during the
colonial period.
Q. There is a reference in these notes to a meeting having been
held on the 24 January, 1977. This was just a couple of weeks
before you left for the Central Zone, where it was announced that
this group had been smashed. Do you have any recollection of what
this meeting was about?
A. I do not recall that. I did not attend that meeting.
Q. In the same notebook, if you could now turn to Khmer, page
00068067, that's 68067; English, 00290235; and French, 00655749.
There are notes there for a prisoner Yin Born, who was a former
Khmer Rouge soldier, who had tried to flee because he was unhappy
with the food and had not been allowed to marry his fiance. And
specifically, the notes say -- quote: "He and a colleague both
had fiances in the village, and they had requested Angkar three
or four times to marry, but Angkar would not permit it." End of
quote.
Can you explain why, during the Khmer Rouge regime, people had to
get Angkar's approval for the person they would marry?
A. I was not aware of the story regarding <these> two persons.
<Generally speaking, those who wanted to get married needed to
ask for the authorization. The man needed to ask for the
authorization and asked the woman for her consent before >the
marriage <could> be celebrated. It was impossible for any
marriage<> to be celebrated without <the authorization>. They
also needed the <consent> of the parents, brothers and sisters
<>or the guardian <who was the local chief.> <That was the
principle. >However, I wasn't aware of the story of <the two
persons because there were many cases and I don't know who was in
charge of the area. However, that woman was not Khom because at
that time it was >in <1970 or> 1971.
Q. The translation I've just received said 1971. Were you talking
about 1971 or were you talking about during the Khmer Rouge
regime?
A. As a matter of fact, it was as of 1970. That was the <way they
organized. It was under the same regime. In 1971, the regime
organized marriages. Requests for marriages were brought to the
attention of unit chiefs or> group <leaders who then approved
them before the wedding took place. Then, more and more people
wanted to marry. So, marriages> involving <hundreds of> couples
<were organized>, and for those marriages to be conducted, <the
unit chiefs made requests to> the superior. <So, if we did not
marry many couples at the same time it would have taken us for
ages to process couple by couple marriages. We did not want
people to marry because we wanted to build up our army to speed
up and conquer the battles. We did not want to prolong the war.
We did not want the people to marry when they were still young.
We wanted them to wait to be a bit more mature. That was our
policy. But, some officials did not give people clear
instructions about that policy and only gave them a brief
summary. So, conflicts arose. But, since people had deeply loved
each other we had to arrange marriages for them.>
Q. I'm a little confused by your answer. You talked about a law.
Were you talking about a law during -- a law from the Khmer
Republic government? Or are you talking about a law during the
Khmer Rouge regime, while the Khmer Rouge was in power?
A. <Allow me to clarify>, the <Khmer government's> law <did not
exist and not apply in those areas>, and <they were under> the
<revolutionary> law. <It was the law of leniency. It was not a
clearly-defined law.> It had to do with coordination,
facilitation, and <arrangement because we did not want the people
to marry when they young. It was just facilitation.>
Q. How was this Revolutionary law, or Party principle, whatever
you want to call it, how was this communicated to cadres, to
Party members such as yourself?
A. For example, in the Tram Kak district, there was <Comrade>
Khom as chief. In the Southwest Zone was Ta Mok. In the sectors,
there were chiefs as well. <But, it was not precise and not
forbid us from doing it. They only instructed us to facilitate,
educate and hold meetings to demonstrate that only young men and
women were able to represent, defend and liberate our country. If
young men and women were not engaged our country would not be
strong and would not move forward. Only all of us worked together
did we make progress. So, men and women competed with one
another. Women raised their hands to show they were going into
the battlefields and that they were not going to marry. It's
decision and commitment in the meeting. Then, the men were
ashamed. So, they decided to join the army. There were many
soldiers as more and more people joined the army. Then, we were
able to liberate the country very quickly in 1975. That's the
idea. This is how they handled the work. Some people were too
serious and strict. When it was too strict it broke up. So, we
had to learn to make things easy and deal with the people's
feelings. Then, things went well. I did that. If things were too
complicated we organized the art performance the whole night. We
had to understand the art. We had art performances for three
months. There was no dispute at all. People were happy and even
young boys and girls sang songs. So, It was easy and things went
so well. We used arts to lead and politics to persuade. If we led
by force using weapons we would win and be defeated.>.
Q. Do I understand correctly that the practices or rules relating
to marriage that were followed in Tram Kak district had been
communicated to you by the upper echelon? Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And you mentioned that there was -- there came a time where
there was too many couples getting married, and that you needed
to start group marriages. Do you remember what year it was that
you started group marriages?
A. After the people <went to join the army in villages, women
helped with transports. It was a bit relief and when there were
more requests for marriages the unit chiefs told the parents to
organize the wedding at home and the commune chief had to be
informed as well. There were brothers and sisters and/or
relatives attending the wedding. Sometimes, the> marriages
<involved> four or five couples <or one couple>, because at the
battlefront there were no <demand for more people as the army
grew enormously in size. The water receded. So, marriages were
organized without any conflict.>
Q. And the decision to have group marriages, was that a decision
made by the district itself, or was that also an instruction from
the upper echelon?
A. The upper level officials gave their authorization, and it was
up to us to organize those marriages, whether they were
individual or collective. We consulted the communes and the
district in order to celebrate such marriages, <that was done at
the same time,> but we also had to consult the parents of those
involved, and in particular, the couples themselves. <We needed
to be sure whether they consented to the marriage or not.>
Q. Let me move on to another subject. The next area I want to ask
you about concerns reports from Krang Ta Chan that were sent to
the district, and then on to the sector. In your OCIJ interview,
E3/401, at Khmer, 00373475; English, 00381025; French, 00426213
to 214; you gave the following testimony:
Question: "Can you explain to us what they did with the
confessions sent from the Krang Ta Chan Security Centre? And
where did they take them to?"
Answer: "The confessions and reports which were in the enclosed
envelope, and sent from the Krang Ta Chan Security Centre to the
sector, had to go through the district first. The district then
sent them on to the sector by the district messenger. One or two
days later, the sector sent the decision, writing on the
confessions, back to the district." And continuing further below
in the same answer -- quote: "For the decision and confession
that related to the people of District 105, which was sent in an
open envelope, I would read them. If there were some names in the
confessions were crossed by the red ink, it meant that the sector
level had decided that these names were to be purged. 'To purge'
meant 'to kill'. The district then sent these names to the Krang
Ta Chan Security Centre who was responsible for implementation."
End of quote.
What I would like to do now, Mr. Witness, and with your leave,
Mr. President, is to provide you a few examples of confession
reports from Krang Ta Chan for -- to ask some questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Mr. Victor Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. My request is if -- whether the
Prosecution would also be so kind to read the following sentence
of that answer, especially the sentence which starts, "If the
names in the confession were not crossed by red ink --"
MR. LYSAK:
I'm reading from an outline. If Counsel wishes to use this in his
examination, he can. I don't think that's an appropriate
objection.
MR. KOPPE:
I'm always reprimanded for not citing all -- the whole passage of
the answer, so clearly the following-up part of this answer is
very relevant, and I think the witness is entitled to have that
part of his answer read to him as well.
MR. LYSAK:
Counsel, I'm happy to do that. Can you tell me again which part
you would like to read? Or can you just read it yourself?
MR. KOPPE:
Sure. "If the names in the confession were not crossed by the red
ink, it meant that the sector level had decided to release them
back to their village. The district did not have the right to
cross any name in the confession with the red ink. The district
only had the right to receive the decision from, and implement
the decision of the sector level."
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, what I'd like to do now is to provide a few of
these confession reports to the witness, and specifically
starting with document E3/2012, that's E3/2012.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may proceed.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. Mr. Witness, what you've been given are three reports, all
from Krang Ta Chan, or from the educational office of District
105. Each of them contains some handwritten annotations. The
first page, which is the first page of E3/2012 is a 30 July 1977
report from An, and it has an annotation up in the top left-hand
corner that reads, "'Smash them all', dated 7 August 1977, Tor
13, Prak".
The second confession example report is dated -- also dated the
30 July 1977. The annotation in the upper left-hand corner reads,
"It is okay to smash. 7 August 1977, Tor 13, Prak". And the third
report is dated the 11 July 1977, from An. It has two
annotations: one at the top left that says, "To be smashed". And
then next to two names that appear in the confession, two people
that had been implicated, there is an annotation that reads, "To
be arrested".
My first question is: Do you recognize Krang Ta Chan Chairman
An's handwriting and signature in these documents?
MR. PECH CHIM
A. Yes, I do. But as for the signature and the handwriting, I
recognize that it belongs to An. But these three letters <were>
issued <after I left>, -- I <was in Kampong Cham in> July 1977, I
actually <left in February>, because I was no longer there. I had
already left.
Q. I understand that. Can you tell us who Prak was, and what Tor
13 was?
A. Prak was in Sector 13. When Saom was sick, he had to be
hospitalized, then Prak came to take his place. An was there at
the time.
Q. And the instruction "to smash", what did that mean?
A. "To smash" means two things: One is to eliminate. It doesn't
mean to execute, but to eliminate. In other words, to eliminate
the sense of class, <repression of other people,> exploitation of
other people, so we have to get rid of all of this mindset. We
have to get rid of all bad <deeds, ideas and thoughts from our
mind, feeling and brain.> That is what that means in one sense.
The other one is to eliminate, to get rid of everything.
Q. Mr. Witness, you were shown these documents during your OCIJ
interviews, and let me read -- remind you what you said in two
different interviews about these documents. First, in interview
E3/401; at Khmer, 00373475; English, 00381025; French, 00426214;
when you were asked about these documents, and the meaning, you
said -- quote: "On this document, Prak, who was the secretary of
Sector 13, made an annotation authorizing execution." And in your
Interview E3/4628, E3/4628; at Khmer, 00373391; English,
00379307; French, 00426199; you said -- I quote: "This word,
'smash', was a reference to killing." End of quote.
Mr. Witness, when a prisoner confession report was sent to the
sector and it came back with an instruction to smash, that meant
to kill the prisoner; correct?
A. That is correct. To eliminate means to smash <or annihilate>.
That is it. <In terms of feeling and stance>, we get rid of the
<position> of class in the society. <It has two meanings and I
clarify it for you to understand. Regarding these letters,> I did
ask <and tell> Prak. When Prak was there, and Saom actually left
<afterward> when he was <discharged from the hospital>. But I had
already left for <and stayed in> Kampong Cham for nine months
already.
Q. Alright. In the testimony of yours that I read a few minutes
ago, where counsel was kind enough to add a little more of it,
you testified that while you were Tram Kak district chief, you
received confession reports which you sent to the sector and that
you received instructions back from the sector on who was to be
killed, who was to be released, which you sent to Krang Ta Chan
for implementation. I want to show you now, with your leave, Mr.
President, a report -- confession report from prison chief An,
from August 1976. It's document E3/4098, E3/4098, and it is on
Khmer, 00271030 to 31; English, 00322114 through15; and French,
00623837 through 838.
Mr. President, with your leave, may I provide E3/4098 to the
witness?
MR PRESIDENT:
You may proceed.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Now, Mr. Witness, when you look at this document, there are two
different documents copied on the pages, so if you would look at
the left side, what I want to refer you to is the left side of
the first page, that is on Khmer , and then on the
next page, the right side of the document. This is a report from
Krang Ta Chan, Chief An, dated
August 1976, a period during  
          4   which you were the district chief. It's regarding the confessions
of two prisoners: Lay Thi , a former Lon Nol sergeant; and Toan
Tien, a former drug store assistant, who were accused of
criticizing the Revolution and planning to flee to Thailand. And
what I want to refer you to is the annotation in the upper left
hand corner of the first page, an annotation that states "to be
interrogated then smashed". Do you recognize the handwriting of
that annotation?
MR. PECH CHIM:
No, I do not recall. I do not recognize this handwriting and
neither do I recall this signature.
Q. Now you testified that sometimes what you got back from the
sector office when you sent them confession reports were names
marked in red. Did you also sometimes get back confession reports
with handwritten instructions on them like this document?
A. I do not see any cross sign. I do not see the red <scripts>
there, but I saw An. This letter -- this one was issued by An.
Q. My question is: Did sector chief Saom only respond by putting
red crosses or did the sector office sometimes write instructions
in handwriting?
A. He merely put a cross sign beside it and he did not make any
additional comments and he forwarded it to Khom, and Khom
reviewed it, after which he would refer it to An and I did not
dare do anything without letting Khom know.
Q. You, in your testimony -- trial testimony in 2013 - this is at
at about 12.01 p.m., right around noon, you gave the
following testimony:
Question: "You said you requested for some release of the people
from Krang Ta Chan security. Do you know what happened to those
who were not released?"
Answer: "I don't know what happened to them or where they should
have gone, but I believe they died. Only some people were
spared." End of quote.
[14.1748]
My first question: Did you have the authority yourself to decide
whether prisoners at Krang Ta Chan were released or was it only
the sector or higher levels that could make that decision?
A. This issue of the prisoner, it was under the exclusive control
of the sector. It was the matter within the sector's
responsibility. I only got the information from the base. They
actually brought up the story of <about> 10<-15> people. At that
time, they requested to me that I was lenient on that and I
requested to others and <>when I came back to the office, I made
that request to the sector based on the request from the base. I
had the authority at that time to request for people to be
released from the security centre. I did have that authority to
request at that time, and when I made that request, he agreed,
but then he said that I had to review it again whether or not
certain people would be involved in politics, and others who were
not, I had to review it again before deciding to release those
prisoners. But then later on he decided that those people be
released.
Q. And when you say that you were instructed to review whether
people were involved in politics, what do you mean by that? What
do you mean by "people who were involved in politics"?
A. Those who were arrested and imprisoned, whether or not they
were related to serious political matters -- if it was the case,
then we would have to handle them differently. If they had done
anything to do with that, then they would be arrested. So Khom or
the militia in the commune would see, then they would arrest
them, but when I went there I actually found out different
things. It was not really serious wrongdoing, <I dared protest
for the level of their offences to be reduced,> then I <made a>
request to the sector. I did not actually request to Khom. I
requested to the sector because the prisoners were under the
control of the sector. At that time, they instructed me to
review. Of course, at that time, I knew that some of them were
released, but others were not and I did not know because I could
not find out the reason to request for their release because that
was the affairs of the upper authorities or other people had the
intention to do it and I did not dare to interfere too much
otherwise I would be in trouble myself.
Q. That's what I wanted to ask you about. Did you worry if you
asked too often for prisoners to be released that you might be
viewed as suspect? Did you worry about that?
A. <> I was concerned, but I had to be based on the reason. The
things that were not related to politics, in other words, if they
did not <go> against the other people and if I knew for sure that
they were good people, gentle and obedient, and they were
<well-disciplined and> hard-working, so we had all the trust in
him, then I would request to the upper authority. I would help
them happily.
Q. In OCIJ interview, E34626 -- E3/4626, at Khmer, 00373465
through 66; English, 00380133 through 34; French, 00426204; you
made the following statement -- quote:
"As for people who had problems at the base, for example those
who had committed immoral acts, were educated locally by the
village and the commune, but if they still did not obey the rules
after being educated, the commune would ask for an opinion from
the district committee, which composed of Khom, Keav, Nhev and
Meas, and the relevant commune committee. We would then hold the
meeting to discuss the matter and make the decision. In the
meeting at the district level, the Party secretary was the one to
make the final decision on the fate of the person being educated,
but the district level had to consult with the sector Party first
before any specific decision was made. The sector Party would
then make a final decision. The district Party was the one to
implement the decision of the sector Party."
Mr. Witness, when the district asked the sector for an opinion or
asked for guidance and the sector responded, was that response
considered an order or instruction that you were obliged to
follow and implement?
A. That decision was the instruction. <It was not the absolute
order.> And it was also a guideline on the working procedure at
the district level.
Q. And did you know whether the sector had to consult with the
zone, the level above it, before responding with decisions on
executions or arrests?
A. In principle, they had to seek consultation. But did they seek
consultation in every matter? That is beyond my knowledge.
Q. I want to ask you about an incident you described in your
Interview, E34626 -- E3/4626, and the reference is at Khmer,
00373469 through 470; English, 00380137; and French, 00426208.
You were asked in the interview how Ta Mok -- Ta Mok was informed
or reported to regarding Krang Ta Chan and this is what you said
- quote:
"I thought he was briefed with either verbal report or written
report about the Krang Ta Chan Security Centre by the sector. I
did not report to him, but I knew about that because in one day
at the table of the sector level meeting, I overheard the sector
report to Ta Mok about the matters of the security centre. I
overheard Ta Saom tell Ta Mok that the group had been resolved.
As I understood it, the phrase 'had been resolved' meant that the
group was already purged." End of quote.
You were describing here a conversation you heard at a sector
level meeting. Where were sector level meetings, like this, held?
A. That word was said following the meeting<, the congress> and
they <> talked to each other, only the sector and Ta Mok. <> They
were speaking in confidential manner. They only said that the
matter had already been resolved, so at that time the
participants of the meeting had already left the meeting and both
of them talked to each other about that, but I, at that time, did
not leave. I remained there. In the normal working procedure,
when there was an approval, they would approve it orally, and
they only spoke one or two words of approval and that was it. It
was not without any -- it was without any documentation
whatsoever. They only said the issue was resolved and that was
it.
Q. How often did Ta Mok attend sector level meetings?
A. After the assembly, when everyone had left, he came and
subsequently he told us where we were gathered. <Later on, he did
not pick any specific location to speak. He would tell Saom
wherever they met.> One day I was at home at the Trapeang Thma
office. He came looking very tired<, sat down and asked me
whether Saom was around. I said 'yes'. Then, he asked me to fetch
Saom. I asked a messenger to ride a bicycle to the north. Shortly
after, I saw Saom coming on a bicycle. At that time, we had only
bicycles. He came to meet and work together secretly,> but I
didn't <dare to> attend that discussion and <only> after <he
left, the plan was revealed. Saom gave further instruction and>
he explained the plans of action and he convened a meeting of
officials <from every district> and he gave them those plans of
action, so <I only knew what they discussed in study sessions and
meetings and> it was not possible for me to know what he had
<discussed privately with Saom>.
Q. And can you tell me where were these sector level meetings
held? Were they held somewhere in Tram Kak district?
A. Customarily, when Ta Mok went there, that was in Tram Kak
district. <It was the security area. Meetings <were> not held in
Kiri Vong <and were rarely convened in Angkor Chey. They were
held in> Tram Kak. <Before> Ta Mok <went to the meetings,
invitation letters> were sent to all the districts, and since I
was there as the host, I had to welcome everyone and to feed
them. So we had to prepare food, rice, to welcome people who came
from Kiri Vong<, Kaoh Andaet, Treang, Angkor Chey> and other
places. If the meeting lasted for only <one> day, we had to
<give> them <food and accommodation> for <that> day. If it lasted
a week, we had to <give> them <food and accommodation> for a
week.
Q. And, before I move on to another subject, was there a Sector
13 office in Tram Kak and if so, where was that office?
A. The Sector 13 office was in Tram Kak district, <there was a
party school in the sector office compound. I studied at the
school until the war ended> and after the war I built a <bigger>
one in <a village to the north>. That was a more convenient
location. They did not take the office, but they used it for
work. They came to work there. Ta Mok also went to work there.
<Ta Mok> didn't <run any congress for long>. They would go there
<to talk in meetings for one or two hours. He read out loud. We
took notes. Then, he left right away. After> that the sector
chief would then <interpret the content of his lectures and> hand
<it> down to the lower levels -- officials at the lower levels --
what Ta Mok had told them. That is all. <>.
Q. I want to ask you about one other incident or meeting relating
to Ta Mok that you discussed in your interviews. This was in
interview, again Interview E34626, at Khmer, 00373471; English,
00380138; French, 00426209; and here you were testifying about
another discussion that you heard between sector secretary, Saom;
and zone secretary, Ta Mok. I quote:
"After the sector assembly ended, I heard Ta Saom and Ta Mok
discuss another problem, which involved a group of 60 people who
were living in Cheang Tong and Kbal Ou villages in Tram Kak
district. These 60 persons were implicated by others. Ta Saom
asked Ta Mok how to resolve this problem." End of quote.
My first follow-up question: Do you remember, Mr Witness, this
group of 60 people who had been implicated? Had they been
implicated in confessions from Krang Ta Chan or had they been
implicated by a -- in confessions that came from a different
security office that had been communicated to you?
A. Regarding those 60 people, in fact, the arrest followed
confessions from the West Zone. At the time, Boeun was also
present <that day>. He was aware of everything. He knew
everything. He knew many things that happened. Ta Mok asked him
how the problem was going to be resolved and he answered by
saying that they should ask Chim to solve that problem because
those 60 people were people who had been involved in the secret
struggle so Boeun -- people, 60 people who had been involved in
this secret struggle -- asked why they had been arrested. <Ta Sy
was arrested.> He said that they had been implicated and it was
after those 60 people were arrested that they were implicated.
<They were kept in Cheang Tong village. Since the Party confided
them in me, I decided to take care of them. I regularly checked
only two houses because I did not know the rest of them. I
accepted them to manage the houses> and they are still alive
today. <They have no problem.>
Let me seize the opportunity to say <one word to> the United
Nations <before Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen>, the
members of the <Communist Party of> Kampuchea were only fighting
with one another, <and that's why> they <suffered a great loss>,
because we have the case of these 60 persons who were engaged in
this struggle. <The secret struggle force in villages was
composed of that many people. Sy was living in the area, but> I
do not know exactly the nature of the problem <he> had with Ta
Mok. So there were lots of conflicts between <these> people
during that period. <Sy would blame people in cooperatives. They
did not come to terms for many things. Sy was a learned person.
Ta Mok was a bit below him, but he was more decisive. Ta Sy
studied politics at Pali School>.
<When the French war ceased>, he had gone <with Vietnamese. He
did not go to Hanoi, but he went directly to Vietnam with the
Vietnamese> and he subsequently returned to Cambodia. <So, they
might want to show they were different. One person might have
thought he had been an old-timer while the other might also have
had the same thought in mind>. Apparently there was a struggle
between two veterans who <wanted to gain a strong image,
respectively. Ta Mok was the Zone Chief of Sihanouk. Later on, Ta
Chong was a deputy in Kaoh Kong. He was a former monk from
Thailand. He was a Khmer-Thai person. Then, Chong disappeared and
so did Sy. Only Ta Mok remained. That's all I want to say and
analyse the problem. They> couldn't tolerate one another since
there were internal conflicts. In fact, it is rather that those
internal problems are the root of the current trial which is
unfolding. <How can we completely resolve this problem? What will
be the correct resolution?>
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr Pech Chim. It is time for us to take a break now.
Judge Fenz, do you have any questions to put to the prosecutor?
JUDGE FENZ:
Two questions to the prosecutor. In relation to the request for
additional time and Counsel Koppe's objection, when it comes to
the part of the argument that dealt with the scope, just to
clarify, does the Prosecution wish to ask questions which are
outside the scope of Case 002 as defined by the decision on
severance?
MR. LYSAK:
Not at all, Your Honour, these are questions within the scope of
Case 002/02.
JUDGE FENZ:
Thank you. Then the second question doesn't need to be asked.
MR. PRESIDENT:
<>
<The Civil Party Lead Co-Lawyer, please go ahead.>
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. I would like the Chamber to be properly
informed so that it may take its decision during the break. We
intend to use an hour 20 minutes to put questions, 20 minutes
regarding forced marriages<, by my colleague,> and I'll <need one
hour. So I am also asking you to consider the request for
additional time, independently of the issue of whether or not you
will authorize> questions regarding the Central Zone.
I don't know whether what I'm saying is clear enough. It had been
envisaged that we'd have one hour 20 minutes, 20 minutes for my
colleague for forced marriages, and one hour for myself, which
means that if we start today we would not be able to conclude by
the end of the day<, anyway>. So we want to be able to continue
tomorrow morning <during the first session,> in order to complete
the questions we have <planned> for this witness. I would
therefore request the Chamber to take into account this
application independently of the Prosecution's motion and the
objection of my learned friend regarding questions <related to>
the Central Zone.
I hope it is clear <for> the Chamber, <who appears to be>
somewhat perplexed, <as for> the Parties<>. We had envisaged that
we would need <a half-day plus Friday, because this witness was
planned for two and a half days. So that brings us to Friday at
noon, and if you grant <us> an additional session, you could in
fact grant the same amount of time to the Defence, in order to
ensure equal time for the Parties.> <Those are the remarks> I
<will rely on the wisdom of the> Chamber <regarding this point>.
JUDGE FENZ:
Well, we heard it, but what is now the combined request? How much
time the Prosecution and Co-Lead Lawyers -- how much more time
the Prosecution and Co-Lead Lawyers ask for, combined?
MR. LYSAK:
My friend can correct me if I misunderstand, but if they have the
morning session -- the first morning session -- tomorrow, that is
about an hour and
minutes, so I think they would finish in 
          15   that. What she's saying is that if they start at 3 o'clock, they
need an hour and 15 or an hour and 20, so the last session this
afternoon is shorter than the first morning session. I think
that's --
JUDGE FENZ:
Could you answer the question? How much extension is requested?
MR. LYSAK:
The exact same thing we asked for before, which is just the first
session tomorrow morning.
JUDGE FENZ:
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, please proceed.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. Prosecutor <Lysak>, this question is for you. I understand is
that you don't want to <put questions that extend> beyond the
scope of Case 002/02. <But the> questions you want to ask have to
do with the Central Zone<, which was formerly> the North Zone.
Now it appears that in the Severance <Order>, in the annex to
that <Order>, we had only envisaged to deal with policies
regarding <internal> purges, in a <very> general manner, and we
even have a footnote, Footnote Number 9, in which we had
indicated that we could <possibly consider> extending the
examination of factual matters regarding <the internal purges in>
the North and East Zone, but that would require an application
for an extension of the scope <of Case 002/02>. I <must admit
that I> don't <quite understand> what your position <is>
regarding these matters that have to do with the Central Zone.
<MR. LYSAK>:
Let me be clear. The people who are the victims of this purge in
the Central, which is the old North Zone, so it's part, there are
two zones that are part of that internal purge. The Central Zone
is the old North Zone, so it's part of that, but the victims of
this purge that are the subjects of this questioning were people
who went to S-21, so the testimony on the subject relates to S-21
and the issue of purges of cadres, which of course are connected.
So I hope that -- and I think it will be very clear from the
witness's interview as well and from the questions I will ask
which part of the case they relate to.
MR. KOPPE:
S-21, I understand. So the questions will be relating to S-21.
That is the crime site that we're dealing with in effect.
MR. LYSAK:
Yes, there's also a section -- segment of this trial called
"Internal Purges", so it's relevant to both of those. There's
obviously a significant overlap connection between that.
In answer to your other question, Judge Lavergne, I know you're
referring to a footnote. I believe that was in the Severance
Decision. I would need to consult with the office to know whether
we would have any intention to do that, but not at this time. My
present request has nothing to do with expanding the scope of the
trial.
MR PRESIDENT:
It's possible that the Prosecution is wrong because it would mean
that this morning's hearings are longer than those of the
afternoon. <That's the past practise. Now, we have cut off half
an hour. So, the amount of time is equal>. It's possible that
tomorrow morning, it will be shorter <because> the Chamber <only
deals with the questioning proceedings and informs the Parties of
their rights in the morning. So, it is shorter. This is what I
can clarify. Now, it> is time for us to take our break. We shall
resume before 10 past 3.00.
< Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room
reserved for witnesses and experts during the break time and
invite him, as well as his duty counsel, back into the courtroom
at 3.10 p.m.>
<The Greffier:
Please rise.>
(Court recesses from 1450H to 1512H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
<Please be seated.> The Court is back in session. <First, the>
Chamber is going to rule on the request from the Prosecution
which was formulated a little while ago.
The Chamber grants an extra session<, that is, tomorrow morning>
to the Prosecution and to the Lead <Co->Lawyers of the civil
parties. <Second,> the Parties will have to put questions that
fall within the scope of Case 002/02. In the event of any
concrete objection, the Chamber will rule on a case <by> case
basis.
<The International Deputy Co-Prosecutor>, you may continue.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. Mr. Witness, let me quickly follow up on the answer that you
gave just before the break regarding the 60 people who had been
implicated. You indicated that these people were eventually
released and that they are still alive; can you give us the names
and locations of some of these 60 people?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. Regarding these 60 people, these were people who were living
in the cooperative in Cheang Tong commune. I based myself on
information transmitted to me by <Boeun> because he was based in
this commune. <I don't remember other names>. I only remember
<another name> Chea <or Ta Chea>, who was next to the pagoda <in
Moeung Char village>. I don't know if he is still alive <or dead
today>. And the other ones lived in Kbal Ou village <and other
areas>. And these were people who were waging a secret struggle.
And I would like to specify that I gathered this information
through Boeun. <He trusted me and told me all these things>. This
was <the> place where people were waging a secret struggle. <Sy
was> working <and was> living there. And they were connected with
people in the city. And this was a time of Hu Nim, Hou Youn and
Pol Pot. And Ta Mok was outside of this network. He would travel
to the provinces. And when Hu Nim, Hou Youn were <wanted>, our
network hid them in the village of Kbal Ou. And it was <Boeun>
who was in charge of hiding them. And when Sy was arrested, the
60 villagers were questioned. Whereas they were part of the Khmer
Rouge network, they were blamed for belonging to the Vietnamese
network. And I learnt all of this <> through <Comrade> Boeun. And
I <was asked to> receive the people from Boeun to re-educate <and
advise> them. They could not betray us, so we would welcome them
with open arms<, heart and pleasure. I wanted them to live in
peace and survive because they were not bad elements. They did
not betray.> They just <earned> their living in an honest way
<and carried out normal activities at home and in the farmland
and rice fields.> That's all I can tell you.
Q. A couple of just very quick questions and I would let others
follow up on that. This incident in which 60 people were
implicated and you followed up, did this take place during the
time you were in Tram Kak district -- that is, between April 1975
and February 1977; yes or no?
A. It was before that period. We solved that problem before that
period. In fact, this problem occurred only after Sy's arrest.
<Sy's arrest came to the knowledge of Tram Kak district only
after it had taken place.> I don't know exactly when Sy was
arrested because I was not aware of everything. And you could
maybe tell me yourself. In fact, I was simply told <by Boeun>
that Sy had been arrested. And after his arrest, all people in
Kbal Ou <village> were denounced <because they were implicated
with the network>. And they belonged to our network. This is all
I knew.
Q. That's why I asked you if this took place while you were in
Tram Kak, Mr. Witness. We know from S-21 records that Chou Chet
alias Sy was arrested in March 1978. Would I be correct then that
if this took place while you were in the Central Zone in March
1978, so these 60 people could not have been implicated by Chou
Chet if he was only arrested in 1978? Is that correct?
A. I'm not sure of that. It's up to you to get that information.
I'm just talking to you about the facts that I was aware of. We
were at the Party school in Trapeang Thnal <where he assigned
those people to me to look after>. Boeun <was> afraid <of looking
after them, so he assigned them to me. But, I heard that he had
guaranteed 100% that those people were not traitors.> And <he>
asked me to support <him with some comments. Then, we decided to
handle it that way.> So I cannot tell you when these 60 people
were arrested. But in any case, it was before I left for Kampong
Cham.
Q. And before I move on to that issue, let me just mention one
name to you. There was one significant Southwest Zone cadre who
was arrested before February 1977, whose name was Achar Kong
(phonetic). He was the Southwest Zone hospital chairman and a
member of the Zone Committee. Do you remember Achar Kong
(phonetic)?
A. (Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please answer the question because just before that, the
<microphone> was not activated so the Parties could not hear you
and neither could the interpreters.
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. No, I do not know him.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. Let me move on now to the period that you moved from Tram Kak
to Kampong Cham. And what I want to focus on is a meeting that
you described in Interview E319.1.18 at answers 60 through 65.
You were describing here your trip from Tram Kak to Kampong Cham.
You described how you stopped one day in Phnom Penh and you
described a meeting of high-ranking Party leaders that you went
to. You stated that the meeting lasted approximately one hour or
more and covered many issues, and that there were approximately
50 to 60 participants. Can you please tell the Chamber who the
high-ranking Party members were who attended this meeting in
Phnom Penh?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. The <people> chairing the meeting were Pol Pot, Ta Mok, Ke
Pauk <and Sae, who> had brought some forces there. <I do not
remember the other members of the meeting. The content of the
meeting was the instructions on work directions. I was assigned
to work in the rubber plantations while the rest of cadres, who
came with me, were left to Bong Pauk. Pauk was managing and
dealing with all districts because the former district cadres had
gone into the jungles. Some of the newcomers were in charge of
districts while others were in charge of communes according to
the actual needs>. I was not sure of the exact number of people
<coming together>. I think there were about 50 people maybe.
Let's say 50. Yes. So they were <superiors> as well as
subordinates together. <Sae> (phonetic) alias Chap also <came
along>. There was no education session. It was simply a meeting
<where short instructions on work directions> were given in order
to <re->organise the sector because <the former district
officials> had escaped into the forest. So we had to restructure
the sector in order to avoid regionalism and in order to avoid
everybody trying to be a boss. And <I was interested and
understood that we had to make sure> that there was no
discrimination <or egoism or gossip> against the cadres. All of
-- this is what was discussed during that meeting.
The next day, <Bong> Pauk <took us> to Kampong Cham <where we
spent two nights>. And <in> the <following morning>, he summoned
people to a conference during which he <briefly> informed them of
the situation. So the district cadres, as well as the commune
cadres <from the Central Zone>, came to this meeting, where he,
Ke Pauk, <allocated> the responsibility to <all districts.> And
then <after the meeting was concluded,> he <assigned> me to the
rubber plantation <as requested>. Later, he went to <monitor my
work. He told me to re-organize everything by myself.> And then I
organise the work by assigning tasks to the different cadres <who
worked together in a consistent manner>.
Q. Thank you for that response, Mr. Witness. If I can ask you to
do your best for the remainder of the day, to focus on answering
my questions. I wish I had hours to talk to you because your
information is fascinating to me, but I have a little time. So if
you do your best to respond to my specific questions, we'll get
through this quicker.
In regards to the people who were present, was Nuon Chea present
at this meeting?
A. I don't remember, in fact. I cannot tell you if <Nuon Chea>
was present or not because I don't remember. In any case, <Bong>
Khieu Samphan was not present.
Q. Let me refresh your recollection, Mr. Witness, with what you
told OCIJ at E319.1.18 at Answer 60. When you were asked who
attended this meeting, this is what you said:
"The high-ranking people included Pol Pot, Ta Mok, Nuon Chea, Ke
Pauk, Son Sen, and there were also other intellectuals such as
Thiounn Thioeunn, Minister of Health, and Thiounn Mumm." End of
quote.
Does that refresh your recollection, Mr. Witness, that the people
present at this meeting also included Nuon Chea and Son Sen and
some intellectuals?
A. I could -- that was all I could recollect. When I was young,
my memory was very good, but now I am at this age, I am forgetful
<and weak>, becoming more forgetful and that was all I could
recollect.
Q. Now, in regards to Khieu Samphan, you were asked in the
interview if he was at the meeting. Your response was "I am not
sure". I want to read to you an excerpt from an interview of one
of the other cadres from the Southwest, who travelled with your
group to the Central Zone, worked for a woman named Yut. And in
Interview .51 at Answer 36, she gave the following
testimony -- quote:
"We stayed one night in Phnom Penh on the campus of a university
whose name I do not remember. Yut and the other 10 cadres
attended the meeting with Ta Mok and Khieu Samphan. I know that
because Ta Mok came to pick them up for the meeting by car and
they returned that night. Yut told me in person that Khieu
Samphan would come to perform an inauguration for us the next
morning." End of quote.
Does any of that refresh your recollection about whether Khieu
Samphan was at this meeting or whether you saw him at any time
while you were in Phnom Penh on your way to Kampong Cham?
A. At the time, it was a brief moment and there were many people
coming, and I do not recall. I could recognise some faces, but I
did not know others. And some just came briefly <to give a
keynote speech>. I <do not have any details> on this point. I
apologise.
Q. Thank you for clarifying that. Where did this meeting take
place?
A. Tuol <Preah> Srey (phonetic) school in the morning. When we
got there, it was in the evening, so I took <dinner and> the
night rest over there. <Bong Pauk and Sae> stayed inside the room
for the meeting. And as for the planning, <Bong Pauk,> Ta Mok,
<and Sae>, and others were there to receive the planning. And
they came out of the meeting, and then they gave us a bit of
instructions, and then they left. And those who were in the
meeting, the combatants -- male and female -- we were all there
and we listened to that instruction. And then the truck came to
pick us up all the way to Kampong Cham province. At Kampong Cham,
Pauk <had> the <food prepared> for us, <then we took the night
rest. His force or local district officials> there <attended> the
meeting <with> us <the whole day. At the end of the meeting, we
divided tasks and directions of work.> And afterwards, we simply
went to undertake our respective task.
Q. Okay. I'm trying to focus at this time just on the meeting in
Phnom Penh. Which leaders -- which of the high-ranking leaders
spoke at this meeting?
A. At the meeting, there was only one person <speaking>. There
were around 10 people coming, but only one person spoke. Another
simply came to accompany him. Only Pol Pot spoke at that meeting.
And he simply said that there were traitors in the Central Zone
and they'd all gone into the forest. <He said, "Now, we turn you
all into cadres and we rely on our male and female combatants to
do this difficult piece of work. You can imagine how difficult it
is, but we have to make efforts to smooth difficulties out of our
way> and the Party has already given us the task, so we <have> to
accomplish the task assigned<">. That was the direction. <Other
senior officials did not make any comments.>
Q. Let me just read a short excerpt from your interview. This is
again E319.1.18 at Answer 64 through Answer 65 - quote:
"During the meeting, Pol Pot said about betrayal in the zones.
And it was also written on blackboards. Pol Pot did not use the
word 'purges', he said that this zone is traitorous. I assign you
comrade to go. You are my right hand man, deal with it. Can you
do it?" End of quote.
You said that there was something written on the blackboard at
this meeting. What do you remember being written on the
blackboard?
A. He wrote several bullet points of directions. At that time, to
my recollection, there were only a few bullet points. The first
bullet point was to control the situation. Second was to delegate
the task and assign the task <working together to make progress>
in order to accomplish the goal. And <don't be regionalist,
don't> be too proud of ourselves, not to be arrogant, not to
over-praise ourselves, and we do not have to have the
individualist perspective. In order words, we do not have to mind
that we are from the zone <or> from that zone, we had to <clear
our mind off this view>. So that was a brief meeting. It was very
brief indeed, and it was only to give the direction <like a
learning session.>
Q. Did Pol Pot, during this meeting, talk about Koy Thuon, the
former chairman of the North Zone?
A. Let me try to recollect. He made mention a few people, but I
do not recollect. But I do recall that he did mention Koy Thuon.
He said that Koy Thuon had betrayed the Party. But I did not know
the detail actually. At that time, he just made mention that, and
I simply followed. I did not know the background story of the
betrayal by Koy Thuon. So that was the one he mentioned at the
time, to my recollection. <He did not mention anyone else.>
Q. Did he tell you that as you were sitting in this meeting, Koy
Thuon was under arrest and being tortured and interrogated at
S-21?
A. As usual, the arrest was not made known. They never told
anybody of the arrest. They only said that one of our members had
betrayed us. That was <the word they used>.
Q. All right. I want to now cover -- you indicated that one of
the instructions at this meeting was that there were traitors in
the zone you were going to. You indicated that you were told they
had fled to the forest and you needed to find them. In your
interview, E3/5786, at Answer 1, you gave the following testimony
about one of the north -- one of the cadres at the rubber
plantation zone after you arrived. I quote.
"At the beginning before that woman became my deputy, the deputy
was a man who was from Preaek Kak in the Central Zone. However,
after he had worked with me for about one month, he was removed
by Ke Pauk, who said that man had been implicated by others and
had an affair with a woman in Preaek Kak." End of quote.
My first question: Did Ke Pauk tell you who it was who had
implicated this deputy at the zone rubber plantation?
A. No, he did not. At that time, the decision was all up to him
alone. He <made> the <overall> decision, and he would give the
order to me to implement. But I did not implement that order
because I was at that time being engaged in getting the rubber
latex. And I could not do it desperately without knowing the
rationale. But once <someone implicated that person he asked his>
messenger <to come> to take <that man. So, I just turned that
person in as requested. I gave Dorn to him through his
messenger.> With him, I could resist against his order as well,
sometimes. And we had some young people who <had> certain ability
to <help me with my> work. But generally, <after I sent those
people to his office> they could not stay with him for a long
time. He would remove them one after another. And I question him
as well why people could not stay with him. And he told me that
well, those people had betrayed the Party, so they had to be
removed. And I told him that well, if you did not have any clear
reason for removal, you simply listen<ed> to orders of the
implication by others, that would not be good.< I told him not to
trust the implications and that he should have assessed their
stances to find out if those people were really bad or good. To
me, they were good people. One day>, he also came to me for other
forces<, asking even for the district chief from me. That made me
clear that> he did not understand what was happening on the
ground. <He did not have the full picture of the work situation.>
That's why whenever I <sent> people to work with him, he would
remove them most of the time. But I ran out of people to send to
him because after all, they could not work with him. <So, I
refused to send more people to work with him because two of my
people had already disappeared. I was not saying they had died,
but they had disappeared.>
MR. LYSAK:
Mr. President, with your leave, at this time I'd like to provide
to the witness, document E3/2956. It is a prisoner list from S-21
that records the list of -- a list of persons from the old North
Central Zone who were arrested between -- in February and March
1977, including a number of people from the rubber plantation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Victor Koppe, you may proceed.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. While agreeing that technically, the
question falls within the scope of the second trial because it
relates to S-21, I think I should also reveal that I feel quite
uncomfortable with this line of questioning because I'm simply
not, at this stage, having enough understanding as to where the
Prosecution wants to go to. While, technically, all parties in
this courtroom should know what has transpired in the North Zone,
what has happened with regard to purges, et cetera, but I think
it's the first time in this courtroom in the second trial that I
really don't know where the Prosecution is going to and what is
his line of questioning leading to. All of a sudden, we're
dealing with purges in the North Zone, Central Zone, S-21. We are
unprepared for this. And like I said again, it is within the
scope. Technically, that is true. But we are unprepared to
understand really what's going on.
MR. LYSAK:
I honestly do not know. I'm not sure how to respond to that.
JUDGE FENZ:
We take this as an observation.
MR. LYSAK:
May I provide this document to the witness, Mr. President?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed.
MR. KOPPE:
Fine. And I object. I object to this line of questioning. I mean,
we're not usually in the habit of saying that we don't know what
is going on this trial. But this time, I feel quite uncomfortable
with what is happening right now. So I object to this line of
questioning. It is not technically outside the scope, but it is
outside of the agreement that we all have, that we are dealing
here with Krang Ta Chan and Tram Kak, and that once we deal with
S-21, we deal with S-21 and the purges in the North Zone. And all
of a sudden on a Wednesday afternoon, we're talking about
something that we are ill prepared for. So I object.
MR. LYSAK:
If I may respond? If counsel is not prepared, that is his fault.
This witness testified about this in his original interviews.
This has been part of the charges of the indictment since it was
issued in 2010. If he doesn't understand where I am going, that's
his problem. I think it's absolutely clear, this has been part of
the case, it's part of the case we're trying. We have a witness
here who has direct relevant information. And if he's not
prepared, that's not your problem, it's not my problem, it's only
his own problem.
MR. KOPPE:
It's my client's problem, to begin with, as well. I remember we
had a whole discussion about which documents we should be putting
on the interface so that the other parties are well prepared.
Documents that everybody knew that was -- documents that were
about the facts that we were discussing. And for the first time,
we are saying that we do not know at this stage where the
Prosecution is going, we get this answer. So I strongly object to
what's going on here right now.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection by the defence counsel for Nuon Chea is not
sustained. The Chamber has made it clear that the parties can put
the questions to the witness within the scope of Case 002/02. And
the questions that have been put by the prosecutor to the witness
are indeed relevant to Case 002/02. So the prosecutor may
proceed. And witness is instructed to respond to the question put
by the prosecutor.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Witness, in this list I've just provide to you, I want to
refer you, if you can to numbers 29 through 37 on the list. There
are a total of 84 central old north zone cadres who are
identified on this list as having been arrested between
mid-February and the end of March 1977. Numbers 29 through 37 are
nine cadres from the zone rubber plantation, who were arrested
mostly in mid-March 1977, about one month after you say you
arrived at the Central Zone rubber plantation. One of them,
number 29, Sam Sarom alias Man is identified as being a chief of
the Preaek Kak rubber plantation. My first question is: Looking
at this list of nine people, can you tell us is one of these
people the deputy from Preaek Kak who you described was arrested
on the instructions of Ke Pauk?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. I would like to clarify that I do not recall the number. At
the time, they only used their  <revolutionary names>. And since
here, there <are> full name<s and they are somewhat complete,
but> I do not recall. But there was actually one person from
Preaek Kak. Ta Pauk took him away. One of them <was> taken away.
Q. If you look at this list, you'll see that in addition to their
full names, their revolutionary aliases are there also. Can you
look at those aliases, and in particular, the person who was
identified as being from Preaek Kak, and tell me whether you
remember any of these people and whether you can identify the
person -- the deputy who was arrested?
A. I'm afraid I am not sure. Because they were newcomer<s> and
<they all disappeared>. I do not recognise them, I could not
answer these questions without precise answer.
Q. Let me ask you this, Mr. Witness. Does seeing the names of
these people refresh your recollection that in fact there were a
lot more than just one cadre from the zone rubber plantation who
was arrested after you arrived there?
A. (Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
<Mr.> Witness, please repeat your answer because you answer<ed>
before the microphone was activated.
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. At the time, Brother Pauk <sent> the forces to take <two
people> away. The first time they came <and> took away the
deputy. And then the second time, they took <another person
away>, but I do not recall the name. And I looked through this
list, I did not know who was who and I did not -- I do not recall
who was taken away at that time. <He had just begun work for four
or five days. So, I can't tell you who that person is on this
list at this moment.> At that time, I was <newly> assigned with
the new task too and I did not know <all of> these people by
their names. So I could not simply guess in my answer.
MR. LYSAK:
Fair enough, Mr. Witness.
Mr. President, one more document I would like to provide. This is
another S-21 list of people from the North Zone. It is document
E3/3861. This is a list of prisoners from the North Zone who were
smashed on the 8th of July 1977. It lists 173 prisoners from the
central old north zone who were killed at S-21 that day,
including a number of cadres from the zone rubber plantation.
Again, I'd like to present this to the witness and see if he
recognises any of the names.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed.
BY MR. LYSAK:
Q. In this list, Mr. Witness, the numbers -- the prisoner numbers
I want you to refer to are numbers 53 through 59 and numbers 140
and 141 on the list. To repeat, numbers 53 to 59 and numbers 140
to 141. And I believe, in the middle column you'll find the
aliases of these people. Are you able to find those numbers and
can you look at those names and tell me whether you remember any
of the zone rubber plantation cadres whose names appear in this
list?
MR. PECH CHIM:
A. When I first arrived, there was no deputy at that time <at
Preaek Kak>. They had all gone. They had been taken away <before
I arrived. So,> I did not know their names either.
Q. And one last subject that I will quickly finish on. In your
testimony relating to your time in the Central Zone, you
identified a cadre named Cham. In interview .3 at Answer
9, you identified Cham as Ke Pauk's right-hand man who worked at
the zone office. And in interview E319.1.18 at Answer 205, you
testified Cham was the office chairman of the Central Zone of Ke
Pauk. He was in charge of security work. My question for you is:
Do you know if this Cham was the same Cham that was the person
who Ke Pauk had assigned to supervise the construction of the 1st
January Dam? Do you know if it was the person?
A. I don't remember. Chham actually, not Cham but Chham. He was
the right-hand man of Ke Pauk and he was sent to be in charge of
the construction of 1st January Dam. To my recollection, Chham
<stayed near my area, I used to see him. Sometimes, the> meeting
<was held at> the office of Chham. <But, when he> came from
Kampong Cham <I saw him. Bong Pauk asked me to see him at> the
1st January Dam. <I went and met Chham there at that time>.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you very much for answering my questions today, Mr.
Witness.
Mr. President, we have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
The hearing today has come to an end. The Court adjourn<s> now
and resume<s> tomorrow on Thursday the 23rd of April, starting
from 9 a.m. in the morning. Tomorrow, the Chamber <will> resume
examining the testimony of Mr. Pech Chim. We would like to thank
Mr. Pech Chim for answering all the questions put by the Parties.
I wish to inform you that your testimony has not been concluded.
So we would like to invite you to come to provide testimony
again. <Now, you can return to the place where you are staying at
the moment. The Chamber> would like to <thank Mr. Moeung Sovann,>
the duty counsel, <and ask you> to accompany the witness <during
his testimony before the Chamber> tomorrow. And <Court> official,
<in collaboration with the staff of the Witness Expert Support
Unit, WESU,> please bring the witness, <Mr. Pech Chim, back to
the place where he is staying at the moment and have him
returned> to the courtroom before 9 a.m. <tomorrow>.
Security <personnel> are instructed to bring <the two Accused,>
Mr. Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, back to the detention facility
<of the ECCC> and have them back into this courtroom before 9
a.m. < tomorrow.>
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1602H)
