P R O C E E D I N G S
(Court opens at 0902H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber continues to hear the remaining of Phon Thol's
testimony. And after that, we commence hearing testimony of
another witness -- that is, 2-TCW-867.
Ms. Chea Sivhoang, please report the attendance of the parties
and other individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present.
Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell downstairs. He has
waived his right to be present in the courtroom. The waiver has
been delivered to the greffier.
The witness who is to conclude his testimony today -- that is,
Mr. Phon Thol, is present in the courtroom.
Today, we also have a reserve witness -- that is, 2-TCW-867, who
confirms that, to the best of his knowledge, the witness has no
relationship, by blood or by law, to any of the two Accused --
that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any of the civil
parties admitted in this case.
The witness took an oath before the Iron Club Statue this
morning.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Chamber now decides on the request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 3rd March
2016, which states that, due to his health -- that is, headache,
back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long. And in order to
effectively participate in future hearings, he requests to waive
his right to be present at the 3rd March 2016 hearing.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the Accused at the ECCC, dated 3rd March 2016, which notes
that Nuon Chea has back pain and feels dizzy when he sits for
long and recommends that the Chamber shall grant him his request
so that he can follow the proceedings remotely from the holding
cell downstairs. Based on the above information and pursuant to
Rule 81.5 of ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea
his request to follow today's proceedings remotely from the
holding cell downstairs via audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies to the whole day.
I would like now to hand the floor once again to the defence
counsel for Nuon Chea to put further questions to the witness.
You may proceed.
I notice that Kong Sam Onn is on his feet. You may proceed,
Counsel.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. For the sake of better time management,
I would like to put the question first to the witness and, after
that, for the remaining time for the defence teams, I'd like to
allocate it to the defence team for Nuon Chea.
MR. PRESIDENT:
That is all right. You may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, everyone in and around the courtroom.
Q. And good morning, Mr. Witness. My name is Kong Sam Onn. I am
the defence counsel for Khieu Samphan, and I have some questions
to put to you.
First, I'd like to speak about your arrest from the rubber
plantation.
You made mention that you were arrested on 16th June 1977. Can
you confirm whether the date is the correct date of your arrest?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. I recall the date clearly, and my previous statement is
correct.
Q. You also provided the reasons for your arrest and the works
that you did at the rubber plantation. And you worked there as a
technician to treat the rubber plantation -- the rubber trees.
You also mentioned of your work in the union.
Can you tell the Chamber what you meant when you referred to that
union?
A. Union actually referred to a village where the workers
resided. And for that reason, the area was not referred to as
Village 1 or 2, but rather, as a Union 1, Union 2, etc.
Q. Was there a leadership structure for the union?
A. Simply speaking, it was a village, so there was a village
chief and a deputy village chief for the union.
Q. And for workers who were part of the union, did they receive
any benefit from the union?
A. No, there was none. There was no benefit from the union to the
workers.
Q. Allow me to give an example regarding food. Was there a food
<ration> for workers who were members of the union in the rubber
plantation?
A. Generally speaking, it -- workers in each union was given two
meals per day. And for each meal, we were given a bowl of rice.
Q. I'd like to refer to your function. Besides being a technician
to treat the rubber trees, did you carry out any other functions?
A. In the union, my main function was to look after and to
provide treatment to the rubber trees.
Q. You already mentioned the duration of your work at the rubber
plantation -- that is, you also had experience working there
since the Sangkum Reastr Niyum, and you start -- you continued
working until 1975 or '76. And then you resumed your work again
in the rubber plantation union.
And my question is to focus on the period between 1975 to '77 --
that is, before you were arrested and sent to Au Kanseng security
centre.
Did you work through the entire period, or did you, at one point,
stop working there and went to work elsewhere?
A. Between the period of 1975 to '76, I was not a rubber
plantation worker. In fact, I worked in the rice fields in
Trapeang Chres <commune, Lumphat district> in Ratanakiri
province.
Q. When did you return to the rubber plantation -- that is,
during the Democratic Kampuchea regime?
A. I can't recall it clearly. However, it happened in around
mid-1976 when I was called to work in the rubber plantation to be
in charge of the technical group.
Q. You said you were in charge of workers for the technical
group. Were you the supervisor of the technical group?
A. I could be considered a section chief, and I took charge of
four or five technicians within the rubber plantation.
Q. Thank you.
I'd like to refer to your WRI -- that is, E3/5172 at Khmer, ERN
00189251; and English -- I believe it is in the front question.
And allow me to quote:
"Until 1975 to '76, I worked as a rubber plantation worker under
the supervision of the Khmer Rouge." End quote.
And Mr. Witness, that is your statement in your interview.
However, you just made mention that, in 1975, you did not work in
the rubber plantation, but you worked in the rice field. Please
tell us which version is correct.
A. It was difficult for me to pinpoint the exact date that I
worked there. And what I could say is that, after I left the rice
field, I was assigned to work in the rubber plantation to be in
charge of the technicians in the plantation <during the
Democratic Kampuchea regime>. And that is what happened
chronologically, but I cannot give you the exact date. And I
could only give you an estimate of the year<, which was maybe in
'75 or '76>.
Q. I try to clarify the date because in your written record of
your interview, you provide a very clear date of your arrest.
Now I'd like to refer to your ex-wife, who was also transferred
to work as a -- at the rubber plantation with you.
Could you tell the Court whether you two were transferred to the
rubber plantation at the same time?
A. We came together.
Q. Did you two leave a specific worksite before you were
transferred to work at the rubber plantation?
A. We left the area <that is now called>Trapeang Chres commune --
that is in Koun Mom district <today>, to work as a worker for the
union.
Q. Is Trapeang Chres the area that you worked in the rice field
and, if so, how many <years> did you spend working in the rice
field in Trapeang Chres?
A. I cannot recall how many years I worked there. After the
country plunged into chaos, I left the rubber plantation to live
in Trapeang Chres <commune> and to work in the rice fields there
until the time that I was called to work as a technician at the
rubber plantation during the Democratic Kampuchea regime.
Q. Yesterday, you testified that you stopped working in the
rubber plantation in 1970 -- that is, after the coup d'état.
Could you tell the Chamber what you did between 1970 to 1975, and
where?
A. After the coup d'état, I went to work in the rice fields in
Trapeang Chres commune.
Q. So does it mean that you came to work in the rice fields in
Trapeang Chres commune from 1970 and you continued working in the
rice field there until your day of transfer to the rubber
plantation?
A. I left the rubber plantation to go and work in the rice field
in Trapeang Chres until the day that I was called to return to
the rubber plantation.
Q. You already responded to my question in relation to the
reasons of your arrest.
Can you tell the Court the reasons for the arrest of your former
wife?
A. Actually, I responded to that question yesterday. The <>
reason <for the arrest> was not <that any offence was committed.
We were only> told that <Angkar needed us> for re-education, and
<my wife and I> were asked to board a vehicle.
Q. So that was the information that they provided to you when you
were instructed to go to Au Kanseng.
However, while you were at Au Kanseng, <after you were
interrogated,> did you know the <actual> reasons for the arrest
of your ex-wife?
A. I did not know what she did wrong, <I only knew about my case
when they told me during the interrogation>.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, I'd like to refer to a document that is, E3/9357
at question/answer number 4.
(Short pause)
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. Allow me to quote an excerpt from this document -- quote:
"They called us to be interrogated one by one. They questioned
me: Where is your birth village? And then they pressed me on
whether I had communicated with the 'Yuon'. I still answered the
same things that I had not communicated with the 'Yuon'. The
interrogators did not bully or hit me." End of quote.
And Mr. Witness, after you arrived at the Au Kanseng security
centre, did they question you about your communication or
relationship with the "Yuons"?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. I actually responded to this question yesterday.
Q. Thank you.
Regarding the time period that you saw Jarai people who were sent
to Au Kanseng security centre, and you said that that happened
about a month after your arrival. You said that you saw a group
of Jarai people who were transported to the Centre, and you
overheard the guards or the militia talking about this <because
they could not go to sleep>.
And yesterday, you also responded to the question in relation to
this matter that you saw dead bodies of the Jarai people from
clothing, backpacks and torches and that you saw those belongings
or properties at the jackfruit plantation. And you also confirmed
that happened in around February or March of 1978.
You also said that happened during the season where jackfruits
got ripe.
My question to you is that do you stand by that statement?
MR. PRESIDENT:
International Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. FARR:
Mr. President, I don't recall the witness indicating the year in
which he said that he saw the bodies of the Jarai at the
jackfruit plantation, and so perhaps if counsel could give us a
citation to yesterday's transcript, then we would be able to find
that.
MR. KOPPE:
If I may respond, Mr. President, he -- we pinned it down, I
believe, to April the next year. It must be April '78. April '79
would not be possible because then the Vietnamese had arrived.
So logically, it could only be April '78.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The International Deputy Co-Prosecutor actually requested the
defence counsel to provide the transcript of yesterday's hearing,
<not to confirm like this. This clarification is not valid.> And
<yesterday,> he referred to the February or March period <as> the
<period that> jackfruit got ripe. And actually, it was counsel <>
who spoke about April <yesterday>. <The witness absolutely denied
it.>
And Defence Counsel, <> you <are requested by the parties to>
refer to <yesterday's> transcript <while putting the question,
because this excerpt is not accurate. That is what they
understand.> Can you do that?
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, I actually tried to get clarification from the
witness because it was not clear from what he testified and from
what is on the transcript. That's why I tried to ask for the time
of the arrest of the Jarai group and whether that happened in
around February or March of 1978. That is when the witness said,
it was the period that jackfruits got ripe.
He testified that he was sent to Au Kanseng centre in 1977, and
that is on the 16 of June '77, to be precise. <If it had been in
February or March, it would not have been until '79. It would
have been until '78 only. It was only one year.> So I'd like to
check with the witness whether his testimony is correct.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The witness has already testified, and it is not up to the
witness to assess whether his testimony is correct or not. It is
the discretion of the Chamber to make such an assessment, and if
you find any unclear point from his transcript, then you should
pinpoint the time of the transcript.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, maybe you get confused.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are not permitted to get the witness to say whether his
testimony is correct or not. <Of course, the witness thinks that
it is correct, that's why he stated that.> And if you, yourself,
find any point that is unclear from his testimony, please make a
quote of that part from the transcript and then put it to the
witness.
It is not up to you to put to the witness whether his testimony
yesterday is correct or not.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
I want to know the position of the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, you are not required to respond to this question.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. In the transcript on the 2nd March 2016, at -- between 3.37
<p.m.> when you were asked: "Was the dry season in February,
March or April?" and his answer is, "Jackfruits got ripe in
February or March."
And the next question: "Was it during the time of the Khmer New
Year?" Answer: "No, the New Year did not fall in February or
March. The New Year fall -- fell in April -- that is, from the 13
of April onward."
So from what you testified, it means that the event took place or
that when the jackfruits got ripe, that was in February or March
and that <was> when <you saw> the Jarai people got killed.
And my question to you, Mr. Witness, are you standing by that
statement?
MR. PICH ANG:
Mr. President, in order for the witness to have the whole picture
and in order for him to be able to respond to the question by
defence counsel, I'd like also to refer to his transcript -- that
is -- that is <a little bit before> 3 o'clock at 39 minutes, 37
seconds, he said that:
"It was not seven or eight month after my arrest, and I have
already answered that, that about a month after I arrived, I saw
those people who were brought in and, about a week later, they
were taken out. And later on, I was sent to <> guard the
jackfruit plantation when I saw the <pit with a crack on the
surface.">
Thank you.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, may I seek your permission to allow the witness to
give his response?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do you recall the question, Mr. Witness? If so, please give your
response.
MR. PHON THOL:
I do not recall the question put by lawyer for the Accused.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. My question is rather short. Do you still confirm -- do you
still confirm that it was in February or March when you witnessed
that Jarai ethnicities were killed?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. I cannot tell exact month of that year, February or March. I
only know that the jackfruits got ripe from February onwards, so
-- so from February up to June, then that is what -- that was the
season that fruit -- jackfruits got ripe.
Q. You stated yesterday that you were detained at Au Kanseng
security centre with your ex-wife and, at the time, your ex-wife
was pregnant, one month or two month pregnant.
Do you recall that you testified this point to the Chamber?
A. Yes.
Q. Thank you.
Mr. President, I would like to quote an extract from a document,
E3/9357, at question and answer number 6 -- quote:
"About -- after I gave birth to a child, for about two, three
months, I saw the minority people tied in a string. Some carried
and some walked their children. All of them were about 20, 30
females. They were placed in the building with me. As for the
males, I did not know.
In about three, four days later, these minority people were told
that they would be taken back to their birth district." End
quote.
Regarding this extract, could you tell the Court whether or not
you recall the time when your ex-wife delivered the baby at the
security centre?
A. I cannot recall the exact month when my ex-wife delivered the
baby. What I can recall is that my child was born in 1978.
Q. Do you -- do you recall the month when your child was born?
A. No, I cannot. I do not recall it.
Q. Perhaps your child was born in February or March. Is that so?
A. I cannot tell you that he was born in that month or of that
year.
Q. Thank you.
Concerning your ex-wife, you stated that you two stayed together
up until 1986. Is that correct?
A. I got divorced in -- I was separated from her in 1986<>.
Q. After the fall of Khmer Rouge regime, did you two ever talk
about the time when you two were detained in Au Kanseng security
centre?
A. We did not recall the past. We, from that time onward, was
trying to do better things for our future.
Q. So after the liberation or the fall of the Khmer Rouge, did
you discuss any experience with your ex-wife about when you
entered Au Kanseng security centre?
A. It was useless to recall the past experience in my family, so
I and my ex-wife never discussed the bad things that had happened
to us.
Q. Thank you.
Did you ever tell your ex-wife that you would come to testify
before this Chamber?
A. She is in Phnom Penh and I am in -- living in Ratanakiri.
Q. Do you have any idea or do you know that your wife has some
issue or is called -- is being called by the Chamber?
A. No.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, I am done.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
The floor is now given back to the defence team for Mr. Nuon
Chea. You may now proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE RESUMES:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good morning, Mr. Witness. I have not very many questions,
just a few this morning.
I want to come back to the story that you told yesterday about
Nhok and the bladder (sic) of a woman.
Is my understanding correct that it was just the story that you
knew of, the story that Nhok was telling, and that you haven't
actually seen Nhok being involved in this act?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. I saw that, but I did not see the actual activities of Nhok.
Nhok told the people who were in the kitchen and, during that
time, I was stationed close to that kitchen.
Q. Were you able to determine whether the bladder (sic) that was
hanging in the kitchen was a human bladder (sic), or possibly a
bladder (sic) of an animal?
A. I told the Court already yesterday, the one who brought that
gall bladder into the kitchen talked about that gall bladder and
told those -- the people <> about that.
Q. I understand. But maybe he wanted to scare people and it
wasn't, in fact, a human bladder (sic), but it was another organ
of potentially an animal.
Would that be possible?
A. Whether that one -- that person wanted to frighten people
there, I have no idea. He said that the gall bladder was belonged
to the human being and then he hung it in the kitchen.
Q. Let me move on to the -- to another topic.
Yesterday, you said that when you were arrested, you and your
wife were arrested, there were another 10 people from the rubber
plantation who were also arrested. Is that correct?
A. I cannot say there were 10 people on the vehicle. I said
possibly there were around 10 people who had been arrested on the
same day.
Q. Can you tell the Court what happened to these 10 or so people
who were arrested at the same day as you -- on the same day as
you?
A. It was the internal business of Angkar. I have no idea about
that.
Q. Did you ever see them later within the compound of Au Kanseng
re-education school?
A. Some were chained together, and some others were detained in a
different building. We were detained together, but we did not --
we could not discuss freely but about our living condition there.
Q. I understand. But did you see them later, maybe in 1978 when
you were working?
Did you see them also working in the compound or outside the
compound? Were they working just like you?
A. We had the same work to do, and concerning the question --
concerning asking each other what mistakes did you commit and --
or did I commit, we never discussed about this issue.
Q. Do you know if any of those fellow 10 or so prisoners are
still alive today?
A. I have no idea. I do not know about that. After we left the
security centre, we were looking for our own professions for our
future, and I have no idea where they have gone and the
whereabouts of them.
Q. Yesterday, you described two incidents of people dying. Were
you the only prisoner that observed these events, or are there
any other prisoners who could confirm what you said you saw?
A. For other prisoners, I do not have idea whether other
prisoners could see that incident. At that time, I was <guarding>
the sugar palm tree, and I could see the incident happening.
Q. But did you tell anybody at the time what you saw? Did you
tell the story to anyone in the re-education school or did you
tell the story to anyone after 1979?
A. After 1979, I discussed about the experience or about the
grave with my relatives. My relatives wanted to know about the
grave.
Q. Let me ask it differently. Is there anyone who can confirm
having heard you tell the story, for instance, about these two
division prisoners being killed?
Is there anyone to whom you told that story who could confirm
what you told him or her?
A. It appears that I did not go around and discuss -- discuss
about these issue. Everyone knew that the detention centres
existed in the security -- the detention buildings existed in the
security centre and, at that centre, killings was conducted.
Q. Yesterday, you were asked the question by the Prosecution as
to what the official name was of the place where you were
detained, and you called it re-education school.
Do you recall whether the re-education school had a number?
A. Angkar was the one who assigned. I do not know about that. It
was the business of Angkar. I was not engaged in Angkar's
business.
Q. Maybe I can possibly help you to refresh your memory.
Do the numbers re-education school 809 and 8010 (sic) somehow
ring a bell?
A. No, It did not ring a bell.
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, I would like to read a very small excerpt from WRI
which is not on the interface, we just realized that now. It
describes the position of re-education schools 810 and 809. And I
want to read the description of the location and maybe that rings
a bell to the -- to the witness.
If it's -- it's not terribly important.
JUDGE FENZ:
The question is just has it been admitted? There are always two
steps, one is admittance and then it's ---
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, it's E3/1 -- E3/5173. It's WRI of the witness; more
specifically, English, ERN 00272661; French, 00272667 and 8; and
Khmer 00189266.
JUDGE FENZ:
Any objection from any of the parties?
MR. FARR:
Well, Your Honour, no. I do note that they have 167 documents on
the interface. This is the first that counsel has used, and it's
not on the interface. So you know, I mean, it's fine for him to
use it, but I do wonder why that's the situation.
MR. KOPPE:
I can assure you no bad faith intended. Just --
MR. PRESIDENT:
So you can use the document.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. This witness is saying the following thing:
"Re-education school 810 was west of what today - or what is
today the provincial hospital near a stream, but I don't know the
name of the stream. The school was located along the road to
Thuoy village."
Does that ring a bell to you, west of what is today the
provincial hospital near a stream, and that the school was
located along the road to Thuoy village?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. That document has nothing to do with Thuoy village.
Q. Fine. Thank you, Mr. Witness. I will move on.
You've been asked this question before, but I would like to
revisit the subject, and that is the number of prisoners in 1977
and 1978.
You don't know the exact numbers, but would it be roughly about
70 prisoners in 1977 and about 100 prisoners in 1978?
A. Regarding the number, I cannot recall the exact number. I was
not responsible for going and counting the numbers of detainees.
Q. I understand. But about 70 in 1977 and about 100 in '78, would
that be roughly accurate?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You have the floor, Lead Co-Lawyer for civil party.
MS. GUIRAUD:
The witness has answered the question several times, and he has
stated that he was unable to know the total number of prisoners,
so it is not useful for the counsel to continue putting the same
questions in the hope that the witness will give him the answer
that he is looking for.
MR. KOPPE:
I think it might assist the memory of the witness if I gave him
the number that another witness mentioned. He can say no, there
were many more or that is roughly right, or he can say, "I don't
know". So I don't think it's repetitive. It's just trying to get
some more clarification.
MR. FARR:
Mr. President, if this is coming from the evidence of another
witness, then we should know which witness and he should put a
quote from that witness' statement.
MR. KOPPE:
It's the evidence contained in E3/405, and it is of an upcoming
witness, 2-TCW-840. It is question and answer 8.
It's actually -- well, I will not elaborate on the person. I just
refer to him. He's coming next week as a witness, so that's where
the evidence is coming from.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. So Mr. Witness, about 50 to 70 in 1977 and about 100 in total
in '78, would that be roughly accurate? Would there be more or
less?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. This is a repetitive question. As I said, I have no idea about
the exact figure. I was not responsible for going and counting
numbers of detainees. I was the one who was detained and chained
in the detention building, so I do not know about that.
Q. No problem, Mr. Witness.
Yesterday, you spoke about the work that you did in and outside
the compound, that you were planting potatoes and vegetables.
Do you remember or was it the case that you also -- that the
prisoners also ate the vegetables and potatoes that were planted
in the compound and outside the compound?
A. This is also a repetitive question. I told the Court already
yesterday the regulation at the Centre were, one, not to flee;
and <two,> not to steal. So although there were things or stuff
in front of us for us to eat, we were not -- we did not dare to
eat. Otherwise, we would be killed.
Q. Let me be the judge, Mr. Witness, whether a question is
repetitive.
My question was whether you actually ate -- whether the prisoners
ate the vegetables and potatoes that you grew. I believe that
question wasn't asked before.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Regarding the question, the question can be different. One is to
steal -- whether you stole, whether someone stole the food to
eat, and the question here is about whether you were allowed to
eat the potatoes and vegetables, so the question from the defence
team lawyer is that did anyone eat -- could anyone eat the potato
and vegetable grown at that centre.
And the question is also about whether or not those potatoes and
vegetables were grown for the detainees at that centre.
MR. PHON THOL:
A. If it is like what you said, Mr. President, I can give my
response.
The vegetables and potatoes grown by the detainees were given to
the detainees. Cabbage or sweet potatoes were then cultivated and
cooked for detainees, so some were provided for the detainees,
but I do not know whether some amount -- some other amount were
sent to someone -- somewhere else.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President.
My last question, Mr. Witness, and I'm referring to another WRI
which is, indeed, on the interface. It's E3/9326; English, ERN
00272579; French, 00485164; and Khmer, 00189240.
Mr. Witness, there's this witness speaking about a worker union
deputy chairman who might have been someone that you knew
yourself, a person who apparently was an ethnic Jarai whose name
was Chat. Does that name ring a bell to you?
MR. PHON THOL:
A. <Well>, <Chhat (phonetic),> the deputy union chief<--> I did
not know this person.
Q. But is it correct that he was an ethnic Jarai?
A. I did not know this <Chhat (phonetic)>.
Q. So you only knew that he was, indeed, the worker union deputy
chairman, but that's all you know. Correct?
A. I did not say anything about this person named <Chhat
(phonetic)>.
Q. Then maybe something went wrong in the translation.
It is correct that there was a Chat who was the worker union
deputy chairman. Did you just confirm that?
A. I did not say that <Chhat (phonetic)> was the deputy chairman
of the union. If I knew any deputies, then I would tell you that
because I speak the truth.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to thank you, Mr. Phon Thol, for your
patience and responses to all the questions. And the hearing of
your testimony is now concluded.
Your testimony may contribute to the ascertainment of truth in
this case, and your presence in the Court is no longer required,
so you can return to your residence or wherever you wish to go
to.
The Chamber wishes you all the best.
Court officer, in collaboration with WESU, please make necessary
transport arrangement for Mr. Phon Thol to return to his
residence or wherever he wishes to go to.
(Witness excused)
MR. PRESIDENT:
And next, the Chamber will hear testimony of another witness --
that is, 2-TCW-867, in relation to Au Kanseng security centre.
However, it is now convenient for our short break.
We'll take a break now and resume at 20 past 10.00.
The Court is now in recess
(Court recesses from 1005H to 1022H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
The Chamber would like to inform the parties that, during the
hearing of testimony of 2-TCW-867, the witness made a request
through WESU for a support from TPO staff -- that is, Madam Sun
Solida, who will sit next to the witness during her testimony.
Court officer, please usher the witness as well as the TPO staff
into the courtroom.
(Short pause)
(Witness enters the courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Madam Witness. What is your name?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. My name is Moeurng Chandy.
Q. Thank you, Madam Moeurng Chandy.
When were you born?
A. I was born in 1954.
Q. Thank you.
And where were you born?
A. I was born in Ta Srach (phonetic) village, Bati district,
Takeo province. And it was in Chambak commune.
Q. Where is your current address?
A. Currently, I live in Daeum Rues village, Kandal Stueng
district, Kandal province.
Q. What is your current occupation?
A. I lived with my children.
Q. What are the names of your father and mother?
A. My father is Chou (phonetic) Moeung, and my mother is Chea
Yan.
Q. Are you married or are you a widow at present?
A. I'm a widow.
Q. Do you have any children and, if so, how many?
A. I have four children.
Q. The greffier made an oral report this morning that, to your
best knowledge, you're not related, by blood or by law, to any of
the two accused -- that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to
any of the civil parties admitted in this case. Is this
information correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And that you took an oath before the Iron Club Statue to the
east of this courtroom before your appearance; is that correct?
A. I took an oath already.
Q. Thank you.
And the Chamber would like to inform you now of your rights and
obligations as a witness before the Chamber.
Madam Moeurng Chandy, regarding your rights as a witness in the
proceedings before the Chamber, you may refuse to respond to any
question or to any comment which may incriminate you. That is
your right against self-incrimination.
As for your obligations as a witness in the proceedings before
the Chamber, you must respond to any questions by the Bench or
relevant parties except where your response or comment to those
questions may incriminate you, as the Chamber has just informed
you of your right as a witness.
You must tell the truth that you have known, heard, seen,
remembered, experienced or observed directly about an event or
occurrence relevant to the questions that the Bench or parties
pose to you.
And Madam Moeurng Chandy, have you been interviewed by
investigators of the Office of the Co-Investigating Judges? If
so, how many times, when and where?
A. I was interviewed once in Ratanakiri province, and I cannot
recall the date of that interview.
Q. How long ago were you interviewed?
A. It happened several years ago.
Q. Before your appearance, have you reviewed, read or have it
read aloud -- that is, the written record of your interview
between you and the OCIJ investigators in order to refresh your
memory?
A. I've read that WRI, and I can recall parts of the content of
that interview.
Q. And to your best recollection, is the WRI consistent with what
you provided to the OCIJ investigators in Ratanakiri province?
A. The record of the interview is correct.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
Pursuant to Rule 91 bis of the ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber
gives the floor first to the Co-Prosecutors to put questions to
Moeurng Chandy. And the combined time for the Co-Prosecutors and
the Lead Co-Lawyers is two sessions.
You may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Thank you, Mr. President; and good morning, parties in the
courtroom.
Q. Good morning, Madam Witness, Moeurng Chandy. I am Song
Chorvoin, the Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
I have a number of questions to put to you related to your
experience and what you witnessed at the <Au Kanseng> security
centre <in Ratanakiri province>. Now <I would like to ask you
about your background before putting questions regarding> the
facts <related to> the security centre.
My first question is: where did you live before 17 April 1975,
and what was your occupation?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. In 1975, I worked as a worker in the rubber plantation in
Village 4.
Q. So you began your work at the rubber plantation. And when did
you start working at the rubber plantation?
A. I do not remember the exact year.
Q. What was the name<> of the rubber plantation that was located
in Village 4? Could you tell us about its exact location, for
example, village, commune, district and province?
A. It was located in Ratanakiri province in Village 4, Ban Lung
district of Ratanakiri province.
Q. When you started your work at the rubber plantation, you
worked with your husband or you worked with any of your relatives
there?
A. I worked with my husband, and none of our relatives worked
with us, but I stay<ed> alone because my husband was sent to work
in other villages.
Q. I want to ask for your clarification that you said that you
worked in the rubber plantation, so I want to know whether your
husband worked somewhere else or in the same rubber plantation
with you.
A. He worked in the rubber plantation, but he was not in charge
of taping the rubber. He was in charge of treating the rubber
tree that had disease, so he went from one village to another to
treat the rubber -- the disease that took place with rubber
trees. <For me, at about 4 a.m., I was up to tap the rubber.>
Q. Did you know how many workers who worked with you who were
responsible for taping the rubber?
A. There were many, and I could not remember how many there were
at that time.
Q. Was it more than 50, more than <100> or more than <200> of
them working there?
A. There were many. It was probably around 50 families.
Q. Who was in charge of the rubber plantation? What is his or her
name?
A. The person in charge of the rubber plantation was known as
Tum. He was supervising the union <at Village 4>. And everyone in
the village called him Tum.
Q. So the chief of the <> union was Tum. So what was his specific
role?
Was <he> the chief of the union, <the deputy> or he held any
other positions?
A. He was the chief, and he was in charge of the rubber
plantation.
Q. Now let me move to the topic about your marriage.
What was the name of the -- your husband, and when the marriage
took place?
A. I got married during the Khmer Rouge regime. At that time,
there was two or three couples who were arranged to get married,
but I cannot recall the exact year when I got married.
But I just want to tell you that I got married during Khmer Rouge
regime.
Q. My question to you is that you got married with your husband
before you began your work at the rubber plantation, or during
that time?
A. We got married before we worked at the rubber plantation.
Q. What was your husband's name?
A. My -- his name is Mey Thol.
Q. Is your husband name Mey Thol or Phon Thol? Could you please
clarify this?
A. Phon Thol.
Q. During the period when you were married with Phon Thol, did
both of you have any children?
A. We had one child, but the child passed away later on.
Q. <> I will <come back to this> topic <later>.
So <are you still married to> Phon Thol <to this day>?
A. We <do> not live together. We got divorced.
Q. Now I move to an important topic related to the -- your
imprisonment.
In your interview with the OCIJ investigators and in that
interview, you talked about the arrest of you, so I want you to
elaborate on the events surrounding that arrest from the
beginning before your arrest to the time when you were arrested.
A. At that time, I lived in Village 4, and I was told that I
needed to go to join a meeting. So we were asked to board the
truck, and we had no idea where they were taking us to.
We -- the truck went through the forest<. I was arrested in
Village 4>, and I had no idea of anything. They told me that I
need to go to the meeting, so I simply follow the orders. <>
And when we arrived, <they were armed, they were guarding in the
truck,> we saw a building <made of bamboo slats> and we
disembarked from the truck at that place.
Q. So at the time of your arrest, you were working at your rubber
plantation in Village 4.
<You said that they came to call you.> Where <did the> people who
came to <call> you <come> from, and how many of them came to
<call> you?
A. I did not know the people who came to ask me to go to the
meeting. I was scared at that time and did not dare to look at
their face, so I simply follow the order and got on the truck.
I was so scared because those people had guns. I did not know who
they were.
Q. Based on your interviews given in <2009, in> Ratanakiri,
<document E3/9357> in your answer number 1, when the interviewer
asked you to describe the event when you were sent to <be
detained during> the <Khmer Rouge regime,> you said that you were
working in the rubber plantation in Phum Buon in Ban Lung
district around here.
"I was not aware of and did not know what happened that led to my
involvement. One day, the village committee, apparently following
the order of Tum, who was the chief of the <> union of the entire
Ratanakiri province-- Tum had black complexion, a large body with
average height, called me and my husband to go to the meeting."
End of quote.
In your interview, you said that there is -- there was a village
committee <member> who came to ask you to the meeting, and the
person was following the order of Tum.
So could you tell us how many <village committee members> came to
get you from the rubber plantation?
A. The village chief came to tell me at the rubber plantation to
go to the meeting, but I did not know <the two or three> people
<> in the <> truck.
Q. You also said that they came to call you to the meeting by
following the order from <the union chief>,Tum.
How did you know that they follow<ed> the order from Tum?
A. The village chief told me that Tum ordered me to go to a
meeting.
Q. So when the village chief came to tell you about going to the
meeting, did the village chief carry guns or did he come with
people with guns?
A. The village chief did not carry <any> gun <when he came to
tell us>, but when we <> arrive<d> at the truck, I saw men with
guns. <They were guarding there.>
Q. So when you left the rubber plantation, you had to walk toward
the truck. So how far was the distance between the rubber
plantation and the truck?
A. From my house to the truck, it was <50> metres away, so it was
<kind of> close.
Q. When you arrived at the truck, <what kind of> truck was it and
how many people were in the truck?
A. There were two or three families in the truck. There were
three families going with me from the <> union.
Q. When you arrived at the truck, you saw three families who were
already there or the three families you are talking about also
included your family?
A. The three families included my family.
Q. When you arrived at the truck, you saw men with guns, so what
types of gun they carry?
A. They were long guns, AK guns.
Q. How many people were there among the three families you
mentioned, and how many of them were men and how many were women?
A. The three families included husband and wives. Their children
were not taken along with them. Their children were at homes, so
there were three men and three women among the three families.
Q. What were the positions or occupations or roles of the people
on the truck? <Were they all workers just like you? Did you know
them>?
A. I knew them all. They were all workers just like me.
Q. You were from the same rubber plantation or from different
rubber plantations?
A. We were from the same rubber plantation.
Q. When you were on the truck, where did that truck take you to?
A. It took me to the area behind Boeng Kanseng. At that time, I
did not know that specific location clearly. I just knew that it
was behind Boeng Kanseng.
Q. In the same document <and statement>, you mentioned that it
was somewhere <behind Ratanakiri hospital> near Au Kanseng, so is
that correct?
A. I said that it was behind Ratanakiri hospital. And that area
was called Au Kanseng and the prison was called Au Kanseng
prison.
Q. So the truck left your house and went straight to Au Kanseng
prison, or it stop over along the way to the prison?
A. It -- it did not <stop to pick up other> people along the way
<because two families were already in there when I arrived>. It
simply went straight to the destination.
Q. Did you remember what time was it or when you were asked to
<get in> the truck? <And when did you arrive at Au Kanseng
prison?>
A. It was around 2 o'clock <when they came to take me>. And when
we arrived in Au Kanseng, it was around 3 or 4 o'clock in the --
in the afternoon.
Q. Now I would like to talk about the time when you arrived at Au
Kanseng prison.
When you arrived there, where did the truck stop and then what
happened next?
A. The truck did not enter the compound of the prison. It stopped
outside the compound, but they required us to disembark the truck
and walk to the building with tile roof. And we stay there. And
then they locked the door and required all the three families of
us to stay there. But the men were separated and put in another
building, and women were put in a different building.
Q. When you entered the compound of the prison, did you witness
any guards, and did those guards carry any weapons?
A. I saw guards with guns, and I was so scared because I had no
idea what would happen to my life, would I be killed or what. And
I saw buildings and, in each building, there were people inside.
So all of this picture frightened me.
Q. When the men and women were separated and put into different
building, could you tell us about the building that you were
placed?
A. I saw one building, and in that building, there were <two or>
three <> people <with their ankles shackled>. And then <in>
another building, I saw <a few> people who were also <shackled>.
<So, I saw buildings> and I saw guards open the door and gave
them food to eat, so I had the idea that, oh, they were
imprisoned.
I sneaked a look, and I saw people were leg-chained together.
Q. How many people did you see who were leg chained?
A. The building that I was placed, they put only women. And there
were a few women who were <> already <> there. And those women
were not chained or shackled; only the building where the men
were placed that the men were chained.
Q. Could you tell us how many women who were placed in your
building with you?
A. There were four or five people.
Q. Did you know them before you were sent there, or you did not
know them at all?
A. I knew only the women who went on the truck with me to the
prison, but for the women who have already been placed there, I
did not know them.
Q. Could you please tell the Chamber about the building, for
example, the width and the length and the features of the
building?
A. That building was 15 metres <long>. <The> roof and <the>
wall<> <were> made from bamboo. <The front was open, but the
bamboo floor had rather big gaps.> And we slept on the bamboo
<floor>.
So all the four or five women who were placed there all slept on
the bamboo <floor>, but we were -- we were not chained.
There were guards outside who <made> sure that we would not
escape.
Q. <Was there a door?> Was <the door> locked?
A. Upon my first arrival, I was placed in a building where there
was a lock. However, later on, I was moved to another building
where the door was not locked and there were walls to the side
and to the back of the building.
Q. You just said that after you made your observations, you
realized that you were being detained.
Can you tell the Chamber that as to when you realized that you
were imprisoned? Did you realize that upon you -- the time that
you got on the truck, or at a later stage?
A. After I got off the truck, I knew that I was being sent to a
prison. The location was isolated from where people lived, and I
saw those small buildings with people inside that I knew that I
was being imprisoned.
Q. And upon realizing that, how did you feel and did you have a
chance to communicate with your husband before he was separated
from you? <Or were you separated from each other immediately at
that time?>
A. We were separated immediately after we got out of the vehicle.
Q. You said that you were scared; can you tell us a little bit
more why you felt scared, at the time?
A. When I arrived in the area, I realized that I would die. I did
not know the reasons that I was sent there and I thought that
would be the end of my life.
Q. During your detention in Au Kanseng prison, were you detained
in one building or were you transferred between buildings?
A. I was housed in the building with the bamboo-thatch roof and I
remained in the same building.
Q. Does it mean that you were detained in the same building, but
you were placed in a separate cell or room where there was no
lock, at a later stage; is my understanding correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. Later on, where I was detained didn't
have a lock at the door.
Q. And while you were detained there at the a -- Au Kanseng
security centre where you were, was there any -- at any stage
that you were interrogated?
A. One day, I was sent to be interrogated. I was questioned about
my native village, etc. Yes, I was interrogated.
Q. Do you recall or what questions were put to you and what
responses did they require you to provide?
A. I was questioned whether I had communicated with the "Yuon"
and I said, "No, I did not have anything to do with the 'Yuon'."
Q. Were you interrogated in your cell or were you interrogated
elsewhere?
A. I was sent for interrogation in a separate room.
Q. Can you describe to the Chamber the interrogation room? Did
you know people who were present in that room? <And how many were
there?>
A. I was sent to that room and there was only one person who
interrogated me and then there was a guard who was posting
outside the room. I did not know them.
Q. When you were in the interrogation room, what was your
observation; were there any tools in the room for the purpose of
the interrogation? Were you threatened? Were you tortured so that
you would respond to the questions?
A. During my interrogation, I was not threatened; I was asked
questions and I responded to those questions accordingly.
I saw a whip and I saw electricity cable in that room.
Q. Besides you -- that is, you were interrogated; did you know if
other inmates were also interrogated, and if so, were they
tortured during their interrogations?
A. We were interrogated one after another; however, I did not
know who was tortured or who was whipped or who was electrocuted.
Q. I'd like to refresh your memory by referring to your written
record of interview with the investigator at Ratanakiri province
-- that is, your written record of <E3/9357>, at question and
answer number 4, you made the following response:
"They recalled us to be interrogated one by one. They questioned
me, 'Where is your birth village?' And they pressed me on whether
I had communicated with the 'Yuon.' I still answered the same
thing that I had not communicated with the 'Yuon'. The
interrogators did not bully, hit me. I did not know the names or
the faces of those interrogators because I was too scared. They
interrogated me only once and there were two interrogators and
there were armed guards near the place. The interrogation place
was a closed, small building that had walls and it was located
about 30 metres apart from other buildings. Inside that building,
I saw things like rattan weaving things -- strings or something
called whips which were used to hit the cows or -- sticks. As far
as the electric wires, later on, I asked the prison inmates and
they said that they had been whipped or electrocuted. As for me,
I told them that I was not hit." End of quote.
I have two things that I need clarification from you. You have
just said that there was only one interrogator and there was a
guard posting outside; however, in your interview in Ratanakiri
province, you said that there were two interrogators. Could you
try to recall whether there was one or two interrogators in the
room?
A. Maybe I <am too nervous> and I cannot recall what happened.
And in fact, the statement is correct and just to remind you,
that interview took place several years ago and now I feel a
little bit <nervous> and overwhelmed, so my response may not as
clear as what I stated in my previous statement and I apologize
for that. And I confirm <that> my previous statement <is
correct>.
Q. Thank you for that. And there is another point that I need
your clarification, since I see there is a discrepancy. Can you
try to recall whether those inmates were tortured as you just
said that they were not, but in your statement, you said that
they were either whipped or electrocuted; so were they whipped or
electrocuted?
A. It did happen because when they came back, they told me that
-- some said they were electrocuted and I told them back that I
was not electrocuted and I was not threatened during my
interrogation and I did not know -- maybe we were from different
backgrounds or something; I did not know.
I was questioned whether I had any communication with the "Yuon"
and I kept responding that no, other inmates were tortured.
Q. You said some were whipped or electrocuted; can you tell the
Chamber how many of them who told you that they were either
whipped or electrocuted during the interrogation and were they
all women or there were other males, as well?
A. They were men. As for women, they were not mistreated.
Q. Those men, who were tortured, did they tell you what questions
they were interrogated on?
A. No. We did not discuss about those questions. I only met them
briefly and in fact, it was the wives, who were detained with me,
who told me that their husbands were tortured -- that is, they
were electrocuted, for example, during their interrogation.
It was not as simple as I went to see them and asked whether they
were tortured or not. We were not allowed to meet and, in fact, I
learned this from their wives who spoke to their husbands. They
said that some of their husbands were whipped or electrocuted
during the interrogation.
Q. So those wives, who saw their husbands tortured or
electrocuted during the interrogation, were they detained in the
same building where you were detained or were you detained
elsewhere and <there was a conversation that led to a discussion
of this issue>?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on and Counsel Koppe, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I object to the formulation of this
question because I understand the testimony to be that the
witness is talking about double hearsay. It's the men only
telling the wives and then the wives subsequently telling the
witness. It's not that the women actually saw the alleged
mistreatment or torture, so we're having a double hearsay
situation.
MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Mr. President, I'd like to respond to the objection by the
defence counsel.
<Obviously, I do not know how it is interpreted in foreign
languages.>
The witness said that, at the time, the wives saw their husbands
being mistreated. Probably that happened after they returned from
the interrogation room. Anyhow, I'd like to get that
clarification from the witness.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. Madam Witness, in order to clarify this point, I'd like to put
a question to you. You said there was a discussion about the
torture, after those people were interrogated, and that the wives
of those tortured husbands told you about their husbands. Did
those wives witness the torture of their husbands and if not, how
did they know that their husbands were tortured during the
interrogation?
A. The interrogation room was not far from where we were detained
and when the -- their husband came out of the room, the wife saw
him. So of course, when people was tortured, we could see that
the way he walked was different from the normal way that he
walked, so the wife realized that her husband was tortured.
And after I was told that -- told about that, I said that I was
not tortured during my interrogation and I said that I told the
interrogator the truth.
And then those wives said maybe their husbands were asked serious
questions because after they left the interrogation room, the
wives could observe that the husbands walked in an abnormal way,
so they concluded that their husbands were tortured during the
interrogation.
And the wives, who lived in -- who were detained in the same
building, spoke to one another about their husbands being
tortured, and that's how I learned that those men were tortured.
Q. When the wives of those prisoners -- male prisoners who were
tortured who told you about their husbands, did they tell you
immediately after the husbands were returned from the
interrogation room?
A. <We could see> the husbands <leaving> the interrogation room
because <the buildings were kind of close to each other. When
people> were sent <in and> out<, we could see them,> and the
wives, who were detained with me, <said that> their husbands
<were> tortured.
Q. And those wives, who saw their husbands tortured and told you
about that, could you observe how they felt? Were they scared?
Were they concerned? <Or was it a regular thing that happened in
that security centre?>
A. Of course, it was natural that we were scared when we were
living there, but what could we do?
Q. And besides the events that you have just described, did you
ever witness or did you know that any other people were tortured?
A. I did not witness any other tortures and I did not witness any
torture in that room.
Q. I'd like, now, to move on to another topic that is in relation
to the detention of the ethnic minority people as you described
in your written record of interview.
In that interview, you said that there were 20 to 30 people who
were of ethnic minority were detained; can you elaborate a bit
more in relation to that group of ethnic minority when they
returned at the detention centre. For example, how did they
arrive <at the security centre, which condition were they in> and
how many of them <were there>?
A. While I was in that building, I saw a group of 10 to 20 Jarai
people, who were tied <together in> single <> file, <like the way
they would walk cows. Those people> were placed <> in the
building that I was detained, some had young children, some had
infants. And two or three weeks after, they were told that they
would be returned to their village.
Q. When you saw those group of Jarai people, can you try to
describe the number of them again; is it 10 to 20 or 20 to 30
when they got out -- got off the vehicle?
A. I did not know where they got off the vehicle; however, I saw
them being walked into the building in a single file. I could say
that there were 10 to 20 of them; although, I do not know the
exact figure while I saw them being walked in a single file.
And they were detained in the building where I was detained.
Q. <Were there male, female, children in> this Jarai group who
was tied in a single file? <Or because> only women were detained
in your building, those Jarai people <were> all women or girls?
A. Only women were detained in the building where I was detained.
Q. So were those people all women and if so, were there any
pregnant women, young infant?
A. There were toddlers who could walk a little bit or who could
sit a little bit; however, there were no young babies.
Q. I'd like to refer, again, to your written record of interview.
At question and answer number 6, you said that: "The ethnic
minority people were tied up in a single file; some were carrying
their children, some were walking with their children, and they
were all female. There were 20 to 30 of them and they were later
on detained in the same building that I was detained." End quote.
I'd like to -- I have two points that I'd like to get your
confirmation. In that record, you said that there were 20 to 30
of them; however, a while ago, you said that there were only 10
to 20; please try to recall which one is the correct figure.
A. There were actually 20 to 30 of them, including men, and later
on, the men were separated and only women were placed in my
building and those women amounted to 10 to -- between 10 to 20.
Q. Thank you. Also you just mentioned that there were no young
babies, however, in your previous statement that there were some
children who -- whose mothers carried them; can you tell whether
they were very young babies or could you tell the Court the age
of those children?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please observe the microphone.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. There were about three children in the building and there was
a toddler, who could walk, and then there was another young
infant who could sit, and then there was also another young --
young toddler, who could walk if the mother held hand.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. <When> the women and the children <> were <walked to> your
building, were they <tied up> or were <their ankles shackled? Or>
they <were> not <shackled anymore> after they <came down from the
truck and> were placed in <> that building? <Could you tell us
what happened to them when they entered the place?>
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. When they got off the vehicle, they were not chained; however,
they were tied -- their <arms were> tied and they <entered the
building.> The tie remained <there> while they were detained in
the building for about 4 to 10 days and after that, they removed
the rope. As in our case, we were not tied with any rope.
Q. What <about> the young children that you refer to, were they
also tied or only the mothers were tied?
A. The children were not tied, only the mother -- mothers were.
Q. What was your observation of the clothes that those women were
wearing?
A. Those ethnic people wore their ethnic clothing and, of course,
their clothing was different from the way the Khmer people wore.
They wore their skirt in a similar fashion to a scarf, which was
not sewn, and their shirt were partly torn and they did not have
any extra set of clothing with them.
Q. Did you know from which area they were brought -- they were
brought?
A. After they came to the building that I was detained, I asked
them about that and they said that they lived in the area of the
Vietnamese-Kampuchean border, this area where the Jarai ethnic
people lived.
Q. You said that they were of Jarai ethnicity; how did you know
that they were Jarai?
A. <Because> I lived in Ratanakiri, I knew that ethnic people
spoke different language<s>, for example, <> Tumpoun <was spoken>
differently from <> Lao<, and Tumpoun, Jarai were spoken
differently>. I could identify <that Jarai was spoken differently
from Tumpoun>. <I could know people's ethnicity.>
So I <knew> that they were the Jarai people, <they> spoke in a
similar way as the Laotian or the Thai people speak.
Q. So besides your observation of the way they spoke, did you
actually speak to them or ask them a question?
A. I did not dare ask them questions; however, we were close to
one another; we could see one another, but I did not dare ask
them any questions since there was also a guard outside.
Q. In your interview at question and answer number 9, and allow
me to quote it, you stated, after you were asked <about> the
ethnic minorities who came to stay in the building with you, you
said that, "When we stayed together, I knew that those people
were Jarai ethnicities in Ratanakiri near the Vietnamese border,"
and you made mention that they lived near the Vietnamese border
and that you could distinguish the way they spoke.
But here, you said that, "We questioned each other."
Can you tell Court whether you, yourself, <were> involved in the
questioning <of> one another, or you only observed them
questioning each other <and you realised that they were Jarai
people>?
A. They spoke amongst themselves and they said that they were
Jarai people from the area near the Vietnamese border and, of
course, they spoke the Jarai language to one another and that
gave me a conclusion that they were the Jarai people.
MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Mr. President, I move on to another topic; however, it is about
the time for our lunch break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. Let we now adjourn for our lunch break and we shall
resume after our lunch break at 1.30.
Court officer, please assist the witness during the break time
and invite her, as well as the TPO staff, back into the courtroom
this afternoon at 1.30.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him returned to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1132H to 1333H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is back in session and the floor is given back to the
Co-Prosecutors to resume the questioning. You may now proceed.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Good afternoon, Mr. President, Your Honours, everyone in and
around the courtroom.
Q. Good afternoon, Madam Witness. We discussed about Jarai
minority people before we broke and those people were brought in
the detention facility and you stated that you knew that those
people were Jarai.
My next question is: Do you recall that those Jarai people,
<including women and children, who> were detained at that place,
<> how long were they detained there before they were asked to
leave that building?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. It was three or four weeks before they were asked to leave the
building and those Jarai people were told that they had to return
back to their village.
Q. In the written record of the interview, when you were
interviewed at -- in Ratanakiri, document E3/9357 at question and
answer number 6, you stated - quote:
"Three -- or in about three four days later, these minority
people were told that they had -- they would be taken back to
their birth district."
So, again, my question is: Did those people stay in the detention
facility for two or three days before they were taken away or how
long were they detained at that place?
A. Two or three days later, they were sent away.
Q. Thank you. Do you know what had happened to those people after
the security guards called them out to go back to their birth
district?
A. I do not know about that. At that time, the Jarai people were
told to leave the building in order to go back to their birth
district and those Jarai people were tied <together in single
file and taken back>.
Q. In the same written record of interview, you further stated -
quote:
"But about a few hundred metres or nearly 1 kilometre (the
distance is not clearly recalled) at the mouth -- at the rim of
the bomb crater, these ethnic minorities were tied to one another
in a string and taken to be killed by the heads of the hoes. I --
and I saw it while I was picking vegetables near that location. I
was so scared and hid in a close by -- it's in a nearby place."
So my question is: <After the security guards came to take them
away by telling them that they would be returned to their
birthplace,> did they actually return to their birth district or
what <you stated earlier> happened to them? Where were you when
<> those people were tied up and walked away?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on. Mr. Koppe, you have the floor now.
MR. KOPPE:
I object to this question; it's a very leading question. It is,
indeed, true that she first answered the question that she didn't
know and that then it is practice to confront the witness with
what she has testified before, but to put, now, the whole
sentence, without any steps in between, to the witness is very
much leading; having the effect, I think, that her answer, now,
is worthless, but I object to the leading nature of the question.
MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
In fact, I asked an open question about her recollection of the
incident and her account was inconsistent with her previous
testimony. For this reason, I quoted the extract from the
document and then confront her with it.
Please, Mr. President, could I continue with that question?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You can ask, Co-Prosecutor.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. Madam Witness, you told the investigator that <you saw> those
people <> tied <together in single file> and then taken away;
<please tell the Court what you saw.>
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please observe microphone, Madam Witness, before you speak.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. Regarding the answer that I provided to the interview, that
statement is correct; but I -- now, I am a bit nervous, so
sometimes, I may not have given the correct response.
As I told earlier, I was picking up the vegetables <> in a nearby
place. From that location, I could see Jarai people were smashed
and then thrown into the pit.
A few days later, I returned to that location and I could smell
the decomposed bod<ies> from the cracked-open soil, so I could
assume that it -- it made me to believe that those people killed
were Jarai people.
And at that location, I also saw the clothing of the dead people
and those clothing -- those clothes were taken and given to other
people to wear, so it makes me to believe that those Jarai people
had all been killed. They never returned to their birth
districts.
From that time onward, I started to feel terrified and I was
thinking to my -- I was talking to myself quietly that <> one day
<it could be my turn>.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. You stated earlier that Jarai people had been killed, so what
kind of weapons or tools did those security guards use to smash
and kill those Jarai people?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Madam Witness. You have the floor now, Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
I object also to this question. First, the witness said that she
doesn't know what happened to the Jarai; then she said they were
killed, but then, subsequently, in the second part of her answer,
she's saying that she believed that the decomposed bodies must
have been the Jarai.
Now, that seems to imply that she actually hasn't seen it, but is
drawing a conclusion upon what she saw in respect of those
decomposing bodies. So, now, just to put it all together and
formulate the question that, yes, she saw it; is going too far,
so I object.
MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
I do not really understand the counsel for the Accused<'s
conclusion>. The witness has stated <this in Court; he tries to
come to a conclusion by himself, which was the exact opposite of
what> she said. <All of us have been discussing whether she has
seen> the killing or smashing of those Jarai people; <she said
herself that she saw Jarai people being smashed.> So my question
is related to the facts she is testifying before the Chamber.
Mr. President, may I be allowed to ask that question?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection by Koppe, the defence counsel for the Accused, is
appropriate. <National Co-Prosecutor, you need to listen
carefully.> The witness said <the word "could," so it's not
clear. Therefore, you should continue asking her questions in
order to clarify the word "could", to what extent this word is
reliable. Maybe the National Co-Prosecutor forgot the word
"could", that's why you indicate that the victims who were
smashed were Jarai people. What she answered before was a
different story. Now she's testifying before the Chamber, she
uses the word "could." This word is> not clear, and you <continue
to> ask <questions regarding> the specific facts<>.
<So, you need to rephrase your question to make it clearer before
asking questions that refer to the specific facts. Because if
it's not clear, and you refer to the questions as if they were
clear, that's where the problem is. When the witness said
"could," you didn't ask for clarification and you assumed that it
was true.>
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. <Thank you, I will rephrase my questions according to your
instructions.> You stated that you saw Jarai people killed or
smashed; did you see that actual <incident> happening and why --
what made you to believe that those people were Jarai?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. I did not see the actual smashing. Before that incident, I
could see the pit< was> empty and after Jarai people had been
taken away, two or three days later, I went back to that location
or I went to a place close to the pit<>. The pit< was> fully
covered after that incident.
For instance, <> one <> day <before> Jarai people had been taken
out, <the pit was not covered> and <a> day<> later, <when> I
<went to pick up vegetables,> the pit< was> fully covered. <I did
not see the actual smashing because they would not allow us to go
near that place while they were smashing.>
Q. So, in fact, you saw the empty pits or the pits which were
fully covered later on; you did not see the actual smashing or
killings; is that correct?
A. In fact, I saw the <> pit.
Q. You stated that you saw security guards coming to call Jarai
people to go back to their birth districts; so <how many of them
came? And did they take all of them or did they keep some in
there?>
A. A security guard was coming to call the Jarai people out and I
do not know -- I do not know whether there were some other
security guards waiting outside. The Jarai people had been tied
up in a string; 10 of them were tied up, and then they were
walked away. <There were some more in the building. So they came
to take more of them out in single file -->
Q. Earlier, you have told the Chamber that the clothes that you
saw were returned to other detainees to wear; could you give a
description of <these> clothes? How long after <> you saw the
<pit did they start distributing these> clothes?
A. Two day later, clothes were distributed to other people to
wear.
Q. Why did you say that those clothes were, in fact, <the clothes
that you saw on> Jarai people <who were brought in the security
centre>? <What kind of clothes were these?>
A. The <clothes> had <the same> colours and <model>. Those
clothes were soaked in a water for one -- were put in the water
for one day. <The clothes were washed and dried> and, later on,
the clothes were distributed to other detainees; but we -- I
could still remember <the model and> the colour, so I could say
that those clothes may have been those of Jarai people.
Q. Were those clothes distributed to the detainees in the same
building as -- the same building where you were detained?
A. The clothes were distributed to the detainees in the same
building.
Q. Thank you. In relation to an individual by the name Auy, do
you know this individual; what did he or she do while you were
detained at that centre?
A. Auy was a guard, but guarding all buildings. He was the actual
perpetrator.
Q. He was the guard and he stood guard at the centre guarding all
the buildings and you also stated that he was the actual
perpetrator; what did he do exactly, at the time?
A. When Auy released detainees to go to work and when those
detainees committed any infraction, he would hit the offender
with the rifle butt or sometimes he hit and kicked. Every time
people were to be killed he was the one who was responsible for
coming and calling the detainees out.
Q. Why did you say that -- what made you to believe or what
incident did you witness and made you to believe that he was the
actual perpetrator and did such activities?
A.I saw the activities that he did on some occasions. He was
cruel and vicious. I was so terrified and I was afraid of him.
One day, I saw him walking a detainee or detainees. Sometime I
may have not made the right points and may not respond correctly
to the questions asked by the <Chamber> because I may have
confused with the -- because my memory does not serve me well. <I
say what I saw.> One day, when I was picking up vegetables, I saw
a woman was walked by him and that woman implored him. But the
Auy - Auy hit her with <the back of a hoe>. At that time, the
woman did not die yet and she was imploring Auy. <There were
three of us> picking up vegetables in a nearby place and <we>
secretly looked at that incident. <We did not let him see us;
otherwise, he would have smashed us too.> And a while later, that
woman was smashed with the back of the hoe. She died as a result.
<He then dug a pit to bury her. We then ran back.>
This was the actual incident that I witnessed at the time so, as
I said, he was the actual perpetrator since he was so cruel and
vicious.
Q. You stated that you saw a woman was smashed and killed by Ta
Auy. Do you know that woman, where was she from?
A. I do not know that woman. I do not know where she was from.
She was taken out from a different building. Her legs were
shackled.
Q. Her legs were shackled or chained so while she was being
smashed by Ta Auy, was she still being chained and shackled?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please observe the microphone, Madam Witness.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. She was locked to the chains while being walked by Ta Auy.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. Did you see other killings of detainees besides that woman?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. <> The other three women who were picking out vegetables with
me saw that incident. All of them died and passed away already.
Q. You stated that you and other two, other three people saw the
incident of killing. Is that true?
A. Yes, <three> of us witnessed that incident.
Q. My question is different from that. In fact, I want to ask
whether there were other killings besides the killing of a woman
that you witnessed on that day.
A. I witnessed only the killing of that woman.
Q. Regarding Ta Auy, besides being a security guard, do you know
the function or the position of that Auy?
A. I do not know besides he was being a security guard. I only
know that he was the one who always walked the detainees out of
the building and he was also responsible for taking all detainees
back into the building.
Q. Do you happen to know an individual by the name Nhok at the
security centre of Au Kanseng?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Civil Party, please observe the microphone.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. I used to hear people mention the name Nhok. I myself never
saw his face.
BY MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Q. In the same written record of interview, the same document
number, question and answer 7, you made mention about the removal
of a gallbladder. Could you give a description of that incident
to the Court? What did you know about that removal of
gallbladder?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. I heard people say that a gallbladder was removed. I was
<cooking. After that,> I was walking <back and forth> along the
road <>. <There were three or four people in chains.> One <of
them> was so cruel and brutal, he used the bamboo stick out of
the wall and then cut open the body to remove the gallbladder,
<but it was not successful>. And that person <died and the body
was taken out>.
Q. I do not really understand your answer. <Who cut who? How was
it not successful?> Did you witness that incident or did you only
hear about the removal of the gallbladder? Could you make it a
bit clearer for the Court?
A. Ta Auy was in charge of the building. When a person was
removed out of the building, it was said that the liver <was>
removed <and eaten>. The detainee did the action, cutting open
the body to remove the liver, and Ta Auy stated by himself that
he ate gallbladder of human beings. <We were working in the
kitchen> and every time Ta Auy went in and out of the kitchen
hall, he said that he ate the gallbladders of human beings.
MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
Thank you, Madam Witness. In the interest of time, I would like
to hand the floor to my international colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes. In fact, you may proceed. However, please alert the Chamber
how you share the remaining time with the Lead Co-Lawyers.
QUESTIONING BY MR. FARR:
Mr. President, they've told us that they need something between
30 and 40 minutes, so I am going to be very brief, less than five
minutes I hope.
Q. Madam Witness, I just have a very few questions for you. So as
I understood your testimony this morning, you told us that when
you were first detained at the prison you were in a room that was
locked from the outside and then later you were moved to a room
that was not locked from the outside. Did I understand that
correctly?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And do you have any way of estimating how long you were in the
room that locked before you were moved to the room that did not
lock?
A. When we arrived, we were detained in that room for a night and
the next day we were put in a room where it was not locked.
Q. So is it correct then that by the time the Jarai women arrived
you were already in the room that did not lock?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Okay. I just have a few more questions about your daughter's
birth. You gave birth to a child during your time in Au Kanseng;
is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. My child was born while I was detained
in the Au Kanseng 1 prison.
Q. And during your pregnancy and at the time of birth, were you
given any sort of medical care?
A. No, there was no medical service. However, there was a male
medic who was there during my delivery and who actually cut the
umbilical cord. And in fact, I was assisted by <> other <>
inmates.
Q. And after your daughter was born, were you able to take care
of her or were you required to immediately begin working?
A. After the delivery I remained with my baby and other inmates
would assist me with the firewood in order to warm me up. And I
was not given any medicine or pills to take. Only the female
inmates who were in the same building that assisted me.
Q. And how long after your daughter's birth were you required to
begin working again?
A. After I had some strength then I was sent to cook rice in the
kitchen and I could be with my baby at the time. However, I did
not have any breast milk to feed my baby and for that reason I
gave her sugar cane juice to drink. And after that, I was sent to
sort of carry woods. I had to carry the wood planks from the
forest.
I feel the pain when I think of what happened at the time. It
vividly plays in my mind. The situation was so miserable for me.
When you ask me these questions, it triggers the pain inside me.
Q. And I know this is a difficult topic but this will be my last
question. Could you just give us an idea of how the conditions in
the prison affected your daughter's health during the time that
she spent there?
A. Because I did not have breast milk to feed her, then I asked
for sugar cane juice to feed her. And that happened because I did
the hard work; namely, carrying wood. Luckily enough, the baby
survived and is still living now. She was fed with sugar cane
juice at the time.
MR. FARR:
Thank you, Madam Witness. Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And the floor is now given to the Lead Co-Lawyers for
civil parties. You may proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. PICH ANG:
Good afternoon, Mr. President, Your Honours, everyone in and
around the courtroom.
Q. And good afternoon, Madam Witness. My name is Pich Ang. I and
my colleague, Marie Guiraud, are Lead Co-Lawyers for the
consolidated group of civil parties and I have some questions to
put to you.
Allow me to back track the events a little bit -- that is, the
time that you were instructed to board a truck in the rubber
plantation. Can you tell us; were you instructed to go and get on
the truck in an orderly manner or were you threatened or not?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. It was the village chief who told us to board the truck to go
for a meeting at S-8 in Botum area.
Q. And when you were at the truck, you saw armed guards. Did you
get on the truck by yourself?
A. Yes, I did it by myself. At that time guards were armed,
including the village guards.
Q. After you boarded the truck, where were the guards? Did the
guards also get on the truck?
A. The guards were sitting at the back of the truck together with
us.
Q. You mean at the rear compartment of the truck? Can you
describe to the Court about the kind of truck that you were on?
Was it a fully covered truck or was it an open-roofed truck?
A. It was a truck with an empty rear compartment, and I do not
know how to describe it more than that. So the rear compartment
was large and empty and we got on the truck and we sat in that
compartment. The guards also boarded the truck and sat at the
rear. However, I do not know the model of that truck.
Q. So I believe, if I am not mistaken, it was an open-roofed rear
compartment truck. Is that correct?
A. It was not -- the rear compartment was not covered.
Q. And when you arrived at the detention centre - or, after that,
did you see that truck again? And if so, how frequently did you
see it at the centre?
A. I did not see the truck again after I was detained in the
centre because usually the vehicles would stop far from where I
was detained.
Q. I would like to talk about other people who were sent to the
detention centre. You just said that the cars or the trucks did
not park near where you were. And besides the group of the Jarai
people, did you witness the arrival of any other groups of people
who were sent to that detention centre?
A. I saw people who were brought in and then they were placed in
the separate buildings but I did not know of their nationality or
ethnicity. I only knew of those Jarai people who were detained
with me.
Q. Maybe my question is not clear enough. Let me talk about the
building where you were detained. Besides you, a Khmer woman and
a group of Jarai people, did you -- were there any other
detainees who were brought in and detained in your building or
room whether they were Vietnamese or Khmer or of any other
ethnicities?
A. There were only Khmer and Jarai people in that building. There
were no Vietnamese.
Q. So I will not ask you further questions about other
ethnicities. Right now return to the work that you did at the
centre. Could you tell the Chamber whether that detention centre
was labelled as re-education centre?
A. I did not know. Maybe the actual name is re-education centre.
Q. During the time that you stayed in that centre, were you ever
called to attend any meeting with anyone there, for example a
study session or a study meeting?
A. No, there was none.
Q. Are you sure that there was no meeting organized or there was
no study session organized for you?
A. There was none.
Q. So there was no such meeting or you did not know if meetings
took place in the centre?
A. There was no meeting and, of course, I did not know if there
were any other meetings.
Q. So I will not ask you any further about meetings. Let we talk
about your living conditions. You have been asked by the
Co-Prosecutors about your young child, so I'd like to touch up on
that issue as well as your living conditions and the conditions
of those who were detained there.
Regarding your young daughter, what was her health like?
A. My child was young and was skinny. When I went to work, the
child would stay with the caretaker there. If children had enough
breast milk, then the children would be healthy, but my child was
not that healthy.
Q. And did your child fall ill rather frequently during your
detention there?
A. Yes, rather frequently.
Q. And was your child looked after when she was sick and what
kind of sickness that she had?
A. Usually it was fever and the male medic would bring some
medicine for her. Most of the time, she had fever and cough.
Q. And after you gave her the medicine, did she recover?
A. Yes.
Q. In your response to the Co-Prosecutor, you said that there was
no medical treatment or service, but now you said that a medic
gave some medicine to your baby. Could you tell the Chamber what
conditions for the inmates or for people there to receive the
medical treatment?
A. My feeling was rather overwhelmed when I am here. However, I
can say that if my baby had a fever or cough then I could ask for
medicine. For me, I do not really understand well about the word
"the services" in Khmer also were. But if you talk about
treatment then, yes, if my child got sick then I could ask for
medicine for her treatment, although my child was not with me all
the time as my child was with the caretaker.
Q. So do you mean that you did not actually know well about the
wellbeing of your child?
A. Because I went to work outside and my child was left with a
caretaker. So it was up to the caretaker to ask for medicine if
my child had fever and I only saw my child at night time.
Q. You also stated that you sort of carried wood planks from the
forest. Can you tell the Chamber where did you sort of carry the
wood planks and how hard was it to carry wood planks?
A. I was asked to sort of carry wood planks and the distance was
rather far. And at that time I had just delivered my baby and I
could not carry it.
There were older women who came from other areas and <they> tried
hard and <> could sort of carry the planks. And after <they>
finished, <they> returned to help carry my share, because
whenever I stood up carrying the planks, my knees shook. So those
women took turns to help me carry the wood planks. And before we
reached the place where we had to drop the wood planks off, I
would try to carry the wood planks <so that they would not see
that I got any help>.
<The> wood planks <were 10 metres long>. We had to carry those
wood planks from the forest where the wood was <cut> and, of
course, the road was not smooth. It was rough. But I could not
carry it from the wood and those old women assisted me.
Q. How far was the distance from the forest where you had to
carry the wood planks to where you had to drop it off?
A. It was about the same distance as from the main road to the
car park here of this Court. So I cannot tell you the distance.
And as I have just said, it was from the main road to the car
park near this courtroom.
Q. If I put it to you that the distance is about 300 metres, is
that about right?
A. I could say the distance was from the main checkpoint at the
main road to our location here. And I cannot give you the number
of metres.
Q. Thank you. And I would like to ask you about your health
condition and your food <rations>. While you had just delivered
your baby, did you have sufficient food to eat?
A. We were given a food ration -- that is, a bowl each and
whatever soup that was given to us we simply ate it. They --
although I had just delivered a baby, I was not -- I did not
receive any special food <rations> at all.
Q. And the food that was given to you, was it sufficient for you
who had just delivered your baby?
A. Of course it was not sufficient when we were detained there.
We were considered prisoners so the food given to us was not that
sufficient. But we had no choice and we just ate what was given
to us.
Q. I don't have many more questions. And I'd like again to ask
you about your living conditions or the living conditions of
other inmates.
While you were in that detention centre, did you have a proper
sleeping facility, for example a sleeping mat, a pillow or a
mosquito net?
A. There was none.
Q. So if that is the case, what did you sleep on?
A. We had a few sets of clothes so we used those clothes as our
pillow and because we had no mosquito net, sometimes we had to
chase the mosquitoes away or sometimes we had to make a fire to
chase the mosquitoes away.
Q. On the topic of hygiene, where did you bathe yourself?
A. We went to the creek to bathe ourselves and we also washed our
clothes in that creek.
Q. While you were bathing yourselves with others, were you being
guarded?
A. The creek that I referred to was located near the kitchen and
near the building where the chief resided. So we were not guarded
while we bathed in that creek.
Q. What about the male prisoners who were chained in the
building? Can you describe their situations?
A. For them, they were not allowed to go out and bathe.
MR. PICH ANG:
I don't have any further questions for you, Madam Witness, and I
thank you for answering my questions.
Mr. President, I conclude my questions now. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now convenient for us to take a short break. We will take a
break now and resume at 10 to 3.00.
Court officer, please assist the civil party - rather, the
witness during the break time and invite her, as well as the TPO
staff, back into the courtroom at 10 to 3.00.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1430H to 1451H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Chamber is now back in session and we give the floor to the
defence counsel to put questions to the witness. And first, the
floor is given to the defence counsel for Mr. Nuon Chea. You may
now proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good afternoon, Madam Witness. I have not very many questions
to you. I hope that we can finish this afternoon.
Let me start by asking you some questions as to the time that you
saw those Jarai ethnic people. Let me first ask you whether it is
correct that you and <your> former husband were arrested and
brought to Au Kanseng around mid-June 1977?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Is it also correct to say that mid-June 1977 you were already
pregnant from your child and if yes, do you know long you were
already pregnant from your child?
A. I was two months pregnant.
Q. Is it then correct that your child was born early 1978? Do you
remember actually the exact date that she was born?
A. No, I cannot recall because I did not pay attention to the
date when the child was born. I simply gave birth without taking
much notice of the date.
Q. I understand, but would you agree with me that if you were
pregnant for about two months mid-June 1977, that your daughter
must have been born somewhere in January 1978?
A. Yes, it's probably like that. It was in 1978.
Q. Now, in your statement to the investigators in question and
answer 6 --
MR. FARR:
Mr. President, I think that counsel may be moving into a -- all
of the questions have been leading so far. I haven't objected
because they weren't important issues. But I think he is moving
into an issue that may be important. So I would ask that he ask
an open question before putting the witness' statement to her.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I have no problem, but the previous questions were also
important.
Q. Madam Witness, do you remember when it was that you saw the
Jarai people in relation to the birth of your daughter? In other
words, was your daughter already born when you saw those Jarai
people in Au Kanseng? And if yes, how long was she born already?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. I did not give birth to my child yet at that time. I saw the
coming of the Jarai people before I delivered the baby.
Q. Let me read to you what you told the investigators. That is
question and answer 6. You said the following, and I quote:
"After I gave birth to a child for about two, three months, I saw
the minority people tied in a string." End of quote.
So it seems that you are saying here that the child was already
born and that two or three months later you saw the Jarai. Does
that somehow refresh your memory?
A. It maybe like what you just said. I cannot recall things well.
I lost some of my memory because my memory was not good. <So what
I answered in my first statement is correct.>
Q. So would you agree with me if your statement to the
investigators is correct that you saw those Jarai March or April
1978?
MR. FARR:
Your Honour, the witness hasn't agreed that her statement is
correct. She said it may be correct what you just read.
Therefore, I object to counsel's question. It's premised on
something other than what the witness has just told us.
MR. KOPPE:
I am not sure if I follow. I confronted the witness with what she
said to the investigators. She didn't deny saying that. She just
couldn't remember it well.
So there is still the evidence in front of us. If that is
correct, I was just calculating for her and putting it to her
that she saw the Jarai March or April 1978. And the reason it's
relevant, obviously, Mr. President, is because of the document
that I showed the other witness yesterday.
So I think it is important that I get leeway to find out exactly
when she said -- when she saw those Jarai.
JUDGE FENZ:
Counsel, yes, we are not hindering to do this but what the
prosecutor objected to was trying to do this by making a
calculation based on what she herself says is an assumption;
might be, might not be. I think it's the path that the prosecutor
objects to, not the end.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I'm happy to do it again.
Q. Madam Witness, I confronted you with your earlier statement
indicating that you saw those Jarai two or three months after the
birth of your child. Then you said, "Well, I don't really
remember well." But if I ask you to think again, was it indeed
two or three months after the birth of your daughter that you saw
those Jarai?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. Yes, it maybe like what you just said when I saw the Jarai
people. My memory does not serve me well.
Q. I understand. But is then correct for me to say that you saw
those Jarai in March or April 1978?
A. I cannot recall whether it was in March or April because at
that time we worked every day, so seven days a week. That's why
we did not pay attention much to whether it was Monday or the
other days or what month it was.
Q. Fine, no problem, Madam Witness. I'll move on.
But then I would like to ask you where it was exactly that you
saw that pit that you believe was then at one point in time
filled with the bodies of those Jarai? Where exactly was it that
you saw that empty pit?
A. The empty pit which I saw was located at a location close to
the place where I was assigned to collect, to pick up vegetables
and that empty pit was the result of the B-52 bombing<. It was a
deep and large pit, I saw it>. So it was far away from the
detention buildings.
Q. Do you recall whether it was about one kilometre or maybe two
kilometres away from Au Kanseng?
A. It was about one kilometre away.
Q. Do you know whether it was - whether this B-52 crater was
close or in a vicinity of a jackfruit plantation?
A. I do not know where jackfruit plantation was located at the
time. The <male> detainees would know about the location of that
jackfruit plantation since they were assigned to guard the fruit,
the jackfruit. And for females, <we did not know about that>.
Q. Do you know any other specifics than the pit was in an old
B-52 crater? Can you be a little more specific as to the
location?
A. I do not have anything to explain about the B-52 crater. As I
stated, I saw an empty pit, B-52 crater.
Q. What made you conclude that this B-52 crater was in fact a pit
to be filled with bodies at one point in time later?
A. The first time I saw the crater, the <> pit was not filled
with dirt. And after Jarai people had been sent away, the day
after, I went to <pick up vegetables and I saw> that <the> pit <>
was filled with the dirt.
Q. Do you remember whether this B-52 crater was close to the main
entrance, was it south or north or east or west? Can you give us
a little more details as to the location? What do you remember?
A. I do not know where exactly that B-52 crater was located. I do
not know whether it was located in the east<> or west. I did not
know about the direction<, but the entrance was on the -- if we
entered --> So it is very difficult for me to describe the
geographical area of the location. I do not really know how to
explain. So the sun was in different positions when <we> visited
<Boeng> Kanseng at different times.
Q. Did you actually see any of the bodies itself? Were bodies in
that pit still to a certain extent uncovered? Were you able to
recognize any of the dead bodies or was it not possible?
A. I cannot recall whose dead bodies they were. The <> crater
<was filled with dirt, with a crack on the surface>. At one time
I saw an empty, <deep> pit and on another time, I saw the pit was
filled with dirt <and> I could smell the decomposing bodies. So I
did not know those bodies belonged to whom. <I was scared,> so <>
I was not interested to discover whose bodies they were.
Q. One last question and I will move on.
Today, you made it very clear that you did not witness the
killings of the Jarai people who were in Au Kanseng and whom you
saw being detained. However in your WRI A6, answer and question
6, you are saying, and I quote, "These ethnic minorities were
tied one after another on a string and taken to be killed by
batons and the heads of the hoes. And I saw it while I was
picking vegetables near that location". Now, clearly that is very
much contradicting what you said today.
Do you know why you said this to the investigators?
A. When I was asked by the investigator, I recalled the
experience at that time, so I provided the <correct> answer. <But
now I get sick often,> I have had the high blood pressure
disease<, and I also had an operation>, so my memory is not good.
<It was quite a long time since I was interviewed by the
investigator. I also lost some memory.> So when I am here to
testify, my testimony may have a little bit of different -- may
be a little bit different from what I told on that time.
Q. Let me move on now to the next subject. You were asked a
question already about this, Madam Witness, and that during your
interrogation you were asked whether you had communicated with
the "Yuon", and you told the Chamber that <> you hadn't.
Do you recall if there were more questions asked to you about
your communications with Vietnamese or with "Yuon"? Was this the
only question that they asked or did they ask all kinds of
questions relating to you allegedly talking to the "Yuon"?
A. I was asked mostly about my communication with "Yuon" and my
same answer was that I never had any contact with the "Yuon".
Q. But do you recall, for instance, whether they asked you
questions about names of certain people, names of Vietnamese
people, time, places etc.? Do you remember any specific details
as to the questions?
A. They did not ask much. The question was about whether or not I
had communicated with the "Yuon". No other questions were put to
me. It was about only communication with "Yuon". I was asked
whether I had communicated with the "Yuon". My reply was no.
Q. And is it then fair for me to conclude that after half-hour of
questions, they were -- they had believed your answers and that
they were fine with this?
MR. FARR:
Mr. President, I think that question calls for speculation. He's
asking the witness whether the interrogators believed her
answers.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I will reformulate.
Q. Madam Witness, when the questioning was done after half-hour,
did they say to you, "okay, thank you, we believe you," or didn't
they say that?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. The interrogator said nothing.
Q. One or two last questions in relation to these questions.
Maybe that would somehow jog your memory.
Did they ever ask you any questions about a person named Lang
(phonetic) who was in contact with Khieu (phonetic) from Hanoi;
possibly Khieu Meas (phonetic) from Hanoi? Did they ask you any
questions about Ya, the zone chief?
Do these names mean anything to you?
A. I was never asked about whether or not I knew some particular
names. They never asked me such things.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness, I will move on.
Would you be in a position to remember how many prisoners there
have been in total in 1977 and the subsequent year, 1978? Are you
possible to remember -- can you remember estimates as to how many
prisoners there were in total, both men and women, in Au Kanseng?
A. I personally did not know about the number of detainees. I was
not so interested about the number of detainees at the time. I
minded only my life. I did not make any effort to count how many
detainees at the time.
I was struggling for my life, so how could I have any focus on
how many detainees were there.
Q. Well, as I understood your testimony, you were working with
most of them it seems in '77 and '78, but at any given time a
minimum of 50 and a maximum of 100, would that be an accurate
estimate or is it not -- are you not possible -- are you not able
to say the exact numbers or the approximate numbers, rather?
A. I cannot tell the approximate number, I did not count. Some
<four or> 10 detainees may have detained in one cell, so the
number in cells varied. I was simply a detainee, I did not bother
counting numbers of detainees. I was assigned to work at the time
and when I returned back at night, I more interested in sleeping
time.
Male detainees may have known about numbers -- number of
detainees. I was a woman with a small infant <and I was also busy
with work>, so I did not bother counting numbers of detainees at
that place.
Q. Do you know whether there was also another re-education centre
next to the one -- or in addition to the one that you were in,
run by military division 801? Have you ever heard whether there
was another re-education centre?
A. No, I have not.
Q. Were you ever told you were in a re-education centre for light
offenders?
A. They did not mention about light and serious offenders. I was
assigned to work so I was doing my utmost to perform the tasks. I
had to be committed to my work.
They allowed me to go outside thanks to my hard work, so they
never mentioned about light or serious offenders.
Q. Have you ever heard of a person named Chat who was a -- the
deputy chairman of the worker union and who was also an ethnic
Jarai?
A. I never heard of that name.
Q. Then my last subject, Madam Witness.
You said this afternoon that you saw Ta Auy kill a woman. Do you
know who this woman was?
A. I do not know who she was, I only saw the killing. I do not
know where she was from and where she was detained in the centre.
While I was picking up vegetables, I saw the killing of that
woman.
Q. So she was not someone who was detained in the same place as
you were; correct?
A. She was not detained in the same building as me, she was <>
detained in a different building.
Q. Well then, let me be clear on this. You didn't know her;
correct?
A. Correct.
Q. Where was it exactly that you saw this incident?
A. While I was picking up vegetables. It was close to a creek or
stream, and close to that stream, vegetables were grown by
detainees. There were small gardens close to that creek.
Q. Do you remember how far this creek was away from Au Kanseng?
A. Au Kanseng was located rightly in the province<, but if we
went from the security centre,> the creek was located far away
from <> Au Kanseng security centre. In fact, <Boeng> Kanseng was
located rightly in the provincial town of Ratanakiri. <So the
location of the security centre was not at Boeng Kanseng.>
I do not recall the name of the location <but> there was a creek
or stream, as I said, and the water at the time was flowing, but
it was not Au Kanseng or <Boeng> Kanseng stream.
Q. Do you remember how far it was; was it one kilometre away, 10
kilometres away from Au Kanseng?
A. I do not know the distance. When you asked me -- when you were
asking me about this question<, I didn't recall it and I did not
estimate> how far it <was. I don't know how to calculate the
distance, I don't know>.
Q. Do you remember when it was that you saw this incident?
A. It was when I was picking up vegetables. I was assigned to
work in the kitchen so I was ordered to go around and find
vegetables in the forest.
While I was walking to find vegetables, I accidentally saw Auy
mistreating a woman. <We were> there looking secretly the
mistreatment <with fear because we> wanted to know how the
process was conducted.
The woman was smashed with the back of the hoe<, and then she
went to grab his leg,> and after that the -- Ta Auy gave her
another <beating. And then he dug the pit to bury her dead body>.
Q. My question was as to when in time. Had you, for instance,
already given birth to your child when you saw this or was it
much later or were you still pregnant when you saw this incident?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please observe microphone, Madam Witness.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. It was after I delivered the baby.
After I had delivered the baby, I was assigned to work in a
kitchen cooking rice, so it was quite some time after I had
delivered the baby when I saw that incident.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Was it also after you saw the Jarai in the detention centre?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. It was after the incident happening to Jarai.
Q. Was it already the rainy season or was it still the dry season
that you saw this incident?
A. The rain started in that -- during that time, but it did not
reach the rainy season yet. It was the start of the rainy season.
Q. And was it only Ta Auy who was involved in this incident or
were there also other men involved?
A. <When I witnessed it,> there was only Ta Auy at the time.
Q. Have you ever heard as to the reasons why Ta Auy killed this
woman?
A. I do not know about the reason. <> It was his business. I only
witnessed that incident. I did not know the reason.
Q. Do you know or have you ever heard whether Ta Auy was under
any form of instruction to kill this woman?
A. I did not know about that.
Q. Do you know whether Ta Auy knew this woman personally or
whether he maybe had a relationship with this woman?
A. No, I don't.
Q. And my last question.
Do you know whether this incident had anything to do with Ta
Auy's capacity as guard in Au Kanseng?
A. I do not know about that. <Because anything involving other
people's business or their internal affairs, I could not know>.
Q. And my very last question, unrelated to this, Madam Witness.
You spoke about the health of your daughter and I understand that
your daughter is still alive. How is her health today?
A. She has suffered from diseases from time to time. Sometimes
she has stomach disease and on other times she has <back pain.
She gets sick often>. She is married, so her husband is <always>
taking care of her. <Her health is not good, she gets sick
often.>
Q. But is she fine now, generally speaking?
A. I have no idea. Currently they are living in their family away
from me. <They are living in Ratanakiri. For me, I came to live
in Doeum Reus (phonetic).> I do not know for sure how she is. I
only sometimes know that she is suffering from diseases from time
to time.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Madam Witness.
Mr. President, my national colleague has a few additional
questions.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE FENZ:
Just to direct follow-up questions to what you said, so I think
it's probably the time to do it now.
Q. This is about the last incident counsel covered with you.
My first question is about the distance from -- or between the
re-education centre and the vegetable field. You said you don't
remember the distance.
Can you tell me, did you walk there or did you go there by car or
by truck from the centre to the vegetable field?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. I walked there. There were no cars or motorbikes at that time.
We did not have even bicycles to ride. <Although it was about one
kilometer or two kilometers, we had to walk there on foot.> All
of us went there on foot and we talked, we chatted, along the way
when we walked there.
Regarding the distance from the vegetable field to the
<buildings>, it was about one kilometre away from each other, but
it was just my estimate because we had no means to measure the
exact distance. And…
Q. I'm not trying to pressure you into making an assumption.
I understand you don't know the distance, but can you tell me
what time it took you to go there? How long did it take you to go
from the centre to this vegetable field, if you remember?
A. <For example, if we walked from that distance to --> we did
not know <> how long it took to get there <on foot>. We did not
pay attention to the number of hours we spent. We simply walked
<there> and did not <estimate> how many hours it took to get
there. <I could not estimate whether it took half an hour or one
hour to get there. We just walked there.>
Q. Well, I'm not sure it's an issue of translation, but when you
say, "How many hours", do I have to understand that it was more
than one hour or don't you have any idea about the time?
A. It was probably one hour to get there, but we walked and we
chatted along the way.
Q. Witness, generally, you don't have to give answers. If you
don't remember something, tell me.
Now, let me get to the next question, and I just want to check if
I understood it correctly.
When you saw this woman being killed, can you remind us what
happened to the body of the woman?
A. As I told you earlier, when I picked the vegetable, I saw Auy
beating the woman with a hoe and then the woman went to <grab>
his leg and begged for her life and then Auy did not let her
survive. He kept beating her with another hoe and then <he dug a
pit and> pushed her into the pit.
And that was what I and other women who went to pick vegetables
saw and we secretly sneaked out to make sure that Auy did not see
us. <After that, we secretly ran away, because we were afraid
that he would beat us with a hoe too.>
Q. And this pit, the pit where the body was thrown into, did you
ever go to this pit, perhaps on a later day, on the next day or
the day after?
A. Later on, I went to pick up vegetables again and I saw <that
the pit was filled and there were> crack<s on the surface>, and
that was when I made my journey back to pick up vegetables again
and that was what I saw.
Q. Just to be clear. That was not the same pit or was it the same
pit where you saw the -- or where you think you -- the Jarai
disappeared, or was that the same pit, no or yes?
A. The pit where the Jarai people were buried was a different
one. That was a big pit. <When I went there for the first time, I
saw> that big pit was not covered, but after the Jarai people
were <taken away, the day after, I went there again and I saw>
the pit was <filled with dirt. That pit was deep.>
So I just want to clarify that there were different pits between
the one that were used to covered -- to put the Jarai people and
the one that was used for the woman. <The pits were not side by
side. The pit of that woman was close to the stream and the
vegetable garden, but the pit of the Jarai people was in a
different place.>
Q. As far as you know, was there only this woman in this pit or
were there more women in this pit -- or more people in this pit?
A. <Her body was not in that pit because the> body of the woman
was buried near the vegetable farm. For the big <crater>, I had
no idea how many people were buried there or who were buried
there. There were many bodies and the big pit< was> covered and
there was a crack in the cover. <If there were only one or two
dead bodies, it would not have filled the pit.>
Q. I understand about the big pit. My question was about the
other pit where the woman disappeared.
Do you know if there were other bodies in this pit, or do you not
know? In the pit where the woman was shoved?
A. There was no other dead bodies. There was only the dead body
of that woman<, because he dug that pit and buried her dead
body.>
Q. <How do you know that> if you didn't go there -- or, did you
go there?
A. I went to pick up vegetables, so I repeat what I said earlier.
When I was picking up the vegetables, I saw the beating of her.
<He> used the hoe to beat the woman. <After she died, he used
that hoe to dig the pit and buried only her dead body>. So it was
a different pit from the <bomb crater> that I said earlier.
JUDGE FENZ:
Okay, thank you. No more questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now the Chamber gives the floor to the defence counsel for Mr.
Khieu Samphan to put questions to this witness. You may now
proceed, counsel.
Now we -- I notice that the <national> defence counsel for Nuon
Chea is on his feet.
QUESTIONING BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Good afternoon, Mr. President. Good afternoon parties, and good
afternoon, Madam Witness.
My name Liv Sovanna; I am a <national> lawyer representing Mr.
Nuon Chea in this courtroom. I have some more questions to put to
you.
Q. First, I would like to know that when you were taken to the
re-educational centre in Au Kanseng, based on your observation,
how many interrogations room were there?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. There was only one interrogation room. <It had a roof and <>
closed <walls>. It was a small room.
Q. From the interrogation room to your holding cell, how far was
it from each other?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Witness, please observe the microphone.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
<Perhaps,> the distance between my holding cell and the
interrogation room were not far from each other.
BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Q. Can you tell us how <many> metres were they away from each
other?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. They were probably about 20 metres away from each other.
Q. I would like to quote from document E3/9357 at question and
answer 4. You said that, "The interrogation <place> was <a> small
<building with a roof and> close<d walls,> and it was about 30
metres away from other buildings." End of quote.
So does this reflect your memory?
A. Yes, it was about that distance.
Q. Now I have another question to put to you.
Were male and female inmates held at different holding cells or
they were held in the same holding cells?
A. We were placed in different holding cells.
Q. You meant that you were <detained> in the same building or in
different buildings?
A. In different buildings. Women were placed <with women only,>
and men <were placed with men>.
Q. Based on your recollections, how many buildings were used to
detain women?
A. There was only one building <for female detainees. It was a
long building, and we slept in line>, but there was another
building where a woman was <taken away. That woman was in another
building>.
Q. I would like you to clarify this point.
Earlier, you said that you did not know that woman, and now you
said that the woman who <was> taken away was the woman who were
detained <in another building>? <Would you clarify this point?>
A. I said that the woman was not detained in the same building
with me. That means she was detained in a separate building. If
she was detained with me, I would know her. <I did not know where
she was brought from, so it means that she was detained in
another building.>
Q. So that means that you did not see which specific building the
woman was detained. What you knew was that the woman was not
detained in the same building with you?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Witness, please observe the microphone.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. My building was a different one from the building of that
woman. When we were allowed to go out to relieve ourselves, we
saw the woman <being> detain<ed in> a separate building <, and
there were no men>, and she was detained in a small <and closed>
holding cell. We saw that woman when that woman was allowed to
come outside to relieve herself.
BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Q. I would like you to recall the situation at that time.
<Earlier,> you said that you <had never> see<n the woman who was
killed>, but now you said that you saw her in a different
building. So I would like to know whether you had seen her before
she was taken away to be killed or what?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Witness, please hold on, and now the Chamber gives the
floor to the Lead Co-Lawyer for civil party lawyers.
MR. PICH ANG:
Counsel for Mr. Nuon Chea said that this witness <had never>
see<n> her; that counsel needed to quote what she said <exactly>.
And what she said was that <> she <did not see> th<at> woman <>
detained in the same building with her. She did not say that she
hadn't seen her <in another place>.
MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Based on my memory, the witness said that she <never knew> the
woman, and now <I would like to clarify whether there were two
different women, because in her earlier response> she said that
she <never knew> the woman <who was killed, but now she said that
she saw that woman detained in another holding cell>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel, the words "seen" and "knew" are two different words.
<You can see a person, but that doesn't mean that you know that
person, right?> They are two distinct words. <Do you know how to
use> the words "seen" and "knew"?
BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Now let me continue.
Q. Now, I asked you about the woman who you said you saw her
being killed.
My question is: have you <seen> her before?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. No, I had not <seen and> known her<>.
Q. Why did you say that she may have been detained in a different
holding cell? It was based on your speculation or it was based on
your actual knowledge?
A. I have not seen her detained in the same building with mine,
that's why I concluded that she was detained in a separate
building, <and she was sent away to be killed. That's what I
said>.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. Now I have some more questions that
I need you to clarify.
<After you and your husband were arrested together,> did you know
<in> which building <> your husband was detained?
A. When my family was arrested, he was detained in a different
building.
Q. From the building where your husband was detained to the
interrogation room, how far were they from each other?
A. From my building to the male building, <it was> probably from
<here> to that building.
Q. If we compare between the building where you were detained and
the building where your husband was detained, which one was
closer to the interrogation room?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on.
Mr. Counsel, please reformulate your question because it is
difficult to understand. You need to be more specific when you
compare the various locations.
BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Q. I compare the distance from the interrogation room to the
holding cell where <she was> detained and from the interrogation
room to where her husband was detained; which one was further
from the interrogation room>?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. My building was closer to the interrogation room.
The male building was far <from my female building;> it <> was
approximately from this courtroom to the <other> building <over
there>. <The interrogation room and the male building were the
same distance I mentioned above.>
Q. Now let me talk about food ration. Were you required to eat in
the common dining hall or were you given food to eat in your
holding cell?
A. We ate in the common dining hall. There were long tables and
we ate together.
Q. Did the male inmates also join with the female inmates during
the eating or they were assigned to eat at separate locations?
A. <Men and women> were assigned to eat at separate locations,
and we were given food ration of one small bowl with potatoes.
And men eat at a different location and women ate at a different
location.
Q. Was it in the same building or different building?
A. Male came to eat close to the kitchen hall. For the women,
<sometimes we took> our food <> to <eat in> our holding cells.
<If not, we could eat there. They had already divided the food
rations for us.>
Q. Based on your observation, the male inmates who came to eat,
how many of them came to eat?
A. There were around 10 of them.
Q. Based on your observations of the eating, because you worked
in the kitchen and you were assigned to pick up vegetables, so
you may have witnessed the approximate numbers of inmates in the
<Au Kanseng re-education centre>?
A. I did not count the number <of inmates in the buildings>. I
saw about 10 men who came to eat at the common dining hall<, and
they went out to work>, but I did not know how many inmates there
were in the prison.
I did not have time to think about the calculation of the number
because I was scared. I just thought about my work.
Q. Now, I move to a new topic related to the arrival of the
Vietnamese.
When the Vietnamese arrived, what did the prison supervisor told
you?
A. They told us that we had to package our luggage because the
Vietnamese now arrived and they would kill all of us.
And any inmate who could walk must walk ahead, and for those who
could not walk, they did not do anything. So those who could
walk, they were walked away and the group also included me.
Q. Were you -- when you were walking, what time was it when you
were told to leave the <Au Kanseng> re-education <centre>?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please observe the microphone, Madam Witness.
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. I did not know the time of the day. It was in the daytime when
we were told to leave. We kept -- they kept on walking at the
time as we were told.
BY MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Q. Your <ex->husband, Phon Thol, and you were together, weren't
you?
MS. MOEURNG CHANDY:
A. We were together.
Q. Before the arrival of the Vietnamese troops, was there any
time that they allowed you to leave together with your husband?
A. We left <and travelled> together, and stayed at a specific
location together when it was the necessary time to stop,
<including unit chiefs and their subordinates>.
Q. I am asking you about the time before the arrival of the
Vietnamese troops, <while you two were detained at the Au Kanseng
re-education centre>.
Toward the end of the regime, were you allowed to stay in the
same house or in the same building with your husband?
A. We were not allowed to stay together and while we were being
evacuated out of the building, we were walking together. I and my
husband were walking together and we rested at the same location
where we stopped together including the chief of the security
centre.
Q. My question perhaps is not clear to you. I want to know about
the time before the evacuation to the end of that time.
I want to know, after your detention and your husband detention,
whether you two were allowed to stay in the same building
together?
A. No. No, we were not detained in the same building.
Q. Perhaps it is my last question to you about the evacuation.
At which location could you escape or flee after that evacuation?
<Could you describe your evacuation journey?>
A. After I had been evacuated, I kept on walking. From time to
time, I walked into the forest and in different locations. <I did
not know in which direction I was walking.>
At one time, I arrived at Lao (phonetic) village, or Phum Lao
(phonetic). This village was known as Nheun (phonetic). <When I
arrived at that village>, the Vietnamese troops arrived <there
too>, so we were <released, and they said, "The 'Yuon' have now
arrived, they have come to kill us.">
We separated from one another at Nheun (phonetic). They left for
different destinations, <but we stayed in Nheun (phonetic)>. I
was there waiting for the arrival of the Vietnamese, although we
were told that the Vietnamese would come and kill us. That kind
of event happened once already and at that time we were not
killed, so that was the second time. So I decided to stay on
waiting for the Vietnamese to come, although I was told that <>
we would be killed at that time. <Because at that time, we were
released, and the unit chiefs had already escaped and fled.>
Those who could walk, they further walked away to other
destinations and I kept on walking at that location. <That's what
I saw along the way during my evacuation.>
MR. LIV SOVANNA:
Thank you, Mr. President. I think I am running out of time so I
am done.
MR. PRESIDENT:
What about the defence counsel for Mr. Khieu Samphan, do you have
questions to put to this witness?
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
I have several questions to put to this witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Moeurng Chandy, the Chamber first thought that your
hearings was concluded today, however, it is not.
So the hearing is now come to an adjournment and the Chamber will
resume on 7 March 2016.
Next week, the Chamber will continue hearing witness Moeurng
Chandy, and according to the schedule of the Chamber, the Chamber
is planned to hear 2-TCW-840. However, a while ago, the Chamber
was informed by the WESU that that witness has a serious health
issue so he or she is not able to come and testify before the
Chamber next week.
The replacement <witness who has been invited to testify after
the witness, Moeurng Chandy, on Monday next week> will be
informed by the Chamber to <the> parties through the senior legal
officer tomorrow.
I am grateful to you, Madam Moeurng Chandy. The hearing of your
testimony as a witness has not come to an end yet. You are
therefore invited to come again to testify before the Chamber on
7 March 2016 at 9 a.m.
Thank you, Ms. Sun Solida, TPO staff, you may also be excused.
However you are also invited to come here again to sit close to
the witness on 7 March 2016. It will not take much of your time.
Perhaps you will be here for another session<>.
Court officer, please work with WESU to send Madam Moeurng Chandy
back to the place where she is staying right now, and please
invite her back into the courtroom on Monday, 7 March 2016,
before 9 a.m.
Security personnel are instructed to bring Mr. Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan back to the ECCC's detention facility and have them
returned into the courtroom on Monday, 7 March 2016, before 9
a.m.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1607H)
