P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
According to our schedule, the revised version as announced last
week, today the Chamber is going to hear the civil party, Chum
Neou.  We continue to hear her testimony because we have not
heard the full statement of hers because of the technical
glitches in relation to the audio recording.
And to make sure the parties to the proceeding clearly understand
this, actually on Thursday afternoon because of the technical
problems occurred in the courtroom, the Chamber had already
announced the adjustment to the existing scheduling of the
hearings.  And since the public and the parties might not have
got the full message of that pronouncement, then the Chamber
would like to, once again, inform the parties that, due to the
progress of the proceedings and the withdrawal of the request to
hear a number of civil parties in the last few days, the Chamber
has rescheduled the hearings for this week and next week.
This Monday, the Chamber will continue to hear Chum Neou and will
hear three other civil parties, including Chhin Navy, Touch Monin
and Ros Men.  After hearing these civil parties, the Chamber will
break for the day because of internal meeting.
On Tuesday morning, the Chamber will hear expert CP2/5 on issues
relating to the suffering of the civil party.  On Tuesday
afternoon, the Chamber will start hearing the challenges of civil
party applications by the defence and responses of civil parties
thereto.  The Chamber will hear such challenges and responses for
approximately two days.  The Chamber will then start questioning
the accused on his character.
The following week the Chamber will start hearing experts and
witnesses on the character of the accused.  The Chamber reserves
the right to change the schedule and will keep the parties
updated if further amendments are required.  The witnesses, and
also civil parties, will also be notified if further amendments
are required.
So this is just the reiteration of the content of our schedule
for the hearings as revised for this week and next week.
The Co-Prosecutor, you take the floor.
MR. SMITH:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, counsel.
Mr. President, in relation to the scheduling we just have two
brief requests.  Firstly, now that the accused's character will
be questioned by the Trial Chamber, I think it would be useful
for the parties to understand how much questioning time they
would have of the accused.
Obviously, this is the probably last substantive time that the
accused will be questioned as to his role in S-21, or certainly
in relation to his personality, and we would ask that, given the
scheduling timeframe Your Honours have, that the prosecution at
least have one hour but, if preferable, an hour-and-a-half on
this particular issue, and the other parties be given questioning
time in balance with that.
The second point is in relation to a filing that the prosecution
filed with the Trial Chamber on the 29th of April this year, and
it was a notice to the Chamber to put before it some documents in
relation to armed conflict.
As Your Honours are aware, at that time the procedure for putting
documents to the Chamber was quite cumbersome and time consuming.
Now, since Your Honours have issued that guideline to streamline
the proceedings, it is now a lot easier of course for parties to
put documents to the Chamber efficiently.
So we would ask that a spot of time, a period of time, be given
over this week or next week where the prosecution can briefly
summarize the documents and explain the purpose and the relevance
of the armed conflict documents.  We would submit it would take
no more than say 25 minutes, half-an-hour, and then parties could
make their comments on that.
Perhaps also that time could be used for other parties that may
wish to put other documents before the Chamber as well, but at
this stage the purpose would be to put the armed conflict
documents before the Chamber.  We would be available to do that
at any time.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Hong Kimsuon, you take the floor.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, Your Honours, thank you very much.
First, to begin with I would like to inform the Chamber the
absence of my co-colleague, Ms. Silke Studzinsky, who is now
being hospitalized and cannot come to attend this hearing.  And
the civil party, Ros Men, does not waive his right to attend in
the hearing but he is sick.
My civil party, Touch Monin, although his time is not yet ready
for him to testify, but we just obtained a document in relation
to him on the 22nd of August, which was during the weekend, and
the translation of the document was not made available during
such time.  And the head of the genocidal museum also satisfied
that the document is genuine and true.
I would like, with Mr. President's leave that Madam Chhin Navy
testify after Madam Chum Neou because she needs for her religious
practice to have lunch before 12 and that she requests that she
would be testifying before that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Alain Werner, I note you are on your feet.  You take the
floor.
MR. WERNER:
Good morning, Your Honours.  Good morning, Mr. President.
Just a word to tell you that we went yesterday to visit Ms.
Studzinsky in the hospital and our understanding is that she will
not be there for quite some time and, of course, we offered her
and her team all support that we can and we will do our very best
to try to collaborate and make sure that whatever the need or
whatever support we can offer will be given.
She was able to talk to us for quite some time, so we discussed
with her some matters and we will do our best to co-operate and
collaborate.  I just wanted to let the Chamber know about that.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil party lawyer group 3, you take the floor.
MS. TRUSSES-NAPROUS:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Of course, I agree with what my colleagues have just said,
however, I have extra information to provide the Chamber and I
would like a rectification here that I'd like to provide to you
following the hearing of Ms. Antonya Tioulong, who spoke on the
18th of August.
Indeed, Ms. Antonya Tioulong indicated in her statements on page
31, more exactly line 21, that she seized a few years ago the
Higher Court of Paris, the investigating judge in Paris, an order
to file a complaint against various people including Duch, but
also Ieng Sary, Nuon Chea and the other therefore charged people
who will be tried in Case Number 2.
In her statement, she forgot something.  She made a mistake in
fact.  She wrote down the wrong name.  She wrote down the name of
Chea Sim who is absolutely not part of this case and, of course,
this was in error, and she didn't notice it herself.  She didn't
notice that she had made this mistake.  It is only when she read
an article, a press article, that she noticed that she had made
this -- that she wrote down the wrong name.
And she decided me to check on the record, which is what I did,
and indeed she did indicate this name.  It was in error on her
part and, of course, she would like to rectify and to apologize
to the Chamber and, of course, to apologize to Mr. Chea Sim
because it was really an error and it was never questioned of
him.  And she was extremely, extremely confused about everything,
so she would like to apologize most sincerely to the Chamber
about this.
Of course, this document -- the decision regarding the lack of
jurisdiction of the Higher Court of Paris was filed in the case
file under document  and the index ERN 00271925 to
00271926.
So, therefore, I am bringing this up so that everything is clear,
Mr. President.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for the information, and the Chamber has also noted the
remarks made by the Co-Prosecutor.  And the Chamber will discuss
this matter and find out how to allocate the times for the
parties to put questions during the future proceedings in
relation to the matter of the character of the accused.
The Chamber is sorry to hear that lawyer, Silke Studzinsky, is
being hospitalized.  The Chamber is thankful to the other civil
party lawyers who show their strong intention to collaborate with
the Court during the absence of Ms. Silke Studzinsky.
And in relation to the civil party lawyer group 3 concerning the
wrong use of name of the person in the statement by the civil
party, and there was a kind of correction, but today it is really
important that such clarification and adjustment to the wrong
name used is fitted in the Court.
Regarding Mr. Hong Kimsuon's request, your request is granted and
the Chamber will act accordingly.
The Co-Prosecutor, we note you are on your feet.  Please take the
floor.
MR. SMITH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Now that that matter has been raised, if I can seek your leave to
return to some other business before the end of the break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer, please call witness Chum Neou and take her to
the place reserved for her before the Chamber.
(Witness enters courtroom)
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q.  Madam Chum Neou, on the afternoon of Thursday last week, the
Chamber failed to finish hearing your statement because of
technical glitch in relation to the audio-visual problem, so
today the Chamber continues to hear your statement and the rest
of your statement, of course.
You may now proceed with your statement.
A.  Thank you, Mr. President.
Your Honours, last week I stopped short when I mentioned about
the death of my kid and I returned from the hospital to my unit.
Today, I would like to go back a little bit and I had not covered
the complete statement.
On one occasion when I entered S-21 at Office at Stueng Chrov, at
that location it was -- so far as I remember, I was located in a
house left over from the previous regime.  It was the place where
detainees were detained while the other house was used to house
staff members and there was another separate house for children,
and followed by the medic house.
The first day when I reached that location and I spent some time
there, and in the afternoon when we went upstairs to that house,
the house was locked from the outside and I could tell that I was
prisoner from then on already because I was locked inside the
room from the outside and it was not like life in the
co-operative.
I was pregnant, and I had been pregnant and was -- I had been
detained until I gave birth to my son, which was probably in
January 1978 when I delivered my baby, and there was only a
midwife who was assisting me with my labour.
And the concrete house was rather tall and although the floor
covered by wood or timber, however, there were a lot of insects,
the kind of bloodsucker insects.  And people found it difficult
to sleep because they were annoyed by those insects.  And, after
some time, I was lying in bed and I was given some injections.
There was not sufficient medical equipment or materials for my
delivery of the baby.  I got some rag clothes with me.  So I had
two sets of skirts and I used one for my son.
Regarding the hygiene and the soap, I believe there was no soap
to provide it at the time.  And for women who just delivered the
baby, and only with a skirt which I tore into four pieces to use
for my baby, that is insufficient.
Therefore, it is difficult for me to look after my baby properly.
I had to use banana leaves to replace those ragged pieces of
cloth.  So with the lack of all these necessary materials during
that time, I could not provide proper care to my baby.
I was allowed to stay home for one week and the other women who
delivered their children before me looked after me.  And after
one week, I went to stay on the ground floor as it's easier for
me to wash those clothes and as it also was near the riverbank.
And as the food was not sufficient, when I went to wash the dirty
clothes I had to use it to lure the fish to come and I caught
some fish to cook.  Luckily before my husband disappeared, I got
a little of white wine and some herbs for women who just
delivered the babies.  So I tried to drink all that one litre of
traditional herbs mixed in the white wine.
It is extremely difficult.  It's indescribable.  I can recall one
event after another and this is the first time after 32 years
that I start talking.  And every time now when I think of that
event, my tears keep flowing.
I also recall another event when we were given cans of dry rice,
sticky rice, but I was told for women who just delivered the
babies could not eat that dry rice crust because I would get
sick, but because I was so hungry I had to eat that dry rice
crust.  So during that time, I went to pick up some mushroom.
Luckily it was not poisonous, so I ate together with the midwife
on the first day but, on the second day, I was poisoned from the
mushroom and I was not sure of the reason why I was poisoned.
The medic or the nurse was also poisoned, so the medic called me
and gave me some injection and she asked me to inject her with
the fluid as well.  Although I did not know anything about the
injection, I had to force myself to inject her with that fluid.
And because we were afraid that my young son would be poisoned
too from the breast that I gave to him, then we tried to find
some sugar to feed him.  And we were afraid that they would find
out because we secretly went to pick the mushroom and if they
found out we would be in trouble.
As I informed the Chamber that I had lived in various places --
for instance, at Prey Sar and there was an office in Prey Sar.
Male people were also housed in a house in Prey Sar and in Barku
two new houses were built for the prisoners and both houses were
locked from the outside.  During the time of my living there, I
learnt that it was a tempering or re-education site
Let me now talk about the time after I was discharged from the
hospital when my son died.  At that time, they did not spare any
effort on me as they knew that my son had died, so I was alone
and then I had to do full labour.
I recall an event after 1988, after the big flood and the dam was
broken.  They lived on the upper floor of the house and we were
asked to live further outside and, at that time, I saw many
prisoners detained.  They made holes in a piece of plank and they
locked their ankle in that plank.  I only saw from the distance,
but we were not shackled in that fashion, though at night we were
locked from the outside and during the night the shackles were
removed from their feet.
I was still wondering what was going on until I heard the
testimony of Chin Met.  At night-time, when we went to work, I
was wondering why some groups finished earlier and the seedlings
were spread onto the rice fields, and how could they plough the
land so quick?  So only when I learned through the testimony that
the Unit K17 did that work.  I only learnt of her identity
through her testimony in this Chamber and that person could
recognize me well, but I could not recognize the other person.
At that time, we were forced to get the soil to patch the dam,
but it couldn't hold the water, and when the dam was broken,
during that whole night the water was everywhere.  It was like a
sea and we were the women and we did not have enough strength to
patch the dam, therefore, the water kept flowing until the water
was level.
Then we were assisted by the male workers.  A truck came in with
sacks filled with soil and then water pump was used to get rid of
the water.
I also had been wondering on the product of rice.  We produced a
lot of rice, but our food was never sufficient.  Sometimes we ate
rice mixed with corn and, at that time, I also had problem with
my stomach.  If I ate rice mixed with corn then I would have gas
in my stomach.  I tried to only eat the rice without eating the
corn.
At that time, despite all these treatments, those difficulties, I
never shed a single drop of tear.  This is to prove to them that
I was tempered and I did my best according to the instructions I
was given.  If I shed my tears, like I am doing now, I would not
be survived.
I was detained longest compared to other women and I was
wondering why I was detained longest.  Was it because I was old
compared to others?  I still could not find the answer for that
and why they did not take me to be smashed.  When I was at Stueng
Chrov together with those people, they had never stayed longer
than 10 days.  They would be taken to disappear and would be
replaced by newcomers.
And at Barku, the movement was less, however, I could see trucks
transporting the youths to the houses along the river bank and
they lived separately from us, the female group.  So at Barku the
activity regarding the incoming and outgoing of the women's group
was less.
I saw students and intellectuals were transported into the area
or the vicinity of Lon Non, the sibling of Lon Nol, and I asked
people around who were they, and I was told that they were people
from abroad, students or intellectuals, because they were still
wearing their nice clothes.
At that time, I also a little bit talkative.  I asked a question,
did they go to Okveh, and I was told you could look at the map,
and after '79 I tried to look for Okveh village, and only through
the hearing here that I learned to go to the Okveh village, it
means to go and get smashed.
I stayed at Barku until 1978.  During the time that I harvested
the rice in around December, then in late December we went to
raise a dam.  And there were some other Jews from other various
units were also working there but we work in separate group, a
loud speaker playing the revolutionary songs and some
propagandas.
I worked there only for one week and I lost all the strength to
carry the soil to the top of the dam.  When I could no longer
carry the soil, I was asked to dig the ground but due to my
disabled hand I was asked to then stamp and level the soil.
Another event that I could recall -- when I tricked them as I
pretended to be sick in order to save my strength.  I went, while
I was walking, I pretend to fall and vomited.  Then I was
relieved from work and I was given a little extra porridge.
There were numerous events that I can recall despite the long
period of time and I cannot recall every event.  I think I'm a
bit up and down to when I describe all those events because my
recollection is not in linear.  I could only recall or pick up
here and there.
Another event when I was pulling the seedlings, we had to
accomplish the quota.  Otherwise we were not allowed to rest.
And the seedlings had to be clean and in order to meet the quota
we worked in small teams so one of the team members would pull
the seedlings, another one would clean and get rid of the soil,
and another person in the team would pile them up.
We also washed ourselves in the stream where we cleaned the
seedlings.  And we only have an extra pair of clothes so we kept
changing the clothes every day.  During the two years we were
given actually four pieces of clothes:  two pants and two skirts
but I used one skirt for my baby.
Let me now talk regarding the event on the 6th of January '79
because I could not recall other events at the moment.  On that
date we were not asked to go and work in the field but we did not
know anything regarding the situation in Phnom Penh.  We were
wondering why we were not allowed to work in the fields on that
day and we were instructed to be ready to be relocated.
We did not move during the daytime but we moved at night-time
when everybody was around.  I packed my sack of belongings and
waiting on the top of the dam around 7.30 or 8 p.m. we were
instructed to move.  During that time it was night and we did not
know the directions that we were heading to and it's been so long
as well and I was not familiar with the location.
I believe at that time I learned of the names of the villages
that I walked across but it's been so long I cannot recall them.
I believe we also walked past the watermelon farm and we ate
those watermelons.  I was not sure which unit it belonged to.
I recall that one day immediately after the 7th January '79 at
the location in between Jareuy Mountain  in Tralach, Kampong
Chhnang and Amleang, before the fighting broke out in Amleang I
met Mr. Duch, the accused here.  The circumstance of meeting him
was that my unit's chief reported that I attempted to flee and
indeed I was attempting to flee but I could not because of the
ready-lines (phonetic) they made.
And I saw Duch sitting in a house made from bamboo.  It was a
newly built bamboo house.  The person who took me there rode a
horse and that person knew me very well but I cannot recall his
name.  And the person asked me how come I was there and he said
that he could not forget the gratitude, the kindness that I did
for him and I told him I could not recall and he said that I
helped him giving food to him when he was at the front line.
And he asked me to ride on the horse with him but I refused so I
walked along while he was riding a horse to lead me to meet Duch
in the forest.  It was just at the outskirts of the forest when I
met him.
On that day I was not afraid of him.  It is my practice to greet
him and at that time I called him Brother.  He was sitting with
his crossed legs on the bamboo bed.  He pulled out his pistol
from the holster and then he pointed his pistol near my temple.
But I believe the pistol was still locked.  In my mind I
determined that if something happens then I would fight to my
death to get rid of the pistol.
I was not shocked and I responded to his questions confidently.
He did not ask of my name.  He asked me how many days have I been
there and I replied I was there since 1977.  He seemed surprised
and he asked why I was there so long and if I knew anything.  I
told him that I did not know anything and he said it's good that
I stayed there for long and that I was still in good shape.
After we talked a little bit later on a fight broke out and then
we flee, although at that time I was still with that unit.  I did
not know the wife of Comrade Duch but somebody told me the wife,
and when I looked at her she was carrying a baby, and during the
time that we were fleeing we saw some soldiers and some people
going along and one person was holding an umbrella for Duch's
wife during the trip, and another person was holding her
belongings.
I could see that from about 20 metres distance and in my mind I
thought, "Oh, it's because of his superior position".  Even at
that time, the wife of the superior was still being looked after,
although I did not have any feeling of jealousy of what I saw.
I had attempted on many occasions to flee, but I failed to do it
because we were watched by people riding horses and we would be
whipped if we strayed from the team.  So during the day the fight
broke out in Amleang, I did not run straight to Amleang.  I ran
across to the forest along the Pis Mountain Range, although I was
not familiar with the direction, north or south, at the time.  I
was rather lost at the time.
I can only recall Amleang, Jarey village for instance, but not
every detail.  And I think the forgetfulness is my part as I
myself told myself to try to forget those events after 1979, but
only later on after the trial, everything came back.
During the time that I lived in the forest, I noticed a lot of
barns, rice barns, and the rice -- the unhusked rice was
relocated from another barn -- from a barn to another barn, and
only people were doing that under the co-ordination of the
messengers who were so efficient.
But the longer we stayed in the forest, the communication with
them seemed to be further isolated and, later on, I was like
alone by myself.  Nobody seemed to recognize me any more and I
could move freely.
I did not have rice to eat for four months and I could only eat
vegetable or tree leaves or wild fruits and in late December '79
or early January '78 (sic), during the time of the rice harvest
season, before I got home -- I may have to go back a little bit.
When we cooked the rice after we had not had any rice, and the
first time we had that first rice, actually, our health was
deteriorating.
When I reached home I was so shocked and moved than when I was in
the battlefield because no-one in my family lived to tell their
story because they all disappeared and perished.  Only one person
left actually.  I was very heartbroken because after I have
learned that my close relatives, my siblings, all died, I was the
one who actually survived.
In 1980, the full year of 1980, I could not concentrate on doing
anything, and thanks to my neighbours who emotionally support me
and they really asked or helped me to struggle to hold onto life
and to forget the past, and for that reason I could move on
further.
When I went to S-21, I actually forgot to bring with me my diary;
the diary that I kept very well, the diary in which I really
detailed any points lectured or presented in the meeting.
However, it was very fortunate anyway for forgetting to bring
along this diary with me, otherwise I would be found out that I
recorded the Party's matter and would be smashed.
And that's all, Mr. President, and thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the civil party
lawyers to put questions to the civil party if the lawyers
believe that questions are important to ascertain the truth.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, thank you very much.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. Good morning, Madam Chum Neou.  I am going to ask you a few
questions in relation to your life story that you have already
mentioned before the Chamber, but only for some clarification.
When Angkar sent you to work in Phnom Penh -- the Khmer Rouge
Angkar referring to here -- you said after the 17th of April 1975
you were sent to work in Phnom Penh by Angkar in the logistics
section.  So who was actually in charge of that section and what
kind of logistics were there?
A. Thank you.  After 1975, the 17th of April, I was assigned by
Angkar to work at the logistic section called Unit S-80.  This
unit was in charge of administering or storing all the
ammunitions and all kinds of weapons to be used across the
country.
Q. Thank you.  So what was your role at that unit or section
then?
A. At that time, there was a small platoon which was assigned to
be in supervision of this section.  I actually worked at the
women's military force in the east and we were dispatched to this
S-80.  One platoon was assigned to this unit and the other
platoons were assigned to other unit to fix weapons.
At that time, I worked as the person who kept the warehouse.
There was a new-build warehouse but most parts of the warehouse
were the old houses.  They used old houses or buildings as the
warehouses, and weapons would be collected and gathered from
various locations across the country and they were finally stored
in these warehouses.  The ammunition was also collected the same
way and then distributed accordingly.  And I was assigned to keep
this warehouse and to guard them.
Q. Thank you.  You said you were assigned to collect ammunition
and weapons and distributed them.  So were you also part in
transporting or delivering those ammunition or weapons to other
units in Phnom Penh?
A. No, I didn't.
Q. In Phnom Penh, did you know the S-21 compound or, in short,
were you ever informed or did you ever learn of this compound?
A. S-21 was referred to basically the Tuol Sleng museum.  I think
-- I never paid a visit to the location or had heard of it.  But
at Prey Sar when we were transporting ammunition to Chamkar
Daung, Brother Pha, who was the immediate supervisor, was
pointing to the location of S-21 and telling us that it was the
S-21 location but we never knew it was there before.
Q. Thanks.  You said your husband was arrested -- or had been
arrested three days before you were arrested.  Could you tell the
Court about your husband?  What was his role and who arrested him
and in which location was he detained?
A. I just received a document, the clear document yesterday, in
relation to my husband.  He was sent twice before he reached S-21
according to this document.  I think having reviewed this
document, there were some discrepancies in the date when my
husband was sent first, which was in 1977.
At that time, I was being hospitalized because I got the morning
sickness and I knew that my husband was transferred or relocated
to work elsewhere, and I knew that at that time it was some kind
of routine that people would be transferred to work in various
places.
However, I was not reunited to my former unit after being
discharged from the hospital, although I was told that I would be
reunited with my husband.  I was transported in a truck and I met
my husband, who worked in the production unit at Chbar Ampel
vicinity, and he worked at Wat Kamsan vicinity.  And we had been
together for about one month.  Then I spotted another truck which
came to pick up my husband and took him away.
At that time, after seeing him off, he whispered into my ear,
reassuring us that he would not be far away from us, and he asked
us to please try to work hard and he would not abandon us.  It
was the last message we got from him.  He reassured us that he
would be back and he told me to keep good care of myself by
taking more traditional herbs.
Q. Thank you.  With the President's leave, I would like a
document concerning the brief biography of Madam Chum Neou --
found at S-21 -- which is already placed in the case file.
Please put it on display.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please give the ERN number in Khmer?
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Madam Chum Neou, could you please tell the Court the ERN on the
top page of that document to the Court?
Mr. President, this document is available under ERN 002118 --
1380.  Correction -- again, 00211880.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit is now instructed to put this document up on display.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
In English, this document is under ERN 00289729.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please scroll down until we see the complete document?
Please scroll to the middle page.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. Madam Chum Neou, your husband's name in this brief biography
is Nour Moeun, alias Sem.  However, in the document and next --
in relation to the prisoners, the male prisoners at S-21 with ERN
00331076 and ERN 000331803.
In these documents under number 3210 in its order -- this is the
order of the prisoner -- we see the name Nour Sar Moeun alias
Sem, the former combatant of Office 62-B and entered on the 30th
of July 1977, and another document, document 00331803.
We found another person under Number 1827 of the same person,
Nour Sar Moeun but why in the biography we have only got the
person's name like two words, Nour Moeun?  Could you please shed
light on these discrepancies?
A. Mr. Hong Kimsuon, Nour Sar Moeun or Nour Moeun alias Sem were
the names of my husband.  I think probably technical error could
be contributed to the mis-spelling of my husband's name.  I told
the Co-Investigating Judges already that my original husband's
name was Nour Sar Moeun and I know for sure that his alias was
Sem.  And he was in the general staff logistics section.
But the difference is that he was at M-62 and I am still
suspicious but I may ask the accused to shed light on this.
Q. Thank you.  I would like to put the last question in relation
to the biography of your husband.
Could you tell the Court when was this biography taken or
written?
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, could you please instruct the AV to remove these
documents from the screen?
MS. CHUM NEOU:
The biography was made the first day we entered Steung Chrov.  At
that time the biography was not typed because there was no
typewriter.  I remember that the biography was written,
handwritten and my name was recorded and in that record.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, could you please instruct the AV to project
another document?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to put this photo on the
projector.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. This photo was the reproduction of the original photo from the
biography.  We only enlarged it because the original photo was
smaller.
My last questions:  is it your photo?  And who wrote your name
underneath?
A. Mr. President, this is my photo 30 years ago and I don't know
who wrote my name underneath.  I remember having my photo being
taken but I don't remember having written any name underneath.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have no further questions.
And thank you, Madam Chum Neou.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to
put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on.  Judge Lavergne would like to take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I listened to the civil party's
statement this morning and she spoke about an encounter with the
accused even though this encounter did not take place during the
time period which involves the facts for which we are seized
(sic).
However, it seems important in regard to the accused's
personality that we obtain more information on what really
happened during this encounter.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. You therefore told us about an encounter where you had been
brought before the accused whereas -- while you were fleeing from
S-24.  Was this the first time that you were meeting the accused?
And are you sure that it was Duch indeed and can you tell us why
you are sure of this?
A. Your Honour, the day I encountered Duch when he placed his
pistol right next to my temple it was him.  I met him the third
time already.  I met him two times when I saw him walking on the
dikes although I did not know whether it was him in the previous
two occasions.  But I was told by our colleagues that he was
Duch.
And I did not really talk to him and I saw him walking close to
me and I just was suspicious why I was asked to plant rice next
to the dikes of the paddy fields.  I learned that I was good at
planting good rice.  However, planting next to the dikes of the
paddy fields was not really a good kind of assignment.
But I was told that I had to be careful with my work because I
was being inspected by the chief.  Of course I could recall that
it was him, the Chief of S-21 who was patrolling that area back
then.
Q. So if I understood correctly, you are telling us that when you
were at S-24 you had to opportunity of seeing the accused twice.
You saw that he was controlling the way that the work was being
carried out in the rice fields.  Is that so?
A. Yes, it is, Your Honour.
Q. I would like to get back to this encounter more specifically
now.  You told us that you had been led to Duch because you had
tried to escape, and were you accused before him of having done
so?  Can you tell us exactly what happened?  Did he introduce
himself?  Did he take out his pistol right away, immediately?
How long did all of this last?
A. When I was led to meet him the person who took me knew me very
well and he told me that I would be meeting the Chief, the head
of S-21.  And he told me his name.  The person knew me very well
but I did not know him, the person who led me.
And when I met him I was very polite, I called him Brother.  I
was not scared.  I smiled at him.  Before he asked me any
questions his pistol was at the ready but I did not see the
safety of the gun was on yet and he pointed the gun at me.
And having noted that the safety was not on I was not afraid.  He
asked me how long had I been here and I still laughed and smiled
-- well, because it was my nature anyway to have a smiling face.
And I said that I had been here since 1977 and he was surprised
to learn that I was still alive and could stay put long enough --
for two years.
And then he asked me, "What happened?"  And I told him that I had
no idea.  And then he responded that it's good.  It's quite good
that I could stay here long enough.  And then he said that I
could stay in that area for some further longer.
And then there was fighting and we could hear the sound of the
guns and then we ran out of time.
Q. Did Duch at any given time beyond the fact of putting the
pistol to your temple, did he threaten you?  Did he say to you
that he was going to shoot you; that he was going to kill you?
A. I'm telling the truth.  It is not from my anger that I said
something bad about him.  Actually he did not threaten me
although he pointing the gun at me.
When I told him that I could be there until 1977 he laughed and
he said that it was good that I could remain there for long
enough.
Q. Thank you very much for these clarifications.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I have no further questions to put to the civil party.  Thank
you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Co-Prosecutors, you may now proceed with the questions if you
would wish to put to the civil party.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS:
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Mrs. Chum Neou, last Thursday you mentioned your forced
marriage under the direction of Angkar.  You also said that you
had been arrested after your husband, probably because he was
considered to be a traitor.
Was this not a revolting situation for you, the fact that you had
been forced to marry him and then to be accused because your
husband had been accused?  Did you try to tell Angkar that this
situation was peculiar and did you complain to Angkar with regard
to your arrest and transfer to S-24 because your husband had been
arrested?
Thank you.
A. In 1976 Angkar arranged me to get married while I worked at a
logistics unit as a general staff.  My husband requested Angkar
to get married with me.  So we can say that my husband actually
requested through Angkar to marry me and I was not forced by
Angkar for my marriage.
Angkar then called me and asked me regarding my husband's
request.  But at that time I did not have an injury on my hand
yet.  Only after my hand was injured and I was discharged from
the hospital then the marriage took place.
There were three couples. And it was so quick.  We were noticed
in the morning that the marriage would be at 2 p.m. I was shocked
and I asked Mot who was the unit's chief and asked Thim and Phon
why the arrangement was made so quickly and that I did -- and
asked them whether my relatives or my parents were invited from
the village.  He said "no."
So I was not happy during my marriage on the wedding day.  But
because the time was set so I could not refuse and I was
explained that the unit was a special unit and we would not be
allowed to marry somebody else outside the unit and that we
should regard Angkar as our parents who arrange our marriage and
we should just agree to the proposal.
So actually I was tearful during the wedding day.  I was upset
that none of my relatives from my village was informed.
Q. Thank you.
Mrs. Chum Neou, who do you blame for the death of your baby, your
son, when you were staying at S-24?
A. The blame for the death of my beloved son should be placed
upon the responsibility of the upper echelon who did not have any
concrete and precise plan for the treatment of people.
The child was young, and the child was separated from me.  He was
still breastfed.  And I didn't know that the measles would be
relapsed after I had him breastfed.  One or two hours after I
breastfed him he had diarrhoea and the medic could not rescue him
and as a result he died; he was buried.  And I was asked to stay
in the hospital to recover my health but because it is not my
habit to stay idle, so I requested to return to my unit.
Q. Well, I believe that you had stated earlier that you had
almost been arrested -- or rather that you had almost been taken
to be executed twice while you were at S-24.  Could you perhaps
describe these episodes to us?
A. Yes, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.  I was asked to board the truck two
times.  One time while I was transplanting, I was pulling the
seedlings, I was asked to board a truck and I was asked to get
off as they got me confused with the surname.  And the next time
I was asked to board the truck when I was taken to the hospital
to see my son.
Q. Can you tell us in what state of mind you were when you were
made to get into the truck?  Did you know what to expect as a
person being taken by this truck?
A. When I was asked to board the trucks on the two occasions my
(technical malfunction) thinking that I will be dead, but on the
first time I was lucky as they got the surnames confused.  And on
the second time, when the truck was driving past my place, I was
asked to pick up my belongings.  So I was a bit relieved and I
went to see my son.
When I was asked to board the truck, everybody was dead quiet
because they knew that I would be taken and gone, but after the
death of my son I returned to my unit and the people at the unit
were rather shocked to see me, as they announced within the unit
that I was a CIA agent; that's why I was taken away.
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Good morning, Madam Chum Neou.  Can you confirm when Angkar
sent you to look after the children; did you know the wellbeing
of those children?
A. Yes, I can confirm that, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.  When I was
assigned to take care of the children, I only just delivered my
son, so I was asked to look after the young children who were
still breastfed but their mothers were working in the rice field.
There were a few of us to look after those several children, and
at that location we had two or three beds and actually they built
like a rack surrounding the bed to keep the baby inside the bed.
And for those babies who were a bit older, who could actually
crawl, then we had to be more vigilant on them.  They were like
young pigs and trying to get out of the pen.
The longer I stayed, the less children I saw, and I did not know
what happened to them; whether they died or whether they were
transferred elsewhere with the mother.
One of my friends, who delivered a baby before me -- a month
before me -- the baby died at night while we were sleeping next
to each other.  At that night-time when her child died, she
whispered to me that the child's dead and she kept hugging her
child until next morning.
Q. Thank you.  Did you know how the children were provided with
the food?
A. The food ration for the children were rather different.  For
the young infants who were still breastfed, the mothers would
breastfeed them in the morning and one more time when they
returned from the field in the evening.  During the day, we
prepared rather thick gruel mixed with ground salt and fed the
baby.
Q. Thank you.  Regarding the activities of arrest amongst the
women's unit, as you told the Chamber, and that you were also
once arrested and boarded a truck, but because of the confusion
of the surname you were allowed to get off the truck.
Did the arrest -- were the arrests made during the day or
night-time?
A. It was in the late afternoon while we were still pulling the
seedlings in the rice fields.
Q. Can you recall the person who told you that the surname was
confused?  Do you know his name or her name?
A. He was a medic, a one blind eye medic named Van.  He looked at
the list of the names and he told me that my -- he got confused
with the surname and he let me go.
Q. Can you recall, regarding the arrest, who actually ordered the
arrest?
A. No, I did not know who would order those arrests.  Even when I
was sent to the location for the first time, I didn't know who
made that decision.
Q. Can you recall the truck which was used to arrest those
people?  Which unit it belonged to; any sign or mark on that
truck?
A. The trucks to transport those people who were arrested -- but
first when I was transported to Stueng Chrov with another person,
it was the same vehicle.  Actually, it was not a truck, it was a
car, but it was grey in colour.
Q. Can you confirm this type of arrest; did it occur frequently
at your workplace?
A. I frequently saw that type of arrest at Stueng Chrov, where I
stayed for the first time, but I did not see the mode of
transportation.  People were ordered to line up and walked to the
National Road and the distance from Stueng Chrov to the National
Road was about two kilometres and any truck or vehicle could not
access Steung Chrov due to the small and rocky path.  The
newcomers would come and replace them a few days after the old
people had been taken away.
Q. You already told the Chamber that you met Duch on two
occasions at Prey Sar.  Can you recall at the time of your
meeting, what year was it?
A. It was in 1978 after the death of my son.  It was not at Prey
Sar, it was at the area where I transplanted the seedlings within
the vicinity of Barku.  It was just opposite Prey Sar.
Q. At that time, did you observe the character of Duch?  Was he
happy or was he in sad mood?
A. I saw him walking alone with no bodyguards.  I saw him wearing
a hat and a scarf on his neck and a pistol on his waist.  He
looked handsome, happy and worriless.  He did not care about the
burdens and the suffering that we had at our location.  He walked
freely, ignoring us.  He did not ask any questions.
Q. When you met Duch after the liberation day of 7th January '79,
after the meeting what happened?
A. The meeting after 7th January '79; as we knew the situation at
that time was chaotic.  We could say the water was already up to
the nose level and the soldiers were defeated.
Q. My question was that whether after the meeting you were
tortured or mistreated by Duch?
A. Since the time I went to live there, I did not receive any
beating or torture but I was mistreated psychologically, but not
physically.
Q. Did you know about the smashing of the prisoners or the people
who went together with you when you met Duch at a later stage?
A. I did not know about that.  We and the soldiers were defeated
and relocated to the Amleang area.  I did not see any arrest or
killing at the time.  I was only wondering that the situation was
already chaotic and why they still needed us.
Q. That you.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Mr. President, the prosecution no longer has questions for this
civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber will take 20 minutes break until ten to eleven, when
it will resume.
Actually, the time allocation for this civil party is for
one-and-a-half hours, but it's been on three sessions already.
The civil party can now retreat for refreshment and please be
here before the hearing resumes.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1049H to 1116H)
(Judges enter the courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
Next, we would like to give the floor to the defence counsel to
put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. Good morning.  I am one of the counsels for the accused and I
wish to put a few questions to you just to clarify your
statements and, therefore, to clarify the Chamber.
I have read again the document that you filled out, your
application in order to join as a civil party before this Court,
and you were asked for a certain amount of information and you
were asked to explain or to tell us what had happened.  And I
would like to just base myself on this document and to ask you
for some clarification.
First of all, you did indicate that you had volunteered for the
revolution.  Is that so; is that the case?
A. At that time I joined the revolution, the Khmer Rouge
revolution.  It was in 1971 when I joined the revolution, and I
made it clear on several occasions already during the proceeding
that I wilfully joined the revolution because I was very angry
being under the American imperialists and capitalists, and that I
joined the revolution to liberate our country from those people;
and voluntarily.
Q. And, quite quickly, you took on responsibility.  First of all,
you were the head of the young women in the village and then you
say that you led the young women in the commune so, therefore,
you did take on a certain level of responsibility.  Is that the
case?
A. Yes, it is correct because during the time of war, youth were
used to transport ammunition or food to supply the combatants in
the battlefields.
Q. And on a personal basis, you are someone who likes to take on
responsibility?
A. I did not quite like it.  It was rather complicated and
difficult.  When I was transferred to work in the army, I was
happier than being assigned at the back line.
Q. And, indeed, you mentioned in your statement that you went to
the front line.  Is that the case?
A. I went to the battlefields, the forefront, in 1973 when I was
in the women combatants at Prey Veng, but when I worked at the
east I did not really work in the battlefields because I had to
be under trainings, military trainings, until the fall of Phnom
Penh in 1975.
Q. But when you were at the battlefields, you fought against the
Vietnamese enemy.  Is that so?  Did you actually fight against
the Vietnamese arms?
A. For my group, we were not armed to fight the enemy.  We were
assigned to supply foods and ammunitions to the combatants in the
battlefields, and we were assigned to carry or transport the
wounded in the battlefields back to the hospital.
Q. In your statement, you mentioned people who had the same rank
as you.  What was your rank when you -- after having undergone
training, military training, what was your rank after that?  What
was your rank in the army?
A. I was actually the chief of the team because there was only
one platoon and there was another chief, although I was the chief
of the small group at that unit.
At the east unit during the trainings, we had attended training
for six months until the day Phnom Penh fell, and I was assigned
a higher position as the chief of the company.
Q. So when you arrived in Phnom Penh in April 1975 your rank was
company leader.  Is that the case?
A. At S-80 I was only the chief of women's team.  There were
about 30 women combatants and I was the chief in charge of
transporting the ammunition but the title was not that high; the
rank was not very high.
Q. But when you were a company leader -- so this was during your
training?  I'm sorry, I didn't quite understand.  You said that
at one moment you were a company leader.  When was that exactly?
A. Could you please repeat your question?
Q. You told us that at one point you were a company leader.  Can
you just tell me exactly when this was when you were a company
leader?
A. It was during the time when we attended training at Office
S-200.  At that time there were two battalions and there were
about 1,000 people and I was in charge of leading or
administering the people or the trainees and people who were the
chief of the battalion, the regiments who were under training.  I
was the chief of -- (no interpretation).
Q. Could you please repeat the end of your sentence?  That was
not translated.
A. In my reply to the defence counsel, my role as the chief of
the company I received while I was still receiving the technical
and military training at the S-200.  At that time there were two
battalions of women in that training school.  We did not go to
the battlefield.  We were still receiving training at that school
until the fall in 1975.
Q. Thank you for this clarification.  Now another clarification:
when you were in Phnom Penh after the fall of Phnom Penh did your
unit partake in the evacuation of Phnom Penh?
A. I did not know whether my unit partook in the evacuation of
people from Phnom Penh because when Phnom Penh fell, several
months during the time of '75 we were not assigned to go to Phnom
Penh.  We only came later on to collect the war spoils.
Q. Thank you for this clarification.
Is it accurate to say that as a soldier you loyally served the
army?
A. Partly that is correct but partly it is incorrect; that is,
the justice that I should deserve.  After my active
participations from the beginning of the war until the liberation
and finally I was in such a position with such great loss, I was
furious why those people -- I would say the tricksters or the
cheaters -- why they behaved in that fashion.  I lost everything
and only I myself survive.
Q. Well, that is precisely the question I was about to ask.  Do
you have the feeling that you gave service to Angkar but that
Angkar betrayed you?
A. That is correct.
Q. Another question.  In your statement you describe the scene
when Angkar came to take your husband away, and you said the
following:
"On 9 August 1977 Angkar called up my husband for an education.
I prepared his things and I accompanied him to the truck.  My
husband was well aware of the fact that he was going to prison,
yet he did not attempt to flee because he knew that if he did his
wife and his child would probably be killed."
And you add:
"At the time I was more than four months pregnant."
So my question is the following.  Do you believe that if your
husband had indeed run away there was a risk that you would
personally be killed because you were his wife?
A. When I said my husband gave me advice and is to look after
myself.  He did not say much in details.  Maybe he knew that what
would happen to him.  He whispered to me that he would not run
away and later on, when I was told that I would be taken to be
reunited with my husband, I was so happy but in fact, no, I was
not taken to see him.
Q. According to what you told us this morning, ma'am, during this
period you lost not only your husband but also other family
members.  When you returned to your village, do the villagers
still consider you as a member of the Khmer Rouge?  Was it the
case then, and is it the case today, that the villagers
considered that you were a member of the Khmer Rouge?
A. It is not that I cannot answer this question, but I have the
feeling of pain, suffering now.  My mother was so furious when I
met her.  She said because of me that her husband died and this
is a great pain inflicted upon me.
And the accused has apologized on several occasions and, of
course, I cannot accept it.  I knelt down before my aunt to ask
her for forgiveness for the loss of her husband, but she would
not accept it and she was my blood relative.  And here I am
before the Chamber and I cannot accept the apology made by the
accused.  Just an apology, just one word of apology by the
accused in the Chamber, cannot be accepted.  I apologized to my
aunt and she did not accept it.
And while I still have the opportunity, I lodged the complaint to
be a responsible person on behalf of my relatives who were
victims of the crimes at that regime, to prove that I am not a
member of the Khmer Rouge and I am responsible and that I am
loyal to the nation.  And that I felt betrayed by that group.
Q. Thank you.  Thank you.  I have no further questions.  Thank
you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Before the Chamber grants the accused the opportunity to make his
observations regarding this civil party's statement, the Chamber
has listened to the statement of this civil party and that she
has certain questions that she wishes to ask the accused.  And
the Chamber would like to check with the civil party now whether
you still have the questions.
THE CIVIL PARTY:
I have questions and I want answers regarding the document,
regarding my husband's.  In that document it was mentioned that
he was a combatant at S-62 of the logistics unit in the general
staff, but I did not understand because my husband was at the
S-80 Unit with me.
So I want the accused to clarify whether this office 62B was
located somewhere near the production site in Chbar Ampeou or
somewhere in Stoeng Chreou and I want to have this information
confirmed; that is regarding the list of my husband, the document
that I just received.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, the Chamber would like you now to respond to this
question.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the S-21 documents -- I accept all the documents
that are S-21 documents.
The biography of Chum Neou, I accept it.  And I accept the
document first and then I accept the person, Chum Neou, regarding
this document Nour Sar Moeun alias Sem, combatant of 62B
logistics of the general staff.
There was a logistics office of the general staff and I think the
code 62 was often used, commonly used -- Office 62.  But Madame
Chum Neou says there were three people managing that office, that
is Phon, whom I clearly knew; and Comrade Mot; I knew him as
well.  And Comrade Thim.
So 62 or 80, it doesn't matter because I acknowledged it, that
Mr. Nour Sar Moeun or Nour Moeun actually victimized at S-21 and
died.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, do you have any other questions for the accused?
THE CIVIL PARTY:
I cannot think of any questions at this stage, Mr. President.
Thank you for the opportunity.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Besides responding to this question, do you have any other
observations you would like to make in response to the statement
of the civil party?  That is, do you have any additional
observations to make?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I acknowledge all the suffering of Madame Chum
Neou, who reported to this Chamber for the period that she
suffered at the Prey Sar Office or S-24 until the 7th January
'79.  Later on, she fled along with me.
What was strange to me from my recollections are in three parts.
First, Madame Chum Neou saw me walking and inspecting people
transplanting.  I never did that.  And that I went to Prey Sar,
seeing -- or that I saw her.  No, I did not let those people see
me.  I went to Prey Sar on the four occasions and that later on
that I asked her to come to me and that I point my pistol at her
temple; that was not true.  I never pointed a gun at anybody in
that fashion.  I had several subordinates who could make arrest
or who could reprimand other people.
And in the Hong Tnaot village, that was the village of my wife.
I walked without food for two days.  I went to reach her house
and slept and stayed, and then I ate and I regained my strength
and then I came back to counterattack those people.  So I did not
pay my attention to the minor issues relating the female
combatants.  And for the suffering from the people from the East
Zone as well as the combatants, I acknowledge their suffering.
This is my response, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The hearing of the statement of the civil party Chum Neou has
come to an end.
And Madam Chum Neou, the hearing of your testimony is now
finished.  You are now excused.  You can either go to the
location reserved for the civil parties or you may wish to go to
anywhere you wish.
(Witness exits courtroom)
And because now it is time for a lunch adjournment, the Chamber
will adjourn for this morning's hearing and the Chamber will
resume in the afternoon, starting from 1.30, to hear the
statements of two civil parties as scheduled.
Security guards, take the accused back to the detention facility
and bring him back to the Chamber in the afternoon before 1.30
p.m.
The hearing is now adjourned.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1147H to 1334H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now in session.
According to our new schedule this afternoon we are going to hear
two civil parties, Chhin Navy and Touch Monin.  Before hearing
the statements of these two civil parties the Chamber would like
to inform the parties to the proceedings that the Chamber refers
to various requests of the Co-Prosecutors to put documents before
the Chamber under Rule 87.
The Chamber will allocate time to the parties at the end of the
hearing of testimony of the witnesses and experts concerning the
character of the accused to put documents which are already on
the case file before the Chamber according to Rule 87(3).  If
parties wish to file new documents according to Rule 87(4) they
should do so as soon as possible.
So this is just the notification in relation to the request made
by the Co-Prosecutors this morning and it is an opportunity to
also inform the parties to the proceedings.
The Chamber hopes that the parties to the proceeding are now
informed and follow the decision.
The court officer is now instructed to call civil party Chhin
Navy to the seat reserved for the civil party.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Good afternoon, Madam Chhin Navy.  Is your name Chhin Navy?
A. Yes, my name is Chhin Navy.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 70 years old.
Q. Where were you born?
A. In Koh Khel commune, S'ang district, Kandal province.
Q. Where do you live?
A. I live in Phnom Penh.
Q. What is your father's name?
A. His name is Chhin Chap.
When people were evacuated he was more than 90 years old but he
deceased.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. Her name is Hong Srun.  When she still lived she was about 40
years old but she died long ago.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the civil party
lawyer to briefly inform the Court the identity -- the reasons
why the civil party has joined as a civil party and the grounds
for her civil reparation claim in relation to the facts alleged
in which the accused Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch has been charged,
and during the time from 1975 to 1979.  The lawyers are
recommended to also support -- provide supporting documents in
relation to the claims and the grounds for such claims and
application of Chhin Navy.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Mr. President, thank you.  Your Honours, I am the national lawyer
representing civil party Group 2.
I may now proceed to briefly tell the Court about the identity of
Madam Chhin Navy.  She has filed a complaint under ERN number in
Khmer, 00152367; in English, ERN 00156825.
She also obtained her identification card which can be found
under ERN number 00152374.  The ID card number is 010154658.
There is another list, the list of the victims who have been
smashed at S-21 under ERN number in Khmer, 00080640.  Her
husband's name can be found in the list and he worked in the
public works section.  He was arrested on the 22nd of February
1976 and there is a photo of her husband obtained from S-21.
Madame Chhin Navy is the wife of Tea Hav Tek and I have already
briefed the Court.  I hope this information helps the Court.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyer group 2, would you wish to allow the civil
party to give her statement on her own or would you wish to put
questions and then she would then respond to your questions
instead?
MR. KONG PISEY:
Mr. President, I would request that questions were to be put to
her.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do you wish that she tell the accounts of her -- the story as a
civil party, or would you ask the Court that you put questions to
her in order for her to respond to the questions in describing
her accounts?  Or would you prefer having her telling the account
on her own without your questions?
MR. KONG PISEY:
As agreed, she would be telling the Court the complete account of
her story actually, and then I would follow up with some
questions if I feel the needs arise.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madame Chhin Navy, it is now time for you to tell the Court the
facts and your relation to the crimes alleged in which the
accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, has been charged.  And also
you should tell the Court the damages physically or emotionally;
the emotional or physical damages that you have had suffered ever
since.
You may now proceed.
THE CIVIL PARTY:
Your Honours, the parties to the proceeding, and distinguished
guests.
Please forgive me if I make something wrong in my statement or if
I am too forgetful because I am not healthy enough.  Sometimes my
memory is so poor and I have been living in such a condition for
many years, and sometimes I am more like a mentally ill woman.
And, if I understand correctly, then the President would prefer
hearing the account; the story I should tell from the beginning
when I left Phnom Penh.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Actually, it would be good if you can actually tell the Court
from the date when you left your home during the evacuation, and
if you can really establish the linkages of the story in relation
to S-21 and what happened to your husband.
Madame Chhin Navy, could you please be reminded or instructed to
wait until you see the red light is on your mike before you can
speak?
THE CIVIL PARTY:
Mr. President, Your Honours, and the Court.
My name is Chhin Navy.  I lived in Phnom Penh since my childhood
because when I passed the exam at the medical school, then people
were recruiting infirmieres and then I attended the medical
school in Phnom Penh, the government school.  There were
thousands of candidates but only approximately 100 passed the
exam, and I worked at the Preah Ket Mealea Hospital after that.
One day, my sibling-in-law got the appendix problem and operation
was needed.  And the sibling was treated at the hospital where I
worked and he liked my care for him, and he would propose to
marry me, and then I got married with him.
However, it is very personal.  I got married three times.  First,
I got married in 1962 and then my husband worked in the same
hospital.  And then we had another wedding in Kampot because my
husband's relatives were living in Kampot, so we reorganized the
wedding reception there.  And the family of my husband worked at
the public works, and he was in charge of the personnel unit.
He was related to Prince Kantol, who was the minister of the
Public Works Ministry and Oeng Pech was the high officer there.
Later on, he was promoted to be the chief of the aviation unit at
the airport.  At that time they addressed me as Madam Chhin Navy.
When later on we bought a house next to Tuol Tompong Market.
During that time bombardments were severe, but I would like to
make it clear that my accounts is based on my honest memory, and
on the 18th I saw soldiers equipped with arms coming to our house
and asked us to leave our home, otherwise the Vietnamese would
drop their bombs on those houses and we would be killed.
Then I asked them where should they wish us to go and they said
that we could go to our home towns.  And then I asked how long
would we leave our home and we were told that it would not be
long, two days the longest.  And, actually, in our house there
were full of furniture and things, but since we would not be
leaving too long then we did not bring along a lot of things with
us.
We were on the truck, and I could only carry with us 16 cans of
rice, and we went together with my father, with my sibling, and
we headed through the road next to Psar Daem Thkau.  At the
roundabout of Kbal Thnal, then we were stopped and we were asked
to wait before moving further.  And at that time my family
relatives, who were sellers at the nearby market, got a Lambretta
and she could make use of the Lambretta to carry her belongings,
but then we all got stuck at the roundabout.
The next morning then, after cooking a pot of rice, then we were
allowed to move to the east bank and then we took ride when we
crossed to the other side of the bridge.  There was a Prek Preah
Pagoda, the place where we then were stopped, and we saw the
black-clothed soldiers with weapons at the ready, and we were
stopped for a while.  And after some meals then when we wanted to
relieve ourselves then we would go into the riverbank, and then I
saw corpses and the corrugated metal sheet would be used to cover
the corpse.
And during meal time, after we had the meal, then I went to the
riverbank -- to the river actually to relieve myself, but saw
these corpses, and I don't remember the exact time but maybe in
the late afternoon then we were allowed to move further and my
kid, who was about four years old, he was not yet sent to school
but because he liked reading something then he could read.
At that time we were forced to move down to the destination -- we
did not know for sure where it would be -- and we would stop
along the road, and then after one month then we reached our home
town at Ta Lun village.  And Phnom Penh people were fully
evacuated but I was frustrated because I did not know actually on
the way to -- you know, in the middle of nowhere.
And one day I was called to the meeting and all the people from
Phnom Penh were called to that meeting in the fruit plantation,
and the chief of the co-operative -- I don't remember his name --
he was a carpenter who was in the co-operative.  He said that his
revolution was successful.  He started the revolution from the
1972 and I'm here to tell the Judges about the honest story,
loyal story of what I witnessed, what I saw, and I'm only telling
the truth.
He said that his revolution was so successful it's more like the
way Duch always said in his statement.  He said that he came to
Phnom Penh to give some injections to some. But Choun Nat and the
meeting he would share such information with us.  And then after
the meeting we were let home and I was so worried, having
attended such meeting.
The next morning my brother came and he was seen walking under
somebody's houses because we could see the spider web was still
staying on his head because he could have been walking under
those houses.  And then because he came with a boat, then we
could travel with him to our home town on the boat.
And in probably June -- May or June -- we were at home and my
brother told me that the soldiers were good, but I think he did
not know the real nature of the soldiers' work.  He talked about
the soldiers who were good people and they said that they were
good because they asked us not to leave our door closed because
they would be there to protect us.
Maybe they would call the Yuon, so I heard that, but because she
could not hear and they would guard the house, and after that we
were asked to work in the village.  We returned home and ate at
home and we carried water for our own use.  And after the
evacuation Angkar ordered us to go to Battambang and people from
Phnom Penh were evacuated and dispersed around in those villages
in Battambang.
And when my group arrived they said the 17 people were evacuated
and they would only keep the best people.  And before the
evacuations the militia, or chhlop, came to ask me -- that person
used to study with me in the same school and he came to ask about
the work my husband did in Phnom Penh.  And my elder sister, who
was the best person, went up to the room and she put the hands
around her mouth and whispered quietly, but I did not notice that
and I did not yet respond to the militia's question.  And maybe
her son was also a militia.
She clapped her hand around her mouth like that and she said,
"Americans" and she said, "American CIA."  She even responded
before I had a chance to do it.  And I blamed her.  I did not
have the opportunity to tell the militia yet because my husband
worked at the civil aviation and he mentioned the difficulty of
flying because of the American bombing, and he worked and his
body was skinny because he only focused on the nation.
And after I blamed her, a fortnight later they came to tell me
that all the 17 people had to evacuate, had to move on, and by
the
a.m. we all had to pack our belongings.  Everything had to            7   be moved and we can only bring just little belongings with us.
And then the ox cart would be prepared for us and then dropped us
at the Takeo Pagoda at the Takeo subdistrict.
First when we arrived nobody came but later on a lot of people
kept coming, and in the morning it was full.  That subdistrict
was adjacent to the Prey Ambil subdistrict.  We were waiting
there and the trucks were not yet arrived and the militia man
said the trucks were transporting the sick people from Koh Thom
first, then will be at Sampan and Prey Ampil and then us.  So we
had to wait.
We kept waiting and another militia man came up and told us --
let me go back a little bit.
Before the evacuation I was thinking, I think they already
prepared this plan, as Duch said.  The important thing is that
the revolution had to take the important prisoners, as Duch
stated.  First the important prisoners, the high-ranking
officers, the intellectuals, and those people will be taken to
work at the district office.
Tie alias Toek and Nguon Heng -- Nguon Heng used to study with
me.  He was my neighbour.  From what I knew, he was a tax
collector at Psar Thmei but after the evacuation he went to his
own village.  So Nguon Heng and my husband and Tie alias Toek
were together on the day we were waiting to be transported to
Battambang.
That militia man came to us for the two names that Angkar
requested, Tie alias Toek and Nguon Heng to a meeting at the
office, at the district office at Preak Touch in S'ang district.
And they used a bicycle and he seemed to realize what's going on.
I kept hearing what my elder sister said, whoever requested by
Angkar for study never returned.  I kept hearing that, so during
the evacuation the situation was like hell.  We were just waiting
for them to tell us what to do.
And when my husband was requested, he put on his shirt and he
handed a watch to me.  I looked at his face and he told me,
"Darling, keep quiet.  This situation happens everywhere
throughout the country.  Just strengthen yourself and look after
the children.  That is I want you to do.  Just educate our
children."  He did not say anything else because the request was
urgent.
I did not think of what's going to happen to him at the time.
When the trucks arrived at the Koh Khel Pagoda, all the people
from the pagoda were called to board the truck.  Then my family
and the Nguon Heng were not asked to board the truck yet and that
they would take us back to the best village.  I recall it was at
dusk and it was in the pagoda.  I tried to be strong.
Then two cars arrived and transported us back to our parents'
houses.  After that, the wife and the children will be sent for
education as Angkar had many eyes as pineapples, would monitor
and track our every activity.  And that way we put with the
regular force.
I was tempered, but like the old saying says, if your fate is to
be determined or to survive, then you would not be dead.
At that time, my children were put into the children's unit and
they tried to work their best, and despite they were being
scolded as they were the children of the imperialists.  I kept
working and I was asked to raise the dyke, the dams.  I was
tempered so hard.  If I mention every detail it's going to be a
long time.
People said that that area that we worked on had never been
ploughed for four years, so the soil was so hard.  When I dug the
hoe, it just didn't cut through.  I made myself to try to dig the
soil, but it wouldn't go through and I could see the blisters on
my hands.  And I didn't dare to say anything.
There were other people who had pity on me and then the group
chief told me to be quiet.  I was tempered to work harder.
People said maybe because I used to be a medic or working in a
medical department, when they saw me holding a kettle they
thought I working in a medical department and probably I tried to
be hygienic to boil the water before I drink.
I was blamed and scolded on a lot of things and I told them I
respected Angkar.  Angkar asked me to drink boiled water.  That's
why I boiled the kettle.
And during the rainy season, there was a chief; he was pretty
high.  He was probably a chief of a co-operative.  He said that I
passed all the schools, all the classes, but then I have to pass
another level and that would be the final level.  And if you
tempered and pass and you survived, that will be your success,
otherwise you will be dead I cannot recall the name of the
co-operative chief.  I recognize him as I used to start to get
into a car together with him to study in Phnom Penh.
Let me just speed up a bit.  I did not want to go to detail
because otherwise it's going to be too long.
So they tried everything to temper me and I seem to survived, and
during the day of the liberation I heard a lot of gunfire and
explosions and we were chattering and probably we thought the
liberation would be soon.  We still could hear the announcement
on the loudspeaker, and when I looked at the sky it was red from
the Phnom Penh direction.
Then Angkar came to us and ordered us to move to the west and
that we all had to go to the west to go up the mountain.  But we
came from the riverside and we did not understand the purpose of
going uphill.  And we thought if we could, then we would go back
to our village.  And at dawn, we could go to where you wish
because the chief of the co-operative already fled and some of
the chiefs already left.
So I came to my village and then my three children came.  Then we
reunited and I heard an announcement on the radio.  I forget to
mention one point.
When my husband was called to go away by Angkar, at that time I
thought he would not be returned because that was the normal
observance and I thought that I would be separated from him
forever, and to me my feeling at the time was so light, so
desperate.  I was empty.  In my mind I could not think of
anything.  And I could not cry because I did not want them to see
or I would be taken away as well.
So when I heard the announcement on the radio that the National
Salvation Front would appeal to those people who had a profession
or who used to work in Phnom Penh with technical skills, then
those people should return to their respective departments or
ministries.
I don't want to talk much about myself because I had been living
with hopelessness and despair for so long.  Even today, if I am
asked to die, I would not hesitate.  Whatever I do today is for
the next incarnation.  I try to do good deeds.
Upon hearing the announcement on the radio, I had a feeling of
looking forward to the returning of my husband, or maybe I should
go to his ministry just in case that he would return back.  And
the best people who used to live in Phnom Penh, who were my
neighbours, asked me to go to Phnom Penh.
So the three of us walked to Phnom Penh.  We started walking in
early morning from Koh Khel to Tuol Krasang, but everything was
so quiet, and when we reached Chak Angre we saw a Vietnamese
female soldier and she told me not to go to Phnom Penh.  So we
were not allowed to go to Phnom Penh.  Then how could we go and
check our house?
Then we returned home, but because it was already dark then we
asked the people who lived in Chak Angre to stay overnight at
their place, and we tried to find means of reaching Phnom Penh
but it is hard because a lot of Vietnamese soldiers and they were
everywhere.  And then I decided finally to go back to my village.
Several days later, the people from Chak Angre told us about the
plan that was announced on the radio, but for the best people who
used to know the tactics and the way they could move around, as
they used to be fighting, then they went to collect some war
spoils.
When I returned home, and regarding my elder sister, my
first-eldest sister, I regarded her as my mother after her death.
I still remember my mum's words, who told me that I would be
suffering after her death.  When I grew up, my elder sister told
me that I was born on the New Year's Day of the Year of the
Rabbit.  I myself could not recall my exact date of birth.
When I arrived in Phnom Penh again, I told my elder sister that I
would go to Phnom Penh to go to his ministry just in case he
would return, and she told me that she would not go to Phnom Penh
with me because she didn't know how to live.  She was comfortable
only living in the countryside, but I decided to go ahead to
Phnom Penh.
So for my second trip to Phnom Penh, I came with one of my sons,
who is currently a doctor.  When we reached Tuol Tumpoung Market
I -- from the distance -- the location who used to be my house
was gone, and then people who worked in the ministries before
asked me to lodge my application to the ministry.
When I met Teacher Nginin in Tuol Tumpoung, where I stayed at his
house, I went to the ministry to view the biography.  When we
talked to each other and revealed our situation, it was difficult
for us to say anything, and when I wanted to check the progress
on my biography, I was told to return in a week's time.
Then one of the teachers had a house near Ta Cheng Heng's
residence near Tom Nob Thmei and I met him after '79.  He was an
entrepreneur.  I looked at him and tried to -- and his face was
familiar, but I could not recall his name.  So after I walked
past him I returned and I stopped him.  I could not really recall
his name after the three years eight months period, and actually
he was my nephew.
He told me "Tie Bunleung" and he greeted me.  You can imagine
that I could not recognize my nephew after three years and eight
months, and he himself surprisingly could not recall me.  And
when I told her my name, "I'm the wife of Tea Hav Tek", then she
recognized that I was his aunt, and he asked about my husband,
and after I told him then I cried and he stopped asking.
I told him that probably I would go and work at the 7 January
Hospital as I made my application there, but he said here only
people who could work would be allowed to work, but those vendors
would not be allowed to apply.  So when I worked at the hospital,
I gave him some medication when he left for his village to meet
his wife.  When I worked there, I worked with some other people,
including a human expert.
After that event, I went to work. I entered Phnom Penh in '79 and
I started working at the 7 January Hospital, or the Chinese
Hospital, in about 1980.  The chief of the department held a
meeting one day and actually we were called to study a lot of
political sessions too, but one day the chief of the department
called us for a meeting to go to S-21 for a visit.
So we went there, and I actually was afraid of ghosts when I
learned that it was the Tuol Sleng Prison, but actually it was
the Ponhea Yat High School, because adjacent to the Ponhea Yat
High School was a house of the sister of my mother-in-law.  One
of my other in-laws also had a house adjacent to the Tuol Sleng
Prison.
So people from the whole department went for a visit to Tuol
Sleng Prison and we were told there were some survivors who were
there to greet the guests and to greet us and to tell us of what
was going on.  I still remember Mr. Oeng Pech -- actually, Mr.
Oeng Pech was evacuated in '75 on the Kampong Som street to Veal
Renh but because after Phnom Penh fell and the electricity was
cut off then people were called to fix the electricity and Mr.
Oeng Pech was called to come to Phnom Penh to fix the
electricity.
He said first he was imprisoned and I'm not sure if he was
detained together with Chum Mey but he got his nails pulled.  His
nails and toes were pulled and they poured alcohol on the bare
hands.  You can imagine when all the nails were pulled out and
the bleeding was there then they poured the alcohol on.  It's
like a live fish is being kept and salt applied onto the body, he
said.
He described the event of evacuation in '75 and the subsequent
living conditions in '76, '77.  For instance in '75 the 17 April
people were brought in and at the end of '76 because the 17
people were already finished, then they brought in the base
people.  That's what he said at the time.
Then he asked his subordinates to guide us at different
departments, different floors, and different buildings.  I did
not go to the north side.
A woman with a portable loud speaker told us that people who were
detained in this room was alleged to be a CIA agent and was
tortured.  The person was handcuffed and shackled and a rake was
used direct on his face and you could see the bloodstains still
left on the floor.  You could even see the mark of the body of
the person on the floor.
And at that time I could recall the shouting of my elder sister
that he was a CIA agent.  So I had a feeling that he died.
And when I looked at different cells, different forms of
treatment were shown by the guide.  And when we returned at the
reception area Mr. Oeng Pech told us that my husband would be
there.  And now I recall if the was the chief of the Department
of the Public Works -- actually, when my husband worked there he
bought a big dog and Mr. Oeng Pech also had a dog.  Then because
he wanted to breed his dog with my husband's dog then he would
take his dog to breed with my husband's and I could recall that
event when he thought that he worked with my husband.
Later on I asked that I could not move further.  Then I was given
the documents which I had copied and I saw the name of my
husband, Tea Hav Tek who was arrested and detained at S-21 on the
2nd of February 1976 and smashed on the 25th of May the same
year.
So this is a document I obtained from Tuol Sleng.  And later on I
found out the name of Tea Veng Tai  who was my brother-in-law,
the brother of my husband, of course. He was the pilot.  At that
time no international flights; there was only internal or
national, flights were allowed only within the country, not to
outside world.
Then I saw another person I am familiar with.  These documents
can be obtained at the Tuol Sleng because they said that they
could not give the document as it is part of their archives.
So another person, Mao was detained in December and I saw the
photo during the time when I was paying the visit to the vicinity
of S-21.  And some negatives were not yet developed and the crew
members from Germany promised me that they would have them
developed and give the photos to me.  And then I got these
photos.
And I would like to go back a little bit.  After I was called
from Wat Koh Khel I was actually taken to my hometown.  Two
families were transferred to the hometown.
We were lonely at that time.  It was a farmhouse and we were
sitting on the couch and looking outside at dusk.  We saw two
bicycles and probably, I believe, they were the local militias
who were riding the bicycle.  I saw people who were sitting
behind those bicycles where their hands were shackled to the
bicycle.
So I recall the moment my husband experienced because I actually
was educated to believe in dignified family and my husband's
relatives were raised in Kampot.  His name was Tie Chan.  And I
still pay homage to the dead souls of these persons because I
would pay regular visits to his tomb.
And I still don't understand why my husband was handcuffed.  I am
here to ascertain the truth and to also ask questions why my
husband, why my auntie, my mother-in-law and my sister-in-law who
are all siblings, eight people in total in each family were all
smashed and drowned in the river.  And they would be taken by
truckloads to be smashed at the foot of the mountain.
And I don't understand why the family of Sien Va or Vom Vann
their son-in-laws who were senior officials in the old regime,
were also executed and then killed in the pits.  So each family
now have only one member left.  I don't know whether these groups
of people have filed their complaint to find justice for their
lost loved ones but I really am thankful to this hybrid Court for
finding justice for us.  And I really am very grateful and I
really wish you all the best, all the judges and the people who
really bring justice to us.
And I wish that every kind of human being stop being too cruel
like the Pol Pot people and Pol Pot himself.  I think having said
this I may have forget where I stopped.
Okay, I may move on a little bit back to the time when people
were arrested and shackled.  So I could see the auntie who was my
neighbour who came to me and whispered into my ear saying that,
"Oui, did you see your husband"?
And, actually, our house was adjacent to one another but we
didn't have wall, we didn't have big fence, so we could see every
movement or any figure moving around inside or in front of our
house, and she asked me whether I saw my husband being taken away
and being handcuffed.  And I told her that, well, of course I saw
him.  I was so moved.
And I told her that, actually, it was because of the one in our
home who accused him of being CIA agent.  And I think it was that
person who actually paid his gratitude to Angkar and then
implicated my husband as the CIA.  And auntie whispered that my
husband would be detained somewhere near, but she was a very kind
person.  I knew that she was good during the very difficult time
although there were plenty of other people around.
And when I saw my husband was being handcuffed, I was a strong
woman actually at the beginning, but I could not hold my emotion.
I could cry and no-one could stop me.  However, I tried to be
strong because it I made this heard then people would also arrest
me.
I was told that my husband committed heavy offence so he would be
detained at Office 15 and he, as I was told, would be offered
what we call the "pig meal" for him and I could imagine -- and,
Your Honours please help think about this.  I heard about the
food or the meals offered to my husband, the pig's meal, and I
believe that it is very inhumane.
And I tried to weep in the manner that I did not really allow
people to hear just because I was afraid I would too be arrested.
I was so shocked.  Why the person with dignity, a person
respected by many, as my husband, was arrested and detained and
badly treated?  Because my husband was quite popular; everyone
knew him.
When people would like to work at the office, then my husband
would be kind enough to really help them to work.  Although they
offered him some money, he said that if you give me money, then I
would never help you because he helped people based on his
conscience.  He was a very good person, the person who could not
end up being treated like that.
I could identify human beings into four.  I'm very religious; I'm
talking about Buddhism.  So if anyone follows Buddha principles
then people would understand how our life would be divided and
how we should treat other people.
So people are classified into four groups.  So we have a group of
people who look like human beings who have very kind heart, but
some people with a human body but with a kind of evil heart, a
kind of very dangerous animal's heart.  So we listen to this kind
of preach of the dharma and I believe that it is quite true
because now these are the people.
These were the people with the evil heart because people who
really treat other people like animals.  How could my husband do
something wrong, so wrong that he was detained?  He never
committed any wrongdoing.  He treated the family very well.  He
loved everyone and he was respected.
I think human being born the same although we use different
languages, however, human beings should treat human beings
equally, not like the way they treated animals.  So people would
like to live in dignity.  People really want peace.  People want
to get rich.  People want to have freedom and happiness.
Why people who did not make any mistake was detained and
mistreated?  I don't understand what kind of human being those
captors were because even giving just the leftover rice to human
beings would not be appropriate, let alone fed them with some
kind of pig food, and forced people to work endlessly and then
treated them like this.  And I want the world to help think about
these very inhumane acts by group of people.
After he was taken away, he disappeared.  We never got any
contact.  Later on, I was taken to be tempered.  I don't remember
the person who took me to the paddy fields and I had to follow
him.  I had to dig canals, and I had to work so hard to fulfill
the quota otherwise I would be smashed.
And I think people, the more than one million people suffered in
different fashion.  I experienced difficult situation in a
different mode.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Chhin Navy, since it is an appropriate time to take
adjournment and the Chamber has noted that you have been rather
exhausted by talking alone and, of course, we are here listening
to you and we pay attention to your speech or statement.
But we would like to instruct you that, please, after we resume
the session, could you concentrate on the linkages of the time
when your husband was detained and tortured, for example, at
S-21.  And please don't stray far away from that matter.
And we will resume.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Civil party exits courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1443H to 1505H)
(Civil party enters courtroom)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity again to Madam
Chhin Navy to continue her statement, and please make your
statement relevant to the facts at S-21 and the facts related to
your husband, Tea Hav Tek, and the damages and sufferings as a
result of those facts as well as the death of your husband.
THE CIVIL PARTY:
I am here again.  I am Chhin Navy.  Good afternoon, Your Honours,
ladies and gentlemen.
Regarding my application as a civil party for my husband Tea Hav
Tek, the deputy chairman of civil aviation in Potchentong, when
the Pol Pot regime fell I worked at the
January Hospital, or            7   the Chinese Hospital, but now a 42-storey building is being
constructed.
Between '78 and '80 the Ministry of Health informed the director
of the 7 January Hospital and subsequently he told all the staff
of the hospital that the ministry permitted us to visit the
genocidal museum of Tuol Sleng.  At that time I haven't heard the
word S-21.  When all the staff were taken to visit the museum and
there were roughly 50 or 60 of us altogether, it was still in the
beginning.  Anybody could just come and ask for a job because in
order to survive, despite their lack of technical or professional
capability.
At Tuol Sleng I met the people who worked there and one person
told me that he was a former Tuol Sleng prisoner.  He presented
himself as Him Oeng Pech and after the fall of Phnom Penh he was
allowed to work in that location.  He made a presentation for our
group, as I said, of what happened in '75, '76, and '77.  And
then he asked his staff to guide us through the cells at the
south, and on the portable loudspeaker the presenter told us that
in that cell the person was accused to be a CIA agent, and he was
handcuffed and shackled on both feet, and for torture treatment a
rake was used to rake on his face and blood and flesh was
spattered around.  And it was evident that the bloodstain was
there on the floor, and when the person died he was moved and the
mark of his body was still apparent on the floor.
At that time I recalled the time that my elder sister made a
sound to the militia at the village when the militia asked about
the profession of my husband.  So at that time I had a feeling
that he died in that location.  After we visited those individual
cells and rooms we came back to the reception area and Mr. Oeng
Pech told us, as I told the Chamber, that there were surviving
documents, and amongst those document I saw a document of the
arrest of Tea Hav Tek taken from Sector 25.  The date of the
arrest is 22nd of February '76 and the date of smashed is May
'76.
I could imagine that he was tortured and when I saw the date of
entry and the date of smashing I could not imagine anything else.
I was shocked, desperate.  I was speechless.  In my mind I was
like a dead person.  I was almost unconscious but I did not want
them to carry me and I tried to be strong.  And then I requested
the document and I received a document with the same information
as I was shown.  When I saw the photo I was speechless.  I had
been suffering from this for so many years and it is still
happening to me.  I cried a lot.
When I returned home that afternoon I kept crying, just kept
crying, and next day when I came to work I kept crying again.  I
told my colleagues that my husband's photo was displayed at the
museum and that he was smashed there.  A colleague comforted me
and that I should not cry because that my husband already passed
away and then his life was over from this world and that we, or
I, should be focusing on taking care of my children.  Everybody
was trying to comfort me at the time and later on my tears seemed
to stop flowing.
I still can remember her words that she told me to try to forget
what happened.  She told me that she went to study in Germany and
that I should only think of the prosperous future time and forget
what happened in the past, but in my mind I still vividly
imagined the torture act, the suffering inflicted upon my
husband, and he was arrested, interrogated to extract confession.
He was compelled to confess.  He was tortured to confess, and I
want to research for that document but in my heart I was so weak
and I would feel that I would be fainted when I see such a
document.  But I want Duch to respond to me that such a document
exists so that the case file for my husband is complete.
In my mind now maybe I think it's better for me to make a film of
what I learned and the fate of my husband for my children to see
in the future, for the next Cambodian generation, for everybody
to see the suffering and the cruel act committed by that regime.
Importantly, we felt betrayed, especially my eldest sister.  She
was indoctrinated.  That's why she said such a thing.  Actually
one time I asked her about what a Communist was but now, through
such suffering and experience, I understood what Communism was.
That is the act of jealousy, of competition, of killing, of
taking people to Tuol Sleng, of betraying, of reporting the
in-law to be arrested and executed.
Even now, now I look after her children.  I helped her, helped
her children.  I'm sorry, Mr. President, although this one is not
directly related to Tuol Sleng but probably I keep bursting out
regarding my elder sister.
A Singaporean media came to interview me the other day and asked
whether I was still angry with my sister and I told them no, I
stopped being angry with her.  But they said they were angry on
my behalf and I said, "That's okay, it's common.  We live in this
world and you are entitled to your feelings."  And when I learned
the Buddhist praying, the Buddhist theory and disciplines, I have
been feeling a bit calmer.
And I understand that what she did was because of the ideology of
the Communism that was indoctrinated upon her.  And actually
after she reported my husband I blamed her.  Maybe she wanted to
be a wife of Pol Pot.  That's why she said such a thing to the
militia man.  And how come she was so cruel?
And sometimes when I see the faces of people I just hate it.  My
feeling of anger seems to be lessened through my Buddhist
learning and also I heard the policy of reconciliation by the
government and to find justice for the victims.  I was asking
myself at what level justice can be found for the victims.  The
national government and the international participation together
work hand in hand to find justice and to satisfy us.
With such feeling I feel relief but here I still keep watching.
It is not my habit to lie to people.  It is not my habit at all
to fabricate anybody or to trick anybody and that's why I was so
upset when my elder sister betrayed us.  But maybe what she did
at the time was for her own goal and, as we said, when she plant
chilli then she would get chilli.  Whatever she grows then she
would get that own fruit.  So the result would fall upon her.
And here I am sitting before the President, before Your Honours,
to find justice for my relatives, for all Cambodian people.  We
are all relatives regardless of families we are attached to.
I don't want to be dragging but this is also a principle of
Buddhism.  If you look at Buddha, he used to be reincarnated in
different forms.  And I actually wanted to tell Duch actually I
have a pity on Duch because in this world, maybe when I have a
pity on Duch, maybe people would get offended because this is a
world of human beings, not a sacred world.  And he deserves what
he did.
And like my sister, she deserves what she did when she reported
my husband to the militia.  If I did not study Buddhist
discipline then the anger would still be burning in my heart.  So
I should not get offended for what people do for their own good
or for their own benefit.
And at Tuol Sleng the feeling of suffering of course is
indescribable, like in the case of the civil party, the French
woman whose husband died at Tuol Sleng.  Everybody suffered, and
the pain we have, and the international Judge asked whether any
Westerners were detained at Tuol Sleng and of course probably
talked about that Briton.
If you look at the New Zealander, he felt the suffering and it
was only his brother.  But if you look at my case, it's my
husband and that I also had to look after my children.  You can
consider that, how much suffering I have been bearing.
However, as I repeatedly said, the suffering was tremendous and
if I keep talking I would have never been able to stop.  And in
short, the suffering is the same.  When you suffer, you suffer.
And how could I compensate for the suffering that I have
received?  That is, how the truth can be revealed to me?  I
suffered.  I lost all the property in the previous regime.  I
tried not to spend much.  I tried to build my property, to build
a house, but in the end we were victimized.  I was detained at
the Office M-15.
But I was like stuck in the middle.  And if I go home, and when I
hear about the testimony in the Chamber then I would cry and then
my eyes would dry and I would find it hard not to use teardrops
or eye drops, and with my current living condition it is
difficult for me to afford such relief from medication.
People with great attitude, with morality, try to be a good
person to serve the nation; a person who was so innocent and did
not involved in politics and why he was being treated that way,
in a cruel way and smashed?  Nothing could be able to compensate
for such act committed by that regime upon my husband; nothing at
all.
And if we talk about the widows, we were suffering in various
forms at various levels.
Some widows, because of their bad habits of gambling, the
husbands divorce them.  But look at me, I was loyal to my nation,
I was loyal to my husband and we served the nation together, and
how come I was punished that way and that my husband was taken
away from me?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Civil Party, I think it is sufficient for the Chamber now
to hear your story, and maybe it's a good idea for other parties
to put questions or observations regarding the death of your
husband.
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the civil party
lawyer who is representing this civil party.  You can put further
questions to clarify the matter that you wish in support of her
application to be a civil party to this case.
The Chamber would also like to remind the civil party lawyer that
the questions shall be easy for her to understand so that her
response is appropriate.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you for the opportunity for
me to ask my client.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. Madam Chhin Navy, can I ask you some questions?
A. Yes, go ahead.
Q. Madam Chhin Navy, what year were you born?
A. I was born in 1939.
Q. Can you tell us; in your ID it shows that you were born in
1946.  Why there is such discrepancy?
A. Actually, after my ID was made I did not pay much attention to
the details.  I think the discrepancy arises because the new ID
was done later during the election.  It was done by the Sangkat
and the information was put in by them.  I thought maybe when I
reach my retirement age and if I still have strength to work then
probably I could work a few more years by reducing my age.  So I
don't want to lie.  That's why it's a bit different from my
actual date of birth.
Q. Thank you.  So actually you were born in 1939.  Is that
correct?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. You told the Court that you obtained the information in
relation to the death of your husband, Mr. Tea Hav Tek, at S-21
Office.  When did you actually obtain this information?
A. I got this information in 1980 because the workers at the
hospital were invited to pay a visit to the compound.
Q. Thank you.  When you received this information and learned
that your husband was executed at S-21, how was your feeling back
then?
A. When I learned that he was killed at S-21 by tortures -- and
he experienced some kind of very harsh tortures -- I was so moved
and I felt dizzy and passed out, and people could be seen coming
to help me.
And from then, I told myself that it was I alone who had to
struggle to hold onto life and that I had no more husband to
assist me, and I was very sympathetic to my husband, who was a
good person, but was tortured and interrogated and had to confess
to the confession -- in the confession which was obtained under
tortures.
And I cannot revisit Tuol Sleng Museum because the memory haunts
me and makes me sick.  As a widow, after my husband died, I have
nothing left much in my life to live on, but I still have had
children and I had to really raise them, but raising children
without the presence of a husband would not be easy.
I can't stop thinking of the moment I witnessed at S-21 in
relation to the death of my husband.  Any moment I recall the
event, then I am so tearful and I had to have some medicines to
calm me down.
Q. Thank you.
MR. KONG PISEY:
With Mr. President's leave, may the photo of her husband be put
up on display?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to put the photo of her
husband on the projector.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. Mrs. Chhin Navy, can you recognize this photo?
A. He is my husband.
If you look at his eyes, look at his eyebrows, they were severed
by torture and his face was different.  He was different from the
very previous photo he took earlier on.
Q. Where did you obtain this photo from?
A. I got it from Tuol Sleng prison or S-21 office and I have also
obtained the list, the list of the prisoners, list of incoming
and outgoing prisoners.  And my colleague actually who worked at
the hospital also conducted research on this information.
MR. KONG PISEY:
With Mr. President's leave, I would like Document ERN 00080640 to
be put up on display.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit is now instructed to put Document 0080640 on the
screen.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Thank you.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q.  This document is the list of the victims who were detained at
S-21.  This document is obtained from DC-CAM.
If we look at line 15 from the top of the page -- Madam Chhin
Navy, can you read this writing, whether you are familiar with
this name?
A. It is my husband's name Tea Hav Tek who was detained from
office -- correction -- Sector 25.  I have not had my glasses on
but I still can read this line that my husband was entering the
facility on the 22nd of February 1976.
Q. Thank you.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Mr. President, could you please instruct the AV to remove this
document, please?
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. Next, Madam Chhin Navy, could you please be brief?  Could you
tell the Court the life of a widow and without the presence of
your husband how difficult has this been for you?
A. As a widow whose husband was killed I maintained a position,
the stance that I left my home village, that I had to be strong
to help raise my children to become good people to the best of my
ability and then I found them the place where they can settle
down.
And nothing left for me.  I had to start from scratch with bare
hands.  And I was so worried that I could probably -- I felt I
could not probably raise the children.  I was so worried that my
children could die because I could not feed them.
I went along with other people to really collect the ammunition
or the kind of DDT powder so that I can really sell to the scrap
collectors.  At that time Cambodian currency was not yet produced
and we could make use of the Vietnamese currency.  And there was
no plate, no pot.  It was so modest.  We were left empty handed
and I had to walk places to collect anything I could get to sell
to the rubbish collector, to the people who could really exchange
these things for money.  It was so desperate and I had to
struggle to hold onto life and so that my children could become a
person who are good people and can be government employees in
some ministries.
Q. Thank you.  I would like to put to you another question but
please be brief, if you may.
Have you paid a visit to any hospital or to the psychiatrist to
have your mental fitness cured?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Why did you meet the doctor?
A. I met the psychiatrist because before these hearings I was
told that there are psychiatrists at the TPO organization who
would be ready to give us the assistance.  And then I contacted
them and paid them a visit.
Q. Thank you very much, Madam Chhin Navy.
MR. KONG PISEY
But I have another question but not to Chhin Navy, to the accused
at this time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed with your question to the accused.
The accused is now instructed to listen to the question to the
civil party lawyer.  And the accused is reminded that you can
exercise your right to remain silent if you so wish.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Thank you.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. First question:  after consultation with Chhin Navy she would
like to put this question through the lawyer to the accused,
whether he knows the arrest of Mr. Tea Hav Tek and whether he
knows that Tea Hav Tek was tortured or not.
A. As I understood, there are two questions.  I would like to now
respond to the first one.
I don't remember when I was the Chairman of S-21 or maybe when I
was the deputy chairman of S-21 that Tea Hav Tek was arrested and
sent to S-21.  I have no idea.
However, the civil party application of Madam Chhin Navy was the
third civil party application followed by those of Chum Mey and
Bou Meng.  I have compared these applications.  I knew Bou Meng
and Chum Mey and I also reviewed Chhin Navy's application against
the former list of the prisoners, which contained 390 pages.
Then I spotted the list and I started to acknowledge that Mr. Tea
Hav Tek was genuinely arrested and sent to S-21 and later on
executed.  I do not deny this because there has been documents
supporting my recognition.  And having reviewed the application
of Madam Chhin Navy, it is very clear that Tea Hav Tek was
working as the deputy chief of the civil aviation and I started
to realize that obviously Madam Chhin Navy was the wife of Tea
Hav Tek.
So in conclusion, I recognize that Tea Hav Tek was really
detained at the facility but I have no idea whether he was there
when I was as the Chairman because I had no idea whether I
remember having seen him there.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to put
questions to the civil party if they so wish.
Could the prosecutors be reminded about how questions should be
put to the civil party, because she is here as a civil party, not
a witness, and we believe that the questions should be framed in
the name of the civil party, rather than the witness.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Good afternoon, Mrs. Chhin Navy.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS:
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Did you ever share the information of the death of Mr. Tea Hav
Tek with your children and what would they react if you did so?
A. I found the photo of my husband and the list at Tuol Sleng and
I shared them with children, who cried out loud all over the
house.
They could not stop crying and they were so desperate because
they knew that their father died.  They could no longer have any
father to call Daddy again.  No-one ever took them to the airport
where their father once worked at.  And since I had to work hard
to raise the children and to put them in ministries, and then
what would be the result of working that hard and after all my
husband died and their father perished?
And my children, the daughter actually, the youngest daughter
conducted further research to find out more information about her
father.  And I am busy and I could not really find out further
about him.
Q. Thank you.  Are they still in this kind of emotion -- I mean
to having learned that their father died?
A. Every one of them has shown their reaction.  However, they are
well disciplined at work.  My son this morning had a mission to
Siem Reap province.  He was assigned by the Ministry of Health
and the hospital and he is a busy person.  My daughter got
married to the American and that American actually came to
propose the marriage right in sight of my home.  And they are
busy.  Thank you.
Q. Thank you, Madam Chhin Navy.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the defence counsel to
put questions to the civil party if they so wish.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Thank you for your statement as well.
The defence has no questions to put.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next the Chamber would like to give the floor to the accused to
make his observation in response to the statement made by the
civil party, if he so wishes to do so.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I do not have any further observation to make at
this moment.  Thank you, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mrs. Chhin Navy, the proceedings in which we have heard your
statement have already come to an end.  Now you may go back to
sit at the civil party reserved seats or you may choose to go
home.  It's up to you.
(Witness excused)
The Court officer is now instructed to call Mr. Touch Monin into
the courtroom.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. The civil party, is your name Touch Monin?
A. Mr. President, my name is actually Touch Monin.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 54 years old.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I was born in Preaek Koy village, Preaek Koy commune, Kang
Meas district, Kampong Cham.  In the former regime, Preaek Koy
was called Sva Kaong.
Q. So where do you live and what do you do for a living?
A. I live in Veal Ri Lech, Svay Teab, Chamkar Leu, Kampong Cham.
I am a schoolteacher at Hun Sen school.
Q. What is your father's name?
A. His name is Touch My. My mother's name is Mao Khon.  She is
deceased.
Q. How many brothers and sisters have you got?  And please tell
the Court the names of those siblings.
A. I have seven siblings.  First, Touch Symorn, Touch Bunthan ,
Touch Sokhan, Touch Mony, Touch Monin -- I am -- Touch Sokhoeun
and Touch Sokom.
Q. Mr. Touch Monin, is Thou Mean, Thou Rin, Thou Saren, Proeun,
Mao Bun Chan or Bun Than and Chea Khan your relatives or you can
tell us about the kinship of these people in relation to you?
A. These names were the relatives of mine.  Thou Mean was my
uncle.  Proeun was the nephew-in-law.  Thou Saren was also nephew
and they all were relatives.  Chea Khan was my cousin.  He was
the last son of my auntie.  He had six siblings:  Chea Phai, Chea
Lai, Chea Phai and he himself, Chea Khan.  Chea Khan was my close
cousin because his mother was the sister of Mao Em.
Q. What about the name Mao Bun Chan or Mao Bun Than.  What is his
relationship to you?
A. Mao Banthan  was my cousin on my mother's side, as his father
was my mother's relative and my elder sister's name was also
Toueh Bunthan.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the civil party
lawyer, for this civil party to make a brief presentation of the
civil party's identity, the reasons to be joined as a civil party
and the relationships and the damages claimed by the civil party
against the crimes alleged on the accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias
Duch, regarding the facts at S-21 during the DK period from the
17 April '75 to the 6th January '79, in addition to other
relevant evidence to prove the application to be the civil party
of this client.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours.  Good afternoon, ladies
and gentlemen.  I am Hong Kimsuon, the civil party's lawyer for
this civil party and Mr. Touch Monin is the civil party, and he
is a Cambodian national with the ID 060172611, and the document
ERN number is 00211332, and another document D25/14/1.
Secondly, he joined as a civil party with the application
document ERN number in the Khmer language, 00211321.  That is the
information form for the victims.  The application was made as
the cousin of Chea Khan alias Chin, male, who was arrested on the
2nd of January '77.  This Chea Khan alias Chin name was in a
prisoners list of S-21.
In the document, the list of the S-21 prisoners with the ERN
number in the Khmer language, 00161084.  In the serial number 94
in English and Khmer, the name is Chea Khan, alias Chin, 35 years
old, male engineer from Russia, arrested on the 2nd January '77,
and the DC-Cam document which was part of the case file with ERN
00161073.
In another document with the ERN 00161356 in the serial order
191, Chea Khan alias Chin (phonetic), engineer from Russia.
Another document is a list of S-21 prisoners with the ERN
00171449 in the serial number 676, Chea Khan, alias Chin,
engineer from Russia and in that document the information
regarding the arrest and brought to S-21 or to be smashed was
only a question mark.
Also in the document, documents regarding the confession of Chea
Khan, alias Chin, was authenticated by the DC-Cam in the Khmer
language ERN 00239024 and in the English language 00211333.  This
document name is D25/14/2 which states regarding the documents
maintained at the DC-Cam.
Because I cannot find the ER number for the document in the Case
File 001, I went to the genocidal museum and asked for the
document which was dated 1999.  That's the document that I
submitted this morning, plus the other parties, are the
authenticated documents maintained at the current genocidal
museum.  It's the confession of Chea Khan, alias Chin.
In addition I just received a photo of the victim Chea Khan,
alias Chin.  This is a photo taken prior to 1970.  It was
submitted through the relative of Touch Monin and I would like to
ask the accused in the end whether he knows this person.
As this document is a written document, with the President's
leave I would like the accused to verify who was the
interrogator.  The name written was Hor and there was an
information regarding the farewell to Russia in 1965.  The name
was Kaing Guek Eav, so I'm not sure.  The accused can verify that
information.
The reason of the relationship between Touch Monin and the victim
was that in the identification documents on the mother's side the
surname was Mao Em and the father was Chea Bou.  The parents of
Chea Khan, alias Chin, was the cousin of the parents of Touch
Monin and they are cousins.
The reasons for joining the application was that the direct blood
relatives, that is the parents of that victim, died during the
Khmer Rouge regime.  That's why Touch Monin lodged a complaint on
behalf of his relative as his cousin of Chea Khan, alias Chin.
Next I would like the President to allow the client Touch Monin
to describe his events during the Khmer Rouge regime and his
research and find the death of his cousin at the S 21.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Touch Monin, the Chamber would like now to give you the
opportunity to make your statement before this Chamber.  The
events, the relationships to the crimes alleged on the accused,
the damages inflicted upon you as a result of the Khmer Rouge
democratic regime, as well as during the establishment and
operation of the Security Office S-21 from the 17th April '75 to
the 6th January '79 and the physical or emotional or
psychological damages that you received and the direct impact or
damages on you yourself up to the present time.
You take the floor.
MR. TOUCH MONIN:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Let me recall from the beginning regarding the history of my
family and my cousin, Chea Khan, alias Chin.  This person was my
cousin, the fifth child of my auntie Mao Em.  Mao Em was the
younger sibling in order in my family side.  My mother had five
siblings:  Mao Em, Mao Im, Mao Un, Mao Hun, and then my mother
Mao Khan, who was the youngest daughter amongst the siblings.
Before 1970 my parents were rice farmers living in Preaek Koy
subdistrict.  My mother was the poorest amongst her family
members.  Before 1970, after the 18th March coup in 1970, my
aunt's family, Chea Bou and Mao Em, had several children residing
in Phnom Penh except Chea Phan, who was a peasant.  Therefore the
event of the coup, after it happened, my family discussed amongst
ourselves with her other sisters that the war will be broken out
because once the prince was toppled, the war would break out.
[16.12.23}
And due to the fear of being bombarded then my mother was
convinced to live in Phnom Penh.  In Phnom Penh she would live
with my elder sister, Chea Lai and in Phnom Penh the parents of
Chea Lai and her husband, Thou Rin, who was a government
official, took care of all the family members.
And I myself was one of the people who was under the family,
including my younger sister and younger brother.  The three of us
were in charge of their care and my elder siblings went to work
in the factory.  My younger sister later on - Touch Sokhoeun --
sacrificed her study and went to work as a factory worker during
that Lon Nol regime in order to get the money to feed ourselves.
At that time my mother had to have a surgery.  In that year the
living situation was deteriorating and Chea Lai tried very hard
to feed us, to look after us, as my parents were old and could
not do anything else.
At that time I was only focusing on study.  I studied at the
Boeung Kak College.  Every day I spent my time studying and
struggled together with my siblings to help with his work.  Also
with my cousin I was given everything, including my schooling.
The living in Phnom Penh at that time, he had a younger sibling,
Mao Im, whose father was Thou Sok.
They were also in-laws.  My family's side usually the cousins
married one another.  After the 17th April '75, I lived with him
until Phnom Penh fell.  I was very worried as my siblings lived
separately, especially Thou Ream.  Thou Ream actually supported
me a lot as well and Thou Ream's  parents lived together at the
house of Chilay and Thou Rin.
Later on when we left Phnom Penh after the black-clad Pol Pot
soldiers who were  (inaudible) forced us to move out of Phnom
Peng for three days and if we refused we would be bombarded.  And
the Angkar would not allow the bombardment.  We were worried.  We
didn't know what to do as the relatives lived apart.
Next morning, we were told again, so we had a gathering amongst
ourselves and my aunt and we agreed that we had to move otherwise
we would be punished.  Therefore, in the late afternoon we
departed from Tuol Kok the quarter number 2, passing through Tuol
Sangke to Kilometre Number 6.
That was the time when I thought of the regret that I did not
bring enough belongings.  I only carried books because I believed
that we would return after three days.  So I only brought books
along.  It was a case of books and a little bit of rice.
We left together with my mother and my aunt.  When we reached
Kilometre Number 6 and we saw people gathering around when the
rice was distributed, so I went to request for the rice and we
got like 10 kilos of rice for our big family.  Along the journey,
my aunt only carried her money, her currency.  That was her
savings.  And I asked her to spend all the money in case the
currency would not be used later on, but she insisted on keeping
her money and she did not believe that the country would be
without any money or currency.
When we reached the pagoda at Ponhea Lueu she realized that money
was no longer traded.  And that was the time my family sat
opposite each other speechless; and as we did not have any means
of supporting ourselves.
One day along our journey when it was at nightfall, we slept and
then I smelt a bad odour.  Then we found a shrivelled corpse.
Then we had to move to another location.  It was unfortunate that
my family had to come across such a dead body and that we slept
nearby a dead body.
When we reached Prek Kdam, it took us two days to cross the
river.  At that time Angkar made an announcement that people were
required to Battambang if they wished to do and some decided to
Kampong Cham.  I myself with my aunt and uncle decided to return
to our village because we had never been to Battambang.
So we took the ferry crossing the river and then the announcement
was made again who wished to Kampong Cham or Chamkar Leu and we
made our decision not to go there.  And we requested to go to
Cheung Chnok at the mountains but we were denied as the road was
blocked.  So we had to take another road passing at the back of
the mountain, Champan Ampar, before we reached that location.
At the Stoeng Chhveng stream, we realized that we reached our
village as we came from the other side.  We made a journey
through the stream.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Defence counsel, Francois Roux, you take the floor.
MR. ROUX:
Mr. President, I apologize for interrupting.  Could we perhaps
ask the witness, as you've done before, to please focus on events
related to S-21 and family members lost at S-21?  These are all
important historical events, I agree, but this is not the purpose
of the civil party.
So if you could please re-invite the civil party to re-focus his
statement?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The observations of the defence counsel is appropriate, and
before the Chamber gives the floor again to the civil party, I
myself made it clear of the 11 facts alleged on the accused that
you received as a result of the establishment and operation of
S-21 from the 17th April '75 to the 6th of January '79, which
leads to you being joined as a civil party to this case.  And
this is the facts which are being put before the Chamber.
So, Mr. Civil Party, please focus only on the relevant part in
relation to the facts and the accused.  Do you understand that?
THE CIVIL PARTY:
Yes, Mr. President.
I would like to say that if the President wants me to talk about
Tuol Sleng, I would like to go back.
The reason that I lodge my complaint as a civil party is on the
behalf of my cousin and that my cousin's families all died.  Only
a few nephews survived and the other grandmothers and fathers
they were all traumatized.  I was discouraged from lodging this
application, but because I had a view of the democratic and fair
process that's why I made my decision to join as a civil party.
My intention is to pay my gratitude to my cousin, Chea Khan alias
Chin, who had great and kind sacrifice and hurt on my family.  He
went to study in Russia in '65 and in '75, three -- that is three
months after the fall of Phnom Penh, he returned to Cambodia.  My
family did not know that he returned; even his parents did not
know.  We were all surprised.
When our family arrived at our native village, Prek Koy, then his
in-law Thou Rin Proeun and a few other members of the family and
my uncle Thou Sok, Thou Ream were all executed.
Let me say they were all executed because we were called for
re-education, but then people whispered that they died and we
heard this from the best people.  They said that we, our family
were the bourgeoisie, we were the rich from the city and we would
not be forgiven.
A few months later my parents and my uncle were evacuated to
Kampong Siem in Kampong Trean.  First they put in the Angkuonh
Dei Pagoda and later on they split us up and my family to Poun
village, my uncle to Phum Pen village and my other family was
moved to another village.  And that's when I lived at that
location from the end of '75 to '76.  From what I was told, he
arrived at Preaek Koy village and when he learnt that some of the
family members were taken away and that his father was relocated
to Trean in Kampong Siem subdistrict, Kampong Cham.
He went to look for his family and to look for my family in
Kampong Siem district to Chamkar Leu district.  First, along the
street my uncle said, "Where should we" -- at the Chamkar Leu.
When we're at Pramat Dei in Svay Teab subdistrict, Nhep
(phonetic) asked us to stay there and my cousin decided to stay
at Svay Teab subdistrict.  We live in -- each of the family
member lives in a separate house.
He met with the family members.  In fact he was asked to live at
Ta Prok at a medical office but later on he was asked to live at
the Chamkar Leu and his position at that time, he works at the
water sluice gate.  He was an architect for the water sluice gate
and the dams and canals.  He designed all those sluice gates and
later on he went to design the dam at the Kampong Thma called 1
January Dam.
And that's all the reasons for our regret, as toward the end of
'76 we lost contact with him.  We only discussed among ourselves
to predict of his fate.  We didn't know where he was taken.  We
only learned that he was taken to be re-educated and, after the
event of 1979, after the fall I went to research at the Tuol
Sleng Prison.  In the beginning I only saw an individual cell
which was partitioned with a brick wall and it housed the former
prime (sic) minister, Minister Hu Nim, and I went to look at
various other cells and I saw the torturing tools, bloodstain and
the stench of blood.  I was fainted.
I tried to look for his photograph but I failed to locate it.
Only later on before 1990s I found a book which was called a list
of traitors and in that book in the Chamkar Leu the name of Chea
Khan was mentioned.  I was not sure whether he was the Chea Khan,
an engineer from Russia, but I was 90 percent sure he's my
cousin.
And only at a later stage that I received a document after my
younger sister (sic), Chea Lai, the elder sister of Chea Khan,
was sick.  She moved from living in Chamkar Leu to Skun and then
to Siem Reap, and I received that book from another relative, Tou
Riem (phonetic), and we reviewed the book and we discussed the
book and we were thinking whether we should make a complaint
regarding the information contained in that book.
We waited to hear for the information in relation to the civil
party applications before the Tribunal because we had to have
ample evidence to support our civil party applications.  Then
when we made contact with the ADHOC organization employees, then
we were reassured that with those documents we of course could
proceed with the application.
I was saddened and sorry for the loss of my brother (sic), Chea
Khan, who was an engineer returning from Russia and who was
tortured and perished in the regime, and I would like to conclude
it now.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next we would like to give the floor to the civil party lawyers
group 4, to put questions to the civil party to seek further
clarifications to support the civil party claim for reparation if
they so wish.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours.
Since it is already 4.30 p.m. do you think that the statement of
Mr. Touch Monin should be postponed to tomorrow's session or
should we proceed further?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Would you wish to put a lot of questions?  If the questions
cannot be extended further than 5 p.m. then the Chamber wishes to
conclude his statement and the questions to be put to him by this
late afternoon.  According to our calculation, we already
predicted that we would hold a meeting for one hour and a half
this afternoon.  However, we failed to actually follow that
schedule.
So could you please tell the Court whether you have a lot of
questions to be put to the civil party?  If so, then we would
adjourn the hearing now.  But if not, then we can finish hearing
the statement of the civil party by 5 p.m.  It would be good if
we can do so but it's up to the civil party lawyers now because
tomorrow we're going to hear some experts.  However, we really
respect the position of the civil party lawyers.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, thank you.  I will make sure that I will brief and
that I would only put three or five questions to the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are allowed to do that.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. Mr. Touch Monin, you already stated before the Chamber but we
would like to seek some clarification because we have just
obtained the photo of Chea Khan.  Where have you obtained this
photo and how?  And how did you really establish the fact that it
is genuinely the photo of Chea Khan?
A. This photo was taken or was seen in 1979 by -- because his
auntie showed this photo because people were suspicious because
they thought that Chea Khan would die and some would say that he
would not be dead.  So that's why the auntie produced the photo
to prove that -- to show everyone who actually could shed light
on the whereabouts of Chea Khan.
And then having seen the photo, then we started to search for the
whereabouts of Chea Khan.
Chea Lai actually was the aunty who showed this photo but she
died, because I have remembered seeing the photo.  That's why
later on we could search for the photo and we located it.
Q. Thank you.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Could, with the President's leave, this document or photo be put
up on the projector?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to put it on the screen.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Can I put this question to the accused; whether he recognizes
this photo?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, you can respond to this question if you would wish
to do so.
THE ACCUSED:
I indicated that Chea Khan was the friend of mine and I of course
know him very well.  That's all.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. I don't put further questions since it is already clear but I
would like to ask my client since you have joined as a civil
party on behalf of Chea Khan, alias Chin, do you wish to seek
reparations, civil reparations in person on your own, or would
you leave it to the lawyer to do it?
A. Regarding the civil party claim for reparations, I would like
to let the lawyer actually act on my behalf.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
I am sorry Mr. President.  I said that it would be my last
question but I have another last question.
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. In 1965 you saw off Chea Khan, alias Chin (phonetic), when
Chea Khan was departing for Russia.  Did the accused see him off?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused can now respond to Mr. Kimsuon's question.
THE ACCUSED:
I don't want to recall any detailed event but I would like to
reiterate that I was there to see him off to Russia.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you very much, the accused, and also Mr. Monin for the
statement.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the prosecutors to
put questions to Mr. Touch Monin if they so wish.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The Co-Prosecutors do not have any
questions to put to the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now an opportunity for the defence counsel to put questions
to the civil party if they so wish.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The defence counsel does not have any
questions to put to the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now time for the accused to make his observations in
relation to the statement of Mr. Touch Monin.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I do not have any specific observation to add in
relation to the case of Chea Khan.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Touch Monin, the proceedings to hear your statement as a
civil party today has come to an end and as the civil party you
have the right to observe the proceedings within the courtroom or
you may choose to go home, should you wish.
Please, I note that you would like to put questions.
MR. TOUCH MONIN:
I would like to put only last questions because due to time
constraints I had four further questions but I only want to ask
one question to the accused.
The question is:  when my brother was detained at S-21 was he
executed at S-21 or at Choeung Ek?  So far we have not obtained
any information in relation to the place where he was killed.
Please, treat us with this information.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused can actually respond to this question if he would
wish to do so.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I cannot really answer in short because I was not
in close contact with this kind of task.  So far as I guess, it
is more than 50 percent that Chea Khan would be executed at
Choeung Ek.  However, I do not really deny that he could have
been smashed at a Phnom Penh location.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The hearing in which we heard the testimony or the statement of
the civil party comes to an end and the Court is now adjourned.
(Witness exits courtroom)
The session will be resumed tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Tomorrow we are going to hear the statement of the expert as
scheduled.
The security personnel are now instructed to take the accused to
the detention facility and return him to the courtroom by 9 a.m.
The Court is adjourned.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1642H)
