P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now in session.
According to today's schedule, we continue to hear the statements
of civil parties before the Chamber.  There are three civil
parties to be heard, one of whom will be done by
videoconferencing.
The Greffier, can you report the attendance of the parties to the
proceedings?
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, all the parties to the proceedings are present and
the civil parties who are to provide their testimonies, Chhin
Navy and Chum Sirath and Chum Neou, are all present, waiting to
be called by the Chamber.  I have already verified their
identification.
Regarding Madame (sic) Ou Savrith, she is ready to provide her
testimony by videoconferencing from France this afternoon.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of counsel, Alain Werner.  You may proceed.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you.  Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your
Honours.
I saw an e-mail half an hour ago informing me that my client, Mr.
Jeffrey James E2/86, will not be able to travel as planned.  He's
telling me that his mother fell sick and he feels that he's not
able to travel, and for different reasons that if you wish I can
elaborate upon, I do not think that video-link is an option.
So I'm very sorry about that because I really do believe that his
testimony would -- or his hearing front of your Chamber would
have brought something new and unique, but that's what he's
telling me.  Of course, we respect that.
So we do withdraw Mr. Jeffrey James from the list -- E2/86.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Studzinsky, you may proceed.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you.  Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your
Honours.
First, I would like to make the following request concerning the
order of the appearance of the civil parties of today.
I would like to request to start with Mr. Chum Sirath, and Mrs.
Chhin Navy is present at the Court but she does not feel well.
She's not in the courtroom.  She is downstairs in the civil party
room and does not feel well at the moment to be able to testify
in the morning.  She believes that she could probably, and
hopefully, be able to testify after having lunch and after having
the meal at lunch.
Now, she is lying and taking a rest and, therefore, I would like
to request the Chamber to change the order, as I said, and to
start with Mr. Chum Sirath in the morning session and to look
then later on how Ms. Chhin Navy's health state is.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for the information regarding the unavailability of the
civil party E2/86 and the request for the rearrangement of the
hearing of the civil parties.  So the Chamber will take the
suggestion into account.  Regarding the request by Studzinsky,
the Chamber agrees with the request.
Court officer, can you invite the civil party, Chum Sirath, to
sit before the Chamber?
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Mr. Civil Party, is your name Chum Sirath?
A. Yes, that is correct, Mr. President.
Q. Mr. Chum Sirath, please note the red light on the microphone.
You should only respond when the light is on so that your voice
goes through the system for the proper record of the transcript.
How old are you this year?
A. I am 68 years old.
Q. Where is your native place of birth?
A. I was born in Lvea subdistrict, Prey Chhor district, Kampong
Cham province.
Q. Where is your current address and what is your occupation?
A. Currently, I live at Chroy Changvar.  I am a company director
of an IT in Cambodia from 2003.
Q. What is your father's name?  Is he alive?
A. His name is Chum Doem.  He is deceased.
Q. What is your mother's name and is she still alive?
A. Her name is Kim Tat.  She is deceased.
Q. Mr. Chum Sirath, how many siblings do you have?
A. I have eight siblings; four brothers and four sisters.
Q. Can you tell the Chamber the names of your siblings in order;
that is from the eldest to the youngest?
A. Chum Sarun; Chum Sarent, elder sister; then Chum Simali, elder
sister; Chum Simalay, another elder sister.  Then myself, Chum
Sirath.  Next Chum Narith; Chum Sinavi, my younger sister.  And
next the youngest, Chum Sinaret.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to provide the opportunity to counsel
Studzinsky, representing this civil party, to make a brief
statement regarding the identity of this civil party, and the
reasons to become a civil party, and their intentions for the
reparations regarding the facts and crimes alleged on the accused
for the establishment and operation of S-21 Office, starting from
the 17 April 75 to the 6th of January 1979, and all the relevant
evidence relating to the reparation or damage.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.  I will be brief.
The identify of Mr. Chum Sirath is proved by his ID card; it is
already on the case file.  The relation to the case is as
follows.
He lost two of his brothers, that is Chum Narith and Chum
Sinaret, in Tuol Sleng and, as well, his sister in-law, Kem
Sovannary, and probably the unborn baby.
The supporting documents are as follows.  There is one photo
existing from Chum Sinaret on the case file with the prisoner
number 59.  It is ERN number 00194512.
Furthermore, Chum Narith was as well in Tuol Sleng and entered
Tuol Sleng on 29th of October '76 and was killed and executed on
1st of January 1977, according to the evidence that my client
received in Tuol Sleng during a visit there.
Concerning reparations, my client leaves this question for his
lawyers and I would like to inform you that we will proceed as
follows.  First, Mr. Chum Sirath will give his statement.  Then I
will put a few questions to him.  And that, is for the moment,
all.  And he would like to get then the floor to do this and to
proceed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Chum Sirath, the Chamber now would like to give you the
opportunity to make your statement describing the events in
connection to the crimes alleged on the accused, Kaing Guek Eav,
alias Duch, which are related to the sufferings inflicted upon
you.
This is in relation to the establishment and the operation of
S-21 office from the 17th April '75 to the 6th of January '79 and
all the relevant evidence and even in relation to your
application for civil parties and the reparations that you seek
for the damage, both physically and emotionally.
You may proceed.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
Mr. President, before I begin talking about my siblings who were
the victims at Tuol Sleng, I would seek the President's leave to
talk about my work that I have done in Cambodia in summary in
order to shed some light on my following statement.
I started working in Cambodia in 1970 to 1974 as the General
Director of the Post and Communications Ministry and from '74 to
'75 I was appointed as a representative for the expertise
organization of the UN in Geneva.
When Phnom Penh fell under the Khmer Rouge on the 17th April
1975, I was abroad.  Later on, I migrated to settle in France and
I took a French citizenship.  So at the moment I have dual
citizenship, Khmer and French, and I had been living in France
since 1975 in a company producing IT equipment.
Also during the period I had lived in China for six years as the
general director of a company and later on I came to live in
Cambodia in 1999 as the director of this company in charge of the
Southeast Asia branch.  And that was in 2003.
In that 2003 I quit that French company and I established my own
IT company and I was the director of that company.  As I informed
the President, my parents had eight children and we were very
poor.  We did not have sufficient money but the only intention
and hope of my parents was for us to be educated.  It's like
climbing a stair to the upper level in society.
As my counsel had just said, all the facts related to case file
001, I had two younger brothers, Chum Sinaret, he was 28 years
old in 1976, and Chum Narith, 33 years old in 1976.  And Kem
Sovannary alias Dan, the wife of Chum Narith, whom I never met,
and an infant -- they were all detained at S-21.
With the President's leave I would talk about each one of them.
Now I would like to talk about Chum Narith.  My family was very
poor.  I received a scholarship to study in France in 1960 and I
only returned to Cambodia in 1968.  At that time, when we went to
study abroad there was no opportunity for us to visit home until
at the end of the study.  And during that eight year period that
I was abroad, Chum Narith was the breadwinner of the family.
Chum Narith was a leading student, studying at Yuk Kunthor
college and the Lycee Descartes only selected the leading
students for their class and then later on they would be offered
scholarship.  And Chum Narith received a scholarship to study at
that Lycee Descartes and would have the opportunity to study
further in France.
But I was in France at that time, and due to the poor living
conditions of my family, Chum Narith gave up his scholarship to
France and when he finished his school, he entered the National
Pedagogical Institution and later on he became a primary teacher
in 1965.  It was the same year as the accused left his teacher
training institution.
Chum Narith was one of the few people who left schooling and got
a job in order to support my parents and siblings.  That is
including Chum Sinavi to finish the high school and also became a
primary teacher later on.  He also supported my youngest sibling,
Chum Sinaret to finish high school and to enter the medical
faculty.
In 1968, that's when she entered the medical faculty, I was still
in France at that time and in fact, my father passed away in 1964
and, as I told you, during the study, the eight-year study, I was
not able to come to attend the funeral of my father.
So upon my return in '68, I was so happy to reunite with my
siblings and mother, and three months later the political police
-- or the special police which was known at the time or sometime
it's referred to as the political police -- under the leadership
of two state secretaries, Sosthene Fernandez for the National
Police Force and Um Manarin for the Internal Security Affairs,
and the special police were under their supervision.
And Narit was arrested on the allegation that he was a Khmer
Rouge; that was in 1968.  At that time, he was a teacher at the
Balang School in Kampong Thom.
And the other day, I listened to the testimony of Mam Nai and he
said he used to be a teacher too at the Balang School.  So my
brother was arrested at the Balang School and brought to the PS
Prison.
My mother had a chronic disease.  She got half the disease.  She
was shocked and traumatized, and I was requested by her to help
my brother to get out of the prison.
At that time when people were arrested, tortures were not
avoided, and there were some rumours that some people were even
dropped at the valleys -- the mountains area to die, and I had to
ask for assistance from my friends.  And at that time, Mr. Vann
Molyvann, the Minister of Education -- so I would ask him to help
me to assist my brother.
And I was just returning from France.  I believed that I could be
convinced to grant such a visit to Mr. Molyvann but he did not
allow me to meet him and he had several pretexts for not allowing
me to do so.
After all, I found a person named Sam An  who was the policeman
who interrogated the people who were detained at the PS and that
person used to study at the primary school in Kampong Cham, and
since Sam An helped administer the interrogation session, my
brother did not receive any punishment or tortures.
Later on, he was reintegrated into the school and transferred
from Balang to Chum Chao, an area which is close to our current
Court location.
In 1968, I was terrified.  Professor Phung Ton was also arrested
at that time.  Professor Keng Van Sak, Chao Sao, the head of the
bank, were also arrested at that time.
Preab In, who was regarded at the right-ist individual, was
arrested and killed in the public, and his execution was
photographed and also could be seen in the movie.  So everyone
who also watched the movie could never forget the memory of
seeing such footages.
And, at that time, people were classified into groups of Blue
Khmer, Red Khmer and, later on, after the DK regime started, and
they classified people into categories of the KGB, the CIA or the
Vietnamese sympathizers, or otherwise they would be regarded as
the older people, the new people, and these kinds of routines or
norms were well embedded long ago back then.
And when Narith was arrested, he was like a normal intellectual
like other intellectuals who were left-ist because they were
progressive because they were with the developing ideas.
And in France, at that time, there was an event we called the May
1968 event.  I may call it a kind of situation when people were
rather left-ist and Maoist in France.  And in Khmer, I think the
situation was the same.  So intellectuals tend to be in favour of
the left-ist.  Left-ist means they are against the war, the
Vietnamese war.
And, number two, they opposed the social injustice.  They would
like the restoration of social justice.  And as a professor,
Narith paid great attention to the future of young people, those
who were unemployed.  And he himself -- he was a very modest
person because he focused on the education and the promotion of
good education.
And there were partisans.  People were left-ists and then people
got their different parties and Narith could not avoid being part
in one of the groups.
However, at that time, there was an injustice arrest by the
police, the judicial police, at that time.  This phenomenon made
Narith, being more involved in the movement to oppose the regime,
and Sihanouk called the movement the Khmer Rouge or the Red Khmer
Movement.  And the movement, of course, had their triumph in
1975.  And as I already said earlier, after he left Sosthene
prison, Narith worked at Chum Chao.
Now, I would like to talk about my brother, Chum Sinaret.  He was
born in 1948.  When he was arrested in 1976, he was 28 years old.
Sinaret studied at grade two at the medical faculty in Phnom
Penh.  In 1970, the 18th of March event erupted when Prince
Sihanouk was toppled down and the war erupted.  My wife, in Skun,
who found out that insecurity was everywhere, so she travelled to
live with me in Phnom Penh.
Sinaret was the one who really be close to my mother.  She had
the heart disease for 20 years before she passed away, and
without Sinaret her life would be in even worse condition because
he, after school, had to be close to her to give great assistance
to her.
He was a man with a sense of humour.  He always made my mother
happy during the very critical time.  Narith and Sinaret were
like friends, although they were brothers.  They really got along
well with one another.  One was good at telling jokes, the other
was good at laughing at the jokes, so they were very good pair.
And Narith was a very good support, the one who supplied or
supported the family and my mother.
We had a very happy family in the midst of the war-torn country.
There were about 300,000 people at that time.  Later on the
population increased to more than one million in the city.  Life
became harder and -- the grenades were dropped in Phnom Penh on a
daily basis, and gasoline became scarce and electricity blackout
was everywhere and very often.  Now people complain of brownout
or blackout but back then, you know, we did not have electricity
for days.
And our family was reunited and we cared for one another and we
could move places so that we could avoid being dropped the bombs
at.  And each family member had different political views.  My
brother was in favour of the republicans -- Narith -- and Sinaret
was in favour of the FUNK movement supported by Sihanouk.  They
were in favour of the liberals.  However, we were not the pure
politicians, so we could compromise our differences and we prayed
that the war was over so that we could resume our normal works,
but our dream was faded because the war was intensified.
In February 1973, after having been sick for 20 years, my mother
could no longer make it through.  She died of suffocation and she
died in the bathroom, and Narith tried to seek medical assistance
to assist her.  However, it was not possible to save her life.
After February 1973 -- actually in 1973 there was a big event at
the Pedagogical Institute next to the Independent Monument.
There was a demonstration, riots, revolts, rebellions done by the
teachers, who claimed pay rise.  And my brothers -- at that time
the police of the republicans accused him as being the ringleader
of the demonstration or demonstrators on the 17th of March.
My mother actually died at the end of February but on the 17th of
March there was a big plane.  Pich Limkhuon was the pilot for the
military aeroplane to drop bombs at the state building where
Marshall Lon Nol was housed.  And at that time chaotic situation
was imminent and my brother was searched to be arrested, but then
he tried to escape, to actually run to the maquis jungle.  And
according to my research, he escaped to the jungle along with
Professor Nuon Khoeun.
He was a very popular professor and they went along with Hu Nim.
Hu Nim was in charge of information or propaganda at that time,
and he worked with Hu Nim in the propaganda section in the maquis
jungle, I may say, in the Liberated Zone.
From March 1973, when he already had been in the jungle --
although I'm not quite sure but I believe that he could have
contact with Chum Sinaret because at that time the communication
was done in secret, but he could have communicated with his
brother.  And by the end of 1973 my brother Chum Sarun died and I
received a letter from Narith from the maquis jungle, who offered
his condolences and grief for the death of my brother, although
he could not attend the funeral.  But according to the substance
of the letter, although it's hard to convey the message, but I
could believe that it would not be easy living in that zone.
In 1974, Mr. President -- I would like to be brief and I'm afraid
that if I talk longer then you will get bored anyway.  So in 1974
there was a tragedy with my brother Chum Sinaret, who fell in
love with a beautiful woman in Kampong Cham.  At that time when
they fell in love, of course, they only -- in French we call it
l'amour platonique.  And then when the war started, then the
communication or the roads was cut and they could not really meet
each other again.
One day a rocket was dropped at Kampong Cham province and the
woman was injured that she had to be amputated otherwise the
situation, the condition would be worsened.  And Narith (sic),
having learned that his sweetheart was injured in the bomb, he
called her but at that time we could not put the blame on the
doctors because there was not sufficient medicine, and I did not
know whether there was some kind of medicine to support the
operation when the sweetheart of him actually was being
amputated.  Unfortunately she died during operation.
And later on I was appointed as the representative of Cambodia in
Geneva, representing Cambodia -- the telecommunication of
Cambodia -- and there was three organizations at that time.
There was International Telecommunication, or in French, Union
Internationale, and also the nuclear energy organization.
When I went there, it was November 1974.  I believe that in three
months Sinaret could be reunited with me because when I had
settled down properly then my family too would be reunited along
with Sinaret.  And I asked them to be prepared to have their
passport renewed, but then on April 1975 everything changed.  My
dream, hopes faded.
It is my lifelong regretfulness.  At that time, I was not brave
or clever enough or I lacked conscience.  I lacked analysis to
analyze the situation that Cambodia would be in a war torn
phenomenon in the next few months, so why having calculated
wrongfully about the situation, I am now regretful and it was a
miscalculation or prediction.
I would like now to share with the Chamber the result of my
research.  On the 17th of April 1975, according to the research,
Narith came to Phnom Penh with the Hu Nim group and worked at the
propaganda ministry.
On the 30th of April 1975, I believe that the Chamber knows that
there was a tragedy, a great tragedy, at the location of the
French embassy in Phnom Penh, both French and Cambodians, in
particular the French.
And those Cambodians who got married to the French nationals and
with their children, they took refuge at the embassy, the French
embassy.  And the pressure from the ruling people at that time
who were Khmer Rouge -- the French consulate Dirac, Jean Dirac --
I probably don't want to say that he expelled the people there,
but he actually ordered those who were not French nationals to
leave the vicinity of the French embassy.  If not, they would be
starved to death or would not be given food.
I think it is now in the hands of the historians to really
analyze the situation and to judge the decision by Jean Dirac at
that time and why he made such a decision.  And, of course, his
decision could be rendered and passed down from the Foreign
Affairs office in France.   I did not know whether the decision
was ethical and that I believe the historians can now take this
into account and judge it.
After these people were expelled from the French embassy, they
were marching to Battambang province and it was a kind of great
tragedy.  I don't want really to recall it, however, when I were
marching to that location later on I reached the different
locations.
And when I was in France, I was told that I should not come back
to Cambodia because people who educated in France were implicated
as those people who were left-ist.  And in France, I was sent a
letter from my brother, Sinaret, telling me that he could move
about in Phnom Penh but his relatives were all evacuated and
moved to different places.
And I think perhaps at that time SiNarith and Narith could have
met one another in happy moment, maybe less happy moment.
On the 29th of October 1976, Narith was arrested along with
Sinaret and Dan, Kem Sovannary, his wife actually.  And the
reason for the arrest, as seen in the confession of Hu Nim -- Hu
Nim himself wrote that.  With Mr. President's leave, I would like
to just briefly read the portion.
Prum Sam Ar, Yit Kim Seng.  Yit Kim Seng was the brother-in-law
of Hu Yun.  They created a group opposing the collectivization
and Prum Sam Ar during the republican's regime, they did not want
to say but allowed Chum Narith to say about this.
Chum Narith was brave and he was accused that the democratic
radio was biased and that Chum Narith violated the
collectivization regime and he claimed that because of this kind
of collectivization, and that's why medicine was not sufficient
and that privatization was banned and that it was not good.
In his confession, Hu Nim said that because Chum Narith said that
then he requested Angkar to remove him.  So on the 29th of
September, he was removed.
From the 21st of July 1976, Pol Pot gave a speech in relation to
the five-year plan concerning the collectivization.  Three months
later my brother was removed as suggested by Hu Nim, and Hu Nim
himself, six months later after the plan was released and after
my brother was arrested, on the 4th of April 1977, he was
arrested.  He said he gave in, himself, to the Angkar, but
actually he was arrested after all.
Your Honours, you may ask, "How can we believe that this
confession of the person, Hu Nim, in which Mr. Pon already had
beaten him five times before he made such a confession?  Can we
really believe in such a confession if it was extracted by
torture?"
But I think it is believable because the arrest was made and it
was well known to the public in relation to arrest because there
was a meeting held at the propaganda office and that he was
challenging the policy of Pol Pot, and the police of Son Sen and
Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, must have known this very well.  So
how could Hu Nim lie in that confession?
So my conviction is that the confession is true.  And it is
consistent also to the nature of Narith.  Narith was outspoken
like I am because when he wanted to say anything he would say so.
Mr. President, Your Honours, in relation to Chum Narith, in 1993
after searching for the truth I came to Cambodia after 19 years
abroad.
I have tried to search for all the evidence but everything was
not clear.  In October '93 I went to Tuol Sleng Prison and on the
list of names under order number 39 the name Chum Narith alias
Nak in the propaganda entered on 29 October '76 and died on the
1st of January '77.  That is after he had lived in the prisons
for 65 days and that he was tortured, dehumanized.
I don't understand the purpose of such act.  If the policy is to
kill, then just kill.  Why there is a need to beat them up?  If
one says beating up is to find the true confession as said by the
accused and even the accused himself acknowledged the information
or the confession from the forced torture and interrogation is
not true, then what is the purpose of beating them up?  Why don't
just kill them straight away?
On that same list I saw the name of my brother Chum Sinaret and
-- as a medic and there was no date for the entry and for the
exit and I did not know when he died.  There was also a name of
Kem Sovannary alias Dan, the wife of Chum Narith and preceding
that name the word "ah" was used.  It's like "contemptible" in
English -- from the propaganda section.
And even about the infant; I saw the paintings done by Mr. Vann
Nath, Mr. President, as we all have seen the painting which
depicts the dragging of an infant from the mother by the Khmer
Rouge clique, by the prison guard.  And on the other side the
mother was being whipped by another person.
And I think that would similarly depict the fate of my nephew,
or the baby could be dropped from the upper floor or smashed
against a tree stump at Choeung Ek.
Mr. President, I am proud to be a Cambodian person and this
Tribunal has given opportunity to the accused to express his
feelings and the civil parties also to make their statements like
Martine Lefeuvre, like Ouk Neary, Tiouloung, Sophea and Phung
Sunthary Guth.  They have all described the long path for them to
search for the truth and the fate of their beloved individuals.
And each story is different.  However, all only had the same
point; that is the despair, the despair and the feeling of not
understanding of what happened and the sorrow and the pain which
happened with us for more than 30 years.
I have struggled constantly every day and night not to forget the
suffering, the misery of my siblings because this is my
obligation for the dead ones.  However, at the same time I have
tried to forget, to forget that because I also have the
obligation for the survivors who are living with me.  The
feelings that I have on both sides have been continuing for 34
years.  I could not separate these two feelings, or which side
should I choose and forget the other one?
Before this Chamber I strongly believe justice is being made and
done.  Up to today I even have written a letter to Kaing Guek Eav
requesting information regarding my brother but he said he did
not know about that.
And Mr. President, this Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, started with
my younger brother at the teacher training institution and
yesterday he acknowledged during the rebellion he was at Sisowat
School with Chum Narith.
And also this Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch met Chum Narith at the
Liberation Zone in the maquis forest.  And for Chum Sinaret at
Skun he was a professor there at Skun and Chum Sinaret was not
his teacher as my parents lived in Skun.
And because of his love for pure intellectuals who held esteemed
the idealism and he made frequent visits to his home and he knew
my brother clearly but on the day he entered S-21 he said he did
not know anything as he was busy working with his documents.  He
had no time to pay attention to him.
As Duch said yesterday if he were aware of Phung Ton that he
would give him food.  Of course I would not believe this.
And  I would like to talk about another matter.  This accused,
Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, always states that he is only a
subordinate and that he was not a major leader and that he did
only based on what he was ordered to do.
And I keep thinking, if he only followed orders, how come we all
say he is one of the most responsible?  For example, he say
chairman of a prison and the CPK only sent those people to his
prison.  And according to the policies, the people will be killed
at the prison.  Then why he's being in charge?  Because we all
believe that he is the most responsible, at least in my case,
that is regarding the deaths of -- my brother's death and his
family.  And this is the core point, the essence or the gist of
this Tribunal.
I would like to say that if the CPK policy was to kill them, then
just follow the policy and there is no need to torture them.  Or
if confessions need to be extracted, then just do so, but with
torture then as he said, the confession could not be true.  And
in David Chandler's testimony, according to the annotations made
by Duch on those confessions, and that Duch could not sleep well
during his tenure at the prison at S-21 or if he disliked what he
did and that he could not eat at the end of the day.
Now, it's not like that.  He enjoys doing what he did until when
Vorn Vet entered in '78, he still did the same.
On the third point, this accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch,
compares himself to a fox in a poem by Alfred de Vigny entitled,
The Death of the Wolf.  This poet was a 19th century famous
person and he was a former soldier.  And, of course, the life of
a soldier was mixed, both joy and sorrow.  So he wrote a lot of
poems regarding the lives of soldiers and one of them was The
Death of the Wolf.
And he talks about a group of hunters, together with like 10 or
20 dogs, to try to kill the wolf, and there were four wolves --
one male, one female and two younger wolves.  And when the wolves
realized that they were being surrounded, they struggled their
best to fight against the dogs.  And the male wolf tries his best
in order to defend the female wolf and their young wolves.  And
in the end he died.  The wolf died.
And according to the poem, the wolf died without making any
noise.  And the morality of this poem was illustrated at the end
of the poem, and Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch quoted that poem on
the 31st of March 2009, if I am not mistaken, at around 4.30 p.m.
toward the end of the proceedings on that day while he was being
questioned by his counsel, François Roux.
And this Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch recited that poem:
"To pray or to think is equally cowardly. You must carry out your
duty where fate has brought you.  And you shall suffer and die
without a word."
So what does it translate into the Khmer language?
I apologize.  I saw the President is talking to me.  In the Khmer
language, it means the person was moaning, crying, begging, and
that we have to try to work, just carry on working, according to
our fate.  And that I take the position of a wolf and that I die
without making any noise.
And, as I said, the accused recited the poem at 4.30 when he was
questioned by his counsel, François Roux, and after he finished
reciting the poem, he left two or three minutes for him to be
silent.
And during that time everything went dead.  We could even hear
the sounds of a mosquito if there was one in the Chamber at the
time.  And, later on, François Roux said that he no longer have
any questions for this accused, Mr. President.  And during the
three minute time, everything was so moody, so quiet, and
probably people would have a feeling of sorrow for this accused.
This is a clever technique as they were playing before this
Chamber.  And maybe they could join as a team to play theatre in
France.  And if the accused compared himself to the wolf in the
poem, The Death of the Wolf, it's actually -- it's just like a
pretext, or un imposteur in French.
And it is the opportunity to grab the good points as a brave
person, a stoic in French, and that he talked about people who
tried to work without thinking of the hardship, personal
suffering, as those French soldiers who were sent to fight in the
battlefield.  So I, personally, would take into account the
points that the accused wants to say regarding the sacrifice, the
selflessness -- or the stoic in French -- because what bravery
was it?
For example, regarding the teacher, Doem Saroeun, that is his
teacher, she entered S-21 and he knew.  He knew that she was
tortured and that she was dehumanized or degraded.  He did not
even raise his smallest finger to assist her.  What brave was
that?
If people used to fight in combat together or used to be
together, then people would help each other but he didn't even
raise his small finger to assist.  And compare to Him Huy.  Him
Huy helped Saom Met, if we all recall.  Sou Met had a younger
sibling, Saom Huy, who was arrested and sent to S-21 and he said
that Saom Met was another brother.  But Him Huy told that younger
brother not to say it and to keep it quiet, and Sou Met was
transferred by Him Huy to another location.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the defence counsel.  You may proceed.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you for giving me the floor, Mr. President.  I believe that
in order to preserve the serenity and dignity of this hearing,
would you please, Mr. President, remind the civil party
testifying at this time to please refocus his presentation and to
speak to us.
We understand that he is speaking to us of his suffering and the
suffering of his family but perhaps to try not to evoke the
reactions of Mr. Kaing Guek Eav or of other persons, perhaps, who
were also victims and who are not connected to his particular
case either by blood or kinship.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Studzinsky, you take the floor.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I only want to respond very briefly to
the objection or request, that is to say, of the defence because
of course this is what, so far, my client has elaborated on and
presented here -- is part of the process of coping with the
suffering and of course is part of the story that he wants to
tell this Court, and therefore I request Mr. President not to
follow the request of the defence.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber has noted that the objection raised by the defence
counsel is partly appropriate.  Therefore, the Chamber would like
to remind the civil party to control your emotion, and your
statement should only focus on the facts, as the Chamber has
informed you and given you the opportunity to do so.
The Chamber of course acknowledges your emotion, your feeling and
the suffering which you have been bearing for so many years, and
the Chamber tries not to interrupt your statement and this is the
part that the Chamber has done this morning.  The main focus of
our proceedings is to find justice.  It is not the opportunity to
make revenge or to affront anybody, including the accused.  The
proceedings here is based on the law with respect to all the
relevant principles and the Human Rights Convention.
In addition, the time allocation for your testimony is two hours
and the time has been spent greatly already.  You may now
continue to proceed with your statement by focusing on the
relevant facts and your intention to be a civil party to this
proceeding.  You can tell the Chamber the reasons, your relations
to the facts and the crimes alleged on the accused, Kaing Guek
Eav, alias Duch, during the establishment and the operation of
S-21 under the DK regime from 17 April 1975 to the 6th of January
1979, which are the main reason for you to be a civil party.  You
can talk about your seeking of reparation or damage that you have
received emotionally and physically.
What you have stated so far is not that far from this point but
the Chamber would like you to only focus on the main points of
you being here as a civil party before this Chamber.  And this is
not just for you.  This has been done and directed at all the
civil parties before the proceeding.  You may now proceed.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
Mr. President, your leadership of this Chamber by you is up to
the international standard and I understand that.  The accused is
not yet regarded as a convict if he is not found guilty by the
Chamber, but we are the victims.  We cannot accept that when the
accused within this Chamber says that the moaning, the crying or
the begging are the coward acts.  Sixteen thousand people died at
Tuol Sleng and of course they would have cried, begged, wept.
Can we say they were cowards?
So within this Chamber, when he talked about these acts, he is
just an imposter.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, you may proceed.
MS. CANIZARES:
Yes, Mr. President.  Please forgive me for again interrupting the
presentation of the civil party.
I do not think that at any time on the bench of the defence we've
noted that the accused had used the expression "coward".  Now,
I'm certain that the civil party is entitled to say what they
want and to share their suffering with us, and we are respectful
of that, but we cannot make the accused say things that he has
not said.  We cannot put words in his mouth which he did not use.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Let me now focus on the purpose of our proceedings, the civil
party.  The Chamber, as you noticed, has not tried to interrupt
you and allows you to express the suffering.  This is done for
all the civil parties.  But please try to refrain yourself and
make your statement related to the facts, and it is your right to
believe or to not believe the statement made by the accused.
The proceedings before this Chamber has been ongoing for several
months and in the end the Chamber would consider all those
information and evidence and then we would issue a judgment which
is fair and just and which is acceptable by all the parties to
the proceedings, including the civil party and the defence party.
We will consider every aspect of the proceedings and the relevant
documents.
As I have just reminded you, your time is running out, so please
focus only on the relevant facts.  Please go on.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
I will conclude now, but before my conclusion I would like to
talk about the conversion of religion by Duch from Buddhism to
Christian.
In the Christianity there was Cain, the person who was the
important actor in the religion, who killed another person, and
Cain was monitored because the dead bodies -- the eyes of the
dead people kept following the person until he could never feel
peaceful anymore so he asked somebody to dig a pit and covered it
with dirt.
The French writer wrote a French poem in French; when the grave
was closed over him the eye was in the grave and was watching
Cain.
So when he was buried in the tomb his sibling's eyes could be
seen follow him in the grave.  So the eyes could even follow the
dead body.
I would like to ask the accused now with the more than 12,000
(sic) people who perished during the regime all together they
could be multiplied by two.  Then they represent the eyes of the
people all together there are 32,000 eyes who actually -- that
the eyes that follow the accused each time of everyday to seek
his explanation.
Now, he converted the religion.  In Christianity his sin is
forgiven for such a reason but in Buddhism those who commit good
receive good.  However, I believe that the 32,000 pairs of eyes
that are now following the accused, how could the accused himself
escape.  I don't believe he has any place to hide.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We'll take the adjournment now and resume at 10 to 11.
The civil party, could you please be seated or take a break
before we can resume the session.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1033H to 1057H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to Counsel
Studzinsky, who is representing this civil party, to put
additional questions to her client if she so wishes.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President, for having the opportunity to ask
my client, Mr. Chum Savrith but before I do this I only would
like to ask the President or the Chamber to get in future events
of any objections of the defence or other parties to our clients
that we get the right to be heard, because I tried to respond and
the second time and could not respond anymore to the intervention
by the defence counsel and only to clarify that the English word
"coward has" -- in the French translation the word "lâche".  That
is the word that is used in this poem and was quoted by the
accused.
I would like to present now some photos to my client and that he
could explain the photos of his brothers and also of his
sister-in-law.
And I would like to ask Mr. President to direct the court
officials to put them here on the screen so that he can explain
and elaborate on these photos.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you arrange to have the photos shown on the
screen?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Mr. President, I would like to give my client the floor and to
comment on these photos to be shown and to explain these photos
and where they are from and when they are taken and without
interruption to elaborate on all these photos that should be
presented.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Chum Sirath, you can now proceed with a photo description.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
This is a photo of my youngest brother Chum Sinaret a medical
student in his second year.   This photo was taken by a friend of
mine and given it to me.  This is the photo of Chum Sinaret who
at the time did not yet fall into the hands of the torturers
clique of Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch.
This is the photo of Sinaret and Narith.  On the right-hand side
is Sinaret and on the left is Chum Narith.  The photo was taken
during the cremation ceremony of my mother.  That was 17 days
before Narith went to the maquis forest as I described earlier.
These two were very close to one another.
This is Kem Sovannary, alias Dan.  I had never met her.  She was
my younger sister-in-law.
With the President's leave, I would like to appeal to anyone who
can recognize Kem Sovannary, alias Dan, the wife of Chum Narith,
who entered Tuol Sleng Prison with Chum Narith with a young
infant; please contact me.  I can be contacted via the Victims
Unit of this Tribunal.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Can you zoom out to show the content of that document?  Stop at
that place and can you move a bit further up?  Move to the end of
the document.  You can now take the document off.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. STUDZINSKY:
Q. I would like to ask my client, Mr. Chum Sirath, now one
question and that is the following:  I would like to know and
that you explain here in this courtroom what do you think and how
do you cope with the excuses of the accused and what it means for
you?
A. In the beginning when I heard the apology made by the accused,
I was happy.  I thought at least amongst the leaders of the
Democratic Kampuchea one was brave to acknowledge.  I want to
believe it, to believe the apology by the accused but the longer
I have participated in the proceedings the feeling of trying to
believe dissipated.  I believe it is not genuine.  And why do I
say that?
On the 31st of March 2009 the accused made a famous statement and
I quote what he said from the transcript as follows:
"At present I am remorseful and I feel shameful as a person who
bears the responsibility and the guilt for the Cambodian people
as a whole."
And then he continues.  I quote:
"In order to comfort myself I prayed for forgiveness.  First I
seek forgiveness from my parents, then my mentor and I pray for
forgiveness from the Cambodian people on the 17 November
annually.  That was my date of birth and I would make a small
ceremony to pray."
In the statement made by the accused he prayed but he did not
pray for the souls of those who died to rest in peace.  He prayed
in order to make himself feel better, "And I tried to find a way
to comfort myself.  That is, I pray on my birthday, 17 November."
And on the 9th of July 2009, under the questioning by Mr. Kim
Mengkhy, the civil party counsel for Chin Met, he asked the
accused whether the accused is responsible emotionally for the
suffering inflicted upon Chin Met.  And I will quote his speech
from the transcript:
"Mr. Counsel, regarding the case of Comrade Met, I am not
responsible emotionally but I am fully responsible before the
law.  And this is my response."
And regarding my brothers, the accused knew them very well.  He
wrote me a letter in response and I was so glad to receive it but
he said he did not see them, and if he even did see them he would
not be able to assist them because they were ordered by Angkar.
He said he didn't know anything about this.
So that's why I said his expression is not genuine and if Mr.
President and Your Honours think that my speech, my statement
here, is biased towards the accused, I would like the Chamber to
please look at the report of a psychological doctor dated the 8th
of April 2008.  This psychological doctor named Sironi-Guilbaud,
Françoise.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
It seems to me to be important to interrupt the civil party
because this is an expert we will be hearing later on.  Therefore
it seems to me impossible at this stage of the debate, having not
heard the expert -- it seems to me not possible to quote what the
expert has written in his report.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
Thank you.  There is no need then for me to talk about my third
point.  However, the next three points will show that his apology
is not genuine.  Therefore, on behalf of my late brothers, Chum
Sinaret, Chum Narith, Kem Sovannary, alias Dan, and my nephew, I
would like to declare before this Chamber that I will not be able
to accept this ungenuine apology.
I am here before this Chamber to ask for justice, and this
justice cannot be separated from the truth.  I haven't received
justice for over 34 years now.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I have no further questions to Mr. Chum Sirath but I would like
to thank you very much for coming and appearing here before the
Chamber and contributing here and undertaking all these efforts
to preserve the memory and to respond to the behaviour or the
defence of the accused and to contribute here to these
proceedings.
Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the opportunity to the
Co-Prosecutors to put questions to this civil party if they so
wish.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Sir, thank you for your courageous statement.  It seemed in
your statement that you were insisting a great deal on the
elements of information that you were able to obtain thanks to
your research concerning your brother Narith and his wife.
However, with regard to your brother Sinaret, I was wondering
whether you could supply us with information regarding whatever
details you may have received concerning his arrest:  when, why,
who arrested him?  Was that arrest linked to the arrest of your
other brother, Narith?
So what did you learn through your research in regard to this?
Of course this is only if you were able to obtain this
information, which is notoriously difficult to obtain.
A. Regarding my younger brother, Chum Sinaret, although I have
tried my best to do his research.  I could not find any more
information except the photo that was given to me by my friend
who took it from S-21.  I went to S-21 in October '93.  I saw his
name on the list with no dates for the entry and the exit.  And
it's the same for Kem Sovannary.
And I had hope and I also supposed that the day Phnom Penh fell
on the 17th April 1975 Sinaret was in Phnom Penh because I
received a letter from him when the French left Phnom Penh.  And
when they left it was toward the end of April and my brother was
still in Phnom Penh.  And Cambodian people were evacuated from
Phnom Penh on the 17th April.
And from what I received from Pich Limkhuon who was a pilot who
dropped bombs at the residence of Lon Nol in '73, he then fled to
the liberated zone in Kratie province.  And after the liberation
of 17th April '75, he returned and he was a helicopter pilot for
the DK government.
Later on he stole that helicopter and flew away to Ou Tapao in
Thailand and then he sought refuge there.  And I met him in 1978
in Oslo.  There was an organization for to hold a meeting for
those people who fled from Cambodia.  It was held in April 1978.
At that time there were about 20 refugees and some experts, Jean
Lacouture, a famous journalist; Francois Pouchard, an author of
the book Cambodia Year Zero; Robert Hartmann and myself.
I was an interpreter at the time.  I was not an expert.  And Pich
Limkhuon was there by invitation and he knew my brother as he was
with Hu Nim and Pich Limkhuon also went to the forest with Hu
Nim.
That's why I learned of my brother's whereabouts in April in 1975
in Phnom Penh.  And through my research he was detained in S-21
on the 29th October '76.  And I believe that the two of them
would meet before their demise at S-21.
Q. Can we say that the motive for the arrest of your younger
brother, remaining defined or undetermined, is a supplementary
cause for suffering for you today since you do not know why he
was arrested or why he was executed subsequently?
A. It is beyond my imagination.  Sinaret was a youth, a student.
He did not involve in politics.  And I am sure he was arrested
because he was the younger brother of Narith and like Kem
Sovannary alias Dan she was arrested because she was the wife of
my brother.
I personally had a regret because I had a plan to migrate them to
Geneva but because of my misjudgement I thought it was okay.  The
situation at the time was okay.  We would serve any government.
We would try to build our country.  We are all Cambodians.
Everybody had the same idea and that's the reason several and a
lot of intellectuals, professors, engineers died due to this
notion of same Cambodian.
And this is my response, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I have no further questions.  Thank you Mr. Chum Sirath.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the defence
counsel if they have any questions to be put to this civil party.
MS. CANIZARES:
Mr. President, the defence have no questions for the civil party.
We wish only to formulate an observation.
As was the case for Mr. Phung Ton at the request of Mrs. Phung
Sunthary, Mr. Kaing Guek Eav has made written comments in reply
to the questions of Mr. Chum Sirath concerning the members of his
family who died in S-21.
This document which has already been filed and has the reference
E3/19 and ERN code Khmer 0024301002413; French reference
002431400204322; and English 0020874600208758.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, do you have any comments you wish to make
regarding the defence counsel's observation?
MR CHUM SIRATH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
The defence counsel said Kaing Guek Eav gave me a letter in
response to my questions and yes, I received the letter and I
already informed the Chamber.  In that letter he said he knew my
two brothers.  What I really wanted to know from him was that how
my brothers died and where.
I know Narith died at Tuol Sleng because he died on the 1st of
January '77.  At that time I believe Choeung Ek was not yet in
existence.  And what I want to know about my other two brothers
and in-law, how long had they stayed in S-21, like in the case of
Phung Ton?  Was it seven months?  Was it ten months?  That's what
I want to know.
I knew that he already knew my brothers but whoever he -- and if
he wanted to apologize, that is his right.  And of course, as I
said, it's not genuine.  I wanted to know the circumstances of
the death of my brothers.  And I don't want him or the counsel to
raise this useless document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
He also gave his written response to the daughter of Mr. Phung
Ton yesterday and the accused said he will try to do further
research to fulfil the response of the daughter of Phung Ton, and
that he already received the letter regarding Phung Ton's
daughter's request.
In your case the Chamber will provide you a separate opportunity,
and here the defence counsel does not talk about your case.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
My apology, Mr. President.  If this is the case involved Phung
Ton's daughter and mother -- and wife I don't understand.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel said she did not have any questions to be put
to you but she wished to make an observation, like in the case
this morning some counsels provided the Chamber with some
information and this is the procedure we practice in this
Chamber.
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the accused to
make his observation in response to the statement by Mr. Chum
Sirath.
The Chamber would like to inform the accused again that this is
your right to respond to the statement by the civil party or you
can elect not to do so by way of exercising your right to remain
silent.
The floor is yours.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I would like to reiterate that first, the old
friends who were arrested and detained at S-21 were numerous.
There was another friend who was senior, the historical professor
at Skun Lycée, who was arrested and sent there at the very
beginning.  I did not know he was being sent to the location.  I
only learned of it later.
So regarding the friends I once worked with, I loved and liked, I
had to really get away from them.  I did not want to face the
challenge.  And that's why I said I betrayed friends and
colleagues.  So, Chum Sinaret and Chum Narith were among the
friends that I had to pretend not to see them because I did not
dare face them.  I just wanted to escape from seeing them because
everyone who was arrested was regarded as enemy.
And when you said about the eyes of the more than 32,000 dead
body, I really realized this matter.  Because of this matter
recently I made it clear that I accept everything said by the
civil party and I'm ready to be pointed the fingers at me by
civil party.  They can punish me to the certain extent -- degree
of punishment they would wish to do so, and I'm happy to do that.
I will receive this kind of criticism and kind of punishment with
a smile.
I don't deny it because I am very sincere now and I'm honest to
reveal the truth that I am sympathetic and really remorseful for
the lost souls.  And I don't want to recall this matter because I
have made it in several occasions already, genuinely I do not
really have any sense of vengeance to contest what you made
before the Court and I honestly receive, accept all the
statements you made.
However, I would like to make some observation in relation to the
historical facts.  You said that Pich Limkhuon went to the rural
area with your brother.
MR CHUM SIRATH:
Mr. President, I did not say that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, could you please stop here so that we don't want to
hear more.  I think your observations should come to an end now.
Now the hearing of the statement of civil party Chum Sirath has
come to an end.
Mr. Chum Sirath, you can now choose to be seated at the reserved
seat for the civil parties and the Chamber is going to hear
another civil party.
(Witness exits courtroom)
The Court official is instructed to call civil party Chum Neou.
MS. CANIZARES:
Mr. President, I take the liberty of speaking now because the
accused had other observations to make apart from the one that he
made, and I would like him to be given the floor again so that he
can go through his observations.  It seems to be important at
this stage of the proceedings that we be made aware of what the
accused has to say.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber has noted that there was a reaction from the civil
party in response to the observation of the accused, and that
observation itself was straying from the facts at S-21 between
the period -- during the period in which the S-21 was
established, being from the 17th of April 1975 to the 6th of
January 1979.
So the Chamber will reserve its right to actually refuse any
civil parties or the accused for making any observation in
relation to the facts which are out of the timeframe as said.
So if the accused would like to respond to the request made by
the civil party in relation to the search for the truth of the
information of their loved one who was lost at S-21 then the
Chamber would allow to do so, but the Chamber does not allow the
accused to make any observation which is far beyond the facts at
issue.
So does the accused wish to make further observations then?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, the reason I made it in my observation is that it
was just the beginning, because at that time the intellectuals
who ran away after the demonstration against Lon Nol, they were
included Mam Nai in 1973 and then Chum Narith, Nuon Khoeun
(phonetic), Prum Sam Ar, Kong Sokhun and, six, Tuon Sokphala.  So
I remember their names because I had followed their account
closely.
However, when I researched further I found the following names.
I found Nuon Khoeun and Tuon Sokphala but I did not see the name
of Sokphala (sic).  I knew that Sokhun was known to me because
Son Sen told me that he committed suicide at the Ministry of
Education, supervised by Sister Yon Yat.
I did not see Chum Narith in the list but there was a record
about Kem Sovannary, so I believe that when Kem Sovannary was
there, so Chum Narith could have been there too.  Chum Sirath was
recorded as the medic from the co-operative, so I think these
people were arrested on different accounts, while Chum Narith was
arrested based on the previous implications in other people's
confessions.
I have no idea what would happen to the arrest of Chum Sirath,
who might have been arrested by the implications of other people
from different locations.  And I would like to make it clear that
the people who left to the rural area, the sick people, were
together with me.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please respond to his question in relation to the date,
exact date, when his brothers-in-law were arrested and executed?
So this is his sole purpose, to know the truth of the date, and
if you can also shed light on the location where their loved one
were executed then it would be grateful to them because they
believe that if they can locate where the dead body of their
loved one could have been buried, then they can really conduct
some kind of religious ceremonies to dedicate or offer some kind
of best wishes to them.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I don't have any record of the date when Kem
Sovannary and her husband were sent in.  They were there but I
believe that the research by Chum Sirath was plausible in
relation to the date when these people were executed.  However,
although I was the Chairman of S-21, I don't think I can have a
good grasp of the accounts of the deaths of these two or three
people.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Chum Neou, the civil party?
A. I am Chum Neou.
Q. How old are you?
A. I am 60 years old.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I had two hometowns or birthplaces; one at Preaek Ruessei,
Prey Veng, and another birthplace of my father was in Prey Veng
province.  I would like to make it clear that it in my
identification card I registered my father's hometown as my
hometown, while in other records I registered the mother's
hometown instead.
Q. Where do you live now?
A. I live in Kampong Leav, Prey Veng.
Q. What is your occupation?
A. I am at home planting vegetables.
Q. From 1975, the 17 April, to the 6th of January 1979, where had
you been and what did you do?
A. During this period -- I may have to make it more detailed.
After the 17th of April 1975 I lived in a military unit in the
east.  After Phnom Penh fell the Angkar ordered me to come to
Phnom Penh to work at the General Staff Logistic Section, and on
the 12th of August 1977 I was arrested and sent to S-21.
Q. What is your father's name?
A. His name is Meak Chum.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. Her name is Kvek Sok.
Q. Can you please tell the Court about your marital status?
A. I am a widow.  After 1979 I remarried but we divorced and he
died and leaving five children behind under my supervision.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the civil party
lawyer group
to brief the Court in relation to the identity of 
           4   civil party Chum Neou and the grounds for civil party
applications, and the relationship of the claims to the facts at
S-21 during the Democratic Kampuchea regime from the 17th of
April 1975 to the 6th of January 1979, and the other evidence to
support the claims or applications.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Mr. President, I only would like to make one remark concerning
the translation in English.  I have heard that there was a
translation when Madam Chum Neou spoke that it was she was sent
to S-21.  It was obviously S-24 in Khmer.  Could it be clarified?
And maybe in the French translation I think it is the same than
S-21 in the translation, I assume.  Or maybe to clarify with the
civil party again this point.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Actually, in Khmer we heard S-21.  I don't know whether -- what
English would say.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Chum Neou, to which direction or which prison was you
arrested and detained -- at S-21 or S-24?
A. When I said S-21 it was based on the document.  Actually, I
was not sent to Tuol Sleng but the location was the branch of
S-21.  First I was arrested and sent to Preak Tnao office or Ta
Khmau prison.  It was the former psychiatric hospital.  I was
detained there for a short while before I was sent to Stueng
Chrov.  We walked there.
At Stueng Chrov I was pregnant and I was forced to get married in
1976.  After I gave birth to my child I was then sent to S-24, or
Prey Sar.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please stop here because we're only now verifying your
identity?  You will be able to give a comprehensive account of
your story actually later and we're now in the midst of hearing
the brief information from your lawyer in relation to your civil
party claims.
So the civil party lawyer, you still may proceed with the further
observation.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President and Your Honours.
I am Hong Kimsuon.  I am the civil party lawyer in group 2 and 4.
My client, Madam Chum Neou was a victim.  She is a victim and the
civil party.  She has obtained the identification card which is
already included in the case file.  The Co-Investigating Judges
have already approved her civil party application form in 2008 in
November.
There are documents to support her claims that she was the victim
at S-21 -- that covered S-24, as she already said briefly
previously.  This document can be found under ERN D25/16/2 in
Khmer, ERN 00211380; and document D25/16/2, which are the
supporting documents to prove that she was detained at S-24,
which was the branch of S-21.
I would like to also tell the Court that Chum Neou was not the
only victim at that time.  During that time her husband Nour
Moeun was also detained.  He was tortured at S-21, now known as
Tuol Sleng museum.  Later on he was executed.
And another person accompanied her was her child, the child she
gave birth before she was taken to S-21, and the baby died
because of starvation.  So she is here not alone but on behalf of
herself and her child and her husband.
The documents that have already been filed in the case file
related to her husband Nour Moeun, alias Sem, can be found in the
list of the prisoners of S-21 or Tuol Sleng Prison -- in that
list, the list of the prisoners from 1975 to 1978.  He can be
found in document under ERN 0071629 on another prisoner list --
with number 61, actually, under ERN 00181657 and another list of
prisoners under ERN 00331375 and another document of S-21 under
ERN 00331803; another list of S-21, the list of prisoners under
ERN 00331076.
So these are the documents supporting the information that her
husband was detained and executed at S-21.  And the document
already filed in relation to the ID card is under ERN 00211379.
I have already told the Court about the biography at S-21 but it
was not produced at S-21 but made at S-24.  It can be found under
ERN 00211380.
Chum Neou has joined as a civil party to seek justice for her and
her husband and kid because the most responsible people of the
Democratic Kampuchea had inflicted tortures and sufferings on her
and she is here to also claim for the civil reparation if the
accused after all is found guilty as charged.  So she is going to
seek collective and moral reparations at the end.
I would like to also tell the Court that Madam Chum Neou was the
victim of the DK, the victim as the result of the purges or the
smashes, as always said by the accused that he referred to the
internal purges of the enemies inside the DK.
My client joined the revolution before 1975 and after 1975 until
the day she was arrested and detained and tortured.  And after
1979, after the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia, she had suffered
more when she had to go with the accused to Pursat and
Battambang.
I would like to now stop here and I would like the President to
allow her to please continue with her statement.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since it is now time to take the adjournment we will take the
adjournment for lunch and we will resume at 1.30 p.m.  The civil
party can then proceed with her statement after lunch.  You can
now please take a rest and come back to the courtroom by 1.30 to
proceed with your deposition.
The security personnel are now asked or instructed to take the
accused to the waiting room and return him to the courtroom by
1.30 p.m.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1200H to 1336H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Chamber is now back in session.  We will hear the statement
of a civil party as per our schedule this morning.  We will
continue to hear the statement of Chum Neou; however, due to the
change and the latest information we received from the AV Unit,
the scheduled hearing of the civil party Ou Savrith, which is in
the form of videoconferencing from France, is able to go ahead.
Therefore, the hearing of the statement of Chum Neou will be
delayed.  It will be held after we hear the videoconferencing
statement of civil party Ou Savrith, which is scheduled at 1.30
this afternoon.
We will now then proceed to hear the statement of civil party Ou
Savrith through videoconferencing from France.
And the AV Unit, please make sure that the system is functioning
and is in order.
This civil party is a client of the civil party group 4.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon, Mr. Ou Savrith.
MR OU SAVRITH (speaking in Khmer):
Good afternoon, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Ou Savrith?
A. (speaking in Khmer) Yes.
Q. How old are you this year?
A.  (speaking in Khmer) Fifty three years old.  I will be 54 in
October of this year.
Q. What is your nationality?
A. (speaking in Khmer) (No interpretation)
Q. Mr. Ou Savrith, what is your nationality?
A. Mr. President, I am a French national.
Q. Where is your place of birth?
A. I was born in the province of Kampong Cham.
Q. Where is your current residence and what is your occupation?
A. I live at number 50 rue Vincent van Gogh, 78300 zip code, at
Plaisir in France.  My profession is I am director of a
department in a real estate network.
Q. Between April 1975 to the 7th January '79, where did you live?
A, I was in France.
Q. What is the name of your father and is he still alive?
A. My father's name was Ou Kimsan and he passed away in 1972.
Q. What is your mother's name?  Is she still alive?
A. My mother's name is Nay Sidonie and she died in Cambodia.  I
do not know where and I do not know what year she passed away.
Q. Mr. Ou Savrith, how many siblings do you have?
A. I have two brothers and two sisters.  My two brothers died in
Cambodia -- my elder brother.  The second is a sister whose name
was Ou Chumonie and she lives in France.  A third brother Ou Rene
died in Cambodia between 1975 and 1979.  One sister whose name
was Ou Macbeth lives in France.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the civil party
group 4 counsel to make a brief statement on the identification
of the civil party Ou Savrith, the reasons for him to be a civil
party and his relation and the request for reparations in
connection to the crimes alleged on the accused Kaing Guek Eav,
alias Duch, for the facts of the establishment and operation of
S-21 during the period between 17th April '75 to the 6th of
January '79, as well as other relevant evidence to support the
request for reparation by the civil party Ou Savrith.
You take the floor.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good afternoon, Your Honours.  Good
afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
My client's name is Ou Savrith, who is now on a videoconferencing
from France, and the lady who is sitting beside him is Jessica
and the President already accepts her participation through this
videoconferencing.  He is the brother of Ou Vindy and I would
like to submit this document.  One is the photo of the victim
Vindy, who died at S-21, or Tuol Sleng prison.
And with the President's leave I would like to have the document
projected on the slide.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber grants you the opportunity.
And Court officer, can you arrange to have the photo and
documents projected on the slide?
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
I would like to take this opportunity to inform Mr. President and
Your Honours that this four-page document, which I now submit to
the President and all the parties to the proceedings, do not have
any ERN number yet because we have just found this document.  And
I would like to have this document as part of the case file, with
the President's leave.
So the first page is the photo of Mr. Ou Vindy and the second
page is my client, who is now on videoconferencing from France,
and his name is Ou Savrith and this is his ID card in French and
the same name appears, Ou Savrith, born on the 1st of October
1955, as seen on the slide.
And the third page of the document is a birth certificate in
French language of Mr. Ou Savrith.  This document is in French.
The father is Ou Kimsan and the mother is Nai Sidony and this
document has been certified in French with a seal.
Let's now move to  of the document.  This document is also
in French and I believe this is a description of the three pages
preceding this page, and I would like to have this four-page
document as part of the case file, with the President's
permission.
I also would like to make a brief statement regarding my client's
status.  My client made a complaint --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Can you pause now?
And the defence counsel, what is your stance on the request to
have this document as part of the case file?
MS. CANIZARES:
Mr. President, since we have just seen a picture of Mr. Ou Vindy,
I would like my colleague to indicate to us the provenance of
that picture.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The counsel, can you provide us further information to clarify
the photo and the documents that you have shown on the screen
just then?  This is also in response to the observation made by
the defence counsel regarding the documents that you have just
shown and that you'd like to have it as part of the case file.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.
In fact, this photo is not the one that I have researched by
myself.  Ou Savrith, my client, attached that.  This is his
brother and he gave this document to me.  And if you want to talk
about the authenticity or the source of this document, I would
seek leave and to get that opportunity for my client, Ou Savrith,
to shed light on this photo.
And if it needs to be checked whether this photo was related to
the victims at S-21, then it means everyone who are the victims
or who are the survivors or who are the relatives of those who
died at S-21, have to prove all -- all those dead relatives.  Or
it means that the DNA test has to be carried out.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, you have just heard the response from the
civil party counsel regarding the four-page document and that he
requests to have this document put before this Chamber.
MS. CANIZARES:
The defence has no objection, Mr. President, to the production of
these documents.  My question was related to the fact that we
have just received communication of these documents and the
defence wanted to have additional details, particularly
concerning the provenance of the first document, more
specifically the picture.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to declare that this document is
admissible and can be placed in the case file.  So the counsel
for the civil party can now proceed with his brief statement for
that civil party.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I also would like now to continue to
make a statement regarding my brief statement for my client, Ou
Savrith.
The document ERN, in Khmer, 00274308 -- and this document is
.  It is a brief biography of Ou Vindy which was made
during the DK regime.  Angkar arrested him.  This is a supporting
document of Mr. Ou Vindy of his arrest before he was executed.
Also, there is another attachment which is already part of the
case file.  I only picked up the document mentioning the name Ou
Vindy.  The document started from number 00274265 to 00274314.
These documents are part of the , which show the
consistency of the victim, Ou Vindy.  It shows the siblings
kinship and the in-law of Mr. Ou Vindy.
In the document mentioning the name of Mr. Ou Vindy, this
document does not have an ER number but it is already part of the
case file, but I haven't found it yet as I could not retrieve it
from our database.
Mr. President, the suffering or the various tortures inflicted
upon Ou Vindy, who is the younger brother of my client, Ou
Savrith, before he was executed were done under the chairmanship
of the accused, Kaing Guek Eav, during the DK regime.
The suffering was immense.  Therefore, the related survivors,
namely Ou Savrith, would like to request the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia to seek for the truth for
their relatives who were executed by the senior leaders of the
Democratic Kampuchea, including the chief, the Chairman of S-21;
namely, Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch.  And we would like the
Chamber to find out the reasons for his arrest and execution.
I would like now for Mr. Ou Savrith to make his statement, with
the President's leave.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Ou Savrith, the Chamber would like now to give you the
opportunity to make your statements regarding the events, the
facts and relations to the crimes alleged on the accused, Kaing
Guek Eav, alias Duch, which have tremendous impact upon you.
The sufferings that you received during the time of the
establishment and operation of S 21 in Phnom Penh being from this
17 April '75 to the 6th of January '79 and which are the reasons
for you to be a civil party to this case to seek reparation, and
we would like you to tell the Chamber the damages you suffer both
physically and psychologically and any suffering that you have
received until today.
MR OU SAVRITH:
Mr. President, distinguished members of the Chamber, I wish to
speak in French because I have been away from Cambodia since
1973, when I left aged 18, and I fear that I would not be able to
express myself adequately in the Khmer language and find the
right words.
Do I have your permission to do this, Mr. President?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are of course allowed to do that.
MR OU SAVRITH:
Thank you.
One might have thought that due to my professional activity,
which generally leads me to speak in public, I would have no
difficulty in speaking before you today.  However, I have so much
expectation in relation to this trial that I am feeling very
emotional today.
Mr. President, who was my brother?  What does he represent for
me?  What particular relationship did we have and why do I miss
him so?
Who was my brother?  He was a graduate of ENA, the national
administration school of Phnom Penh.  He was on track for a
brilliant career and at 31 in 1975 he was an official at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs seconded to the Cabinet of the Prime
Minister, Mr. Long Boret.
My brother was married, had three children.  His disappearance
was very painful and when I see again His Excellency Norodom
Sihanouk of Cambodia, when I would meet him in Paris we would
often discuss my brother, because they were in fact in school
together at the Ecole Nationale d'Administration, and my brother
would fetch him every morning to go to work.
What does he represent for me, Mr. President?  My brother was a
brother of the kind that many would like to have.  He was
brilliant, he was seductive, he was always affectionate and
attentive to his friends and colleagues.  He was a model for me.
I wanted to be like him and I was very proud of my elder brother.
What particular relationship did we have?  As I told you a moment
ago, we were a family of five children.  He was the eldest and I
was the youngest.  There were 11 years between us, which may seem
a lot, but he was accessible, close to me.  We had a great
affinity and often a glance was enough for us to understand one
another.  I was, quite simply, happy to be with him.
Why do I miss him?  In 1973 at 18 I had to go to France to pursue
my studies.  This was an age where the affinity and relations
that one could have would even be stronger than usual and at all
stages of my life I have missed him and today I still recall and
miss all the moments spent with my brother.  Then came 17 April
1975.  I lived in terror of the fate that might befall him.
At the end of 1979 I saw that his name was in the list of persons
arrested in S-21.  From that moment on I had two dates in my mind
and thousands of questions -- two dates; 13 February 1976, which
-- the abruptly-stated date that he was registered, and 23
January 1976 when he was executed.
And so for 30 years now I have been thinking of him every day, 30
years, 10,950 and some days and nights trying to think about what
happened inside the walls of S-21.
My suffering today is totally and intimately related to that of
my brother's wife, the daughter of my brother, my two sisters
living in France, and I cannot speak to the Court without sharing
with the Court what they feel as well.
Mr. President, I would like to read a few lines which were
written by my niece and intended for you.  I quote:
"My name is Ou Kamela.  My father, Ou Vindy, is one of the many
victims of S-21.  I was four years old when my father was
arrested, tortured and executed.  At four years old, I was too
young to be fully aware of all the atrocities which my father was
probably subjected to.  When I was four years old, I was too
young to realize that he was no longer among us.  At four, I was
also too young to realize the degree to which the absence of a
father would forge my future life.
His absence left a cruel mark on my youth and my life as a woman.
Not to have had a father standing beside me during the major
events of my life has thoroughly wounded me.  I would have wished
him to be there to protect me when I needed protection.  I would
have given everything to see pride on his face when I graduated
from high school with a baccalaureate or when I succeeded in my
exams and got my first job.
I would have wanted to tell him the degree to which his sisters
and his brother were great with us.  I would have wanted to thank
him for having made me the woman that I am today.  According to
my aunts and my uncle, my father was a great person and I cannot
conceive how anyone can be so cruel as to take the life of such a
person.  Quite simply, how can one summarily execute with no
remorse, no scruples, another human being?
I, daughter of a victim, I request that the punishment be
commensurate with the crimes committed, with the suffering
inflicted, and commensurate with the number of lives that the
accused has taken away.  On behalf of my father, I refuse to
forgive because to grant forgiveness comes down to saying that
finally no serious crime was committed.  To grant forgiveness
boils down to admitting that the atrocities committed do not
touch us so deeply.  To grant forgiveness would mean to feel
pity, but how can anyone feel pity for a man who has taken away
so many lives?  Did he have any pity for the women, the children
and the men he caused to be assassinated?
On behalf of my father, I refuse to express the slightest amount
of pity.  On behalf of my father, I request that justice be
handed down."
This is the end of the letter of my niece, Mr. President.
I speak here on behalf of my sister-in-law, my niece and those
relatives I have who are still living.  I claim no financial
reparation, no material relief.  I would simply like to know what
happened during the 97 days and throughout these 50 pages of
confession.  That is the reason why I applied to be a civil
party.
Indeed, my representations before this Court is of a different
nature.  I seek moral redress.  One person alone, my wife, was
aware of my suffering during these 10,950 nights when I would
wake up on a regular basis in a start, shouting and crying,
unable to express my suffering in any other manner.
Mr. President, like any Cambodian, modesty is required.  Everyone
internalizes feeling.  The effort that I made before you today is
very great, but it is a necessary effort, and for me it is
through this testimony that a certain form of reparation begins
to be born.  I know today that the accused in the first place,
but also the international community taken as a whole, are aware
of the horror that I have experienced, just like the thousands of
families of victims of S-21.
I visited S-21 for the first time in 1992.  Absolute horror.  I
was frozen.  At one point in one of the cells I looked out:
beautiful weather, blue sky, sparrows singing, wonderful
vegetation, and we were in an island of barbarity in the middle
of an ocean of softness. How was it possible that such a massacre
could occur in such a place, far from the eyes, ignored by the
entire world, the fate of innocent defenceless people abandoned
to pitiless killers?
Since that time, that day, I cried for injustice.  Why did they
do this?  Why is it that the international community had
forgotten us?  Why is it that the international community did not
believe from the outset the testimony that was coming out?  Why
did they not exercise their duty to interfere?
As a civil party, Mr. President, I wanted to know what had
happened inside the walls of S 21.  This trial has shed some
light for me and we now know the very detail of the modus
operandi that was practised.  Before this I had an abstract
vision of cells, of shackles, of instruments of torture, of
posts.  I saw pictures, pages filled with confessions.
Now for every one of these things, by watching and following this
trial, I wanted to try to experience what he experienced, to
share in my own way his suffering, his anxiety.  I wanted to
imagine the pain that one can feel when one is being beaten, when
one's fingernails are being pulled, when one is submitted to
electric shock, when you are being shackled at every moment of
life in Cambodia.  When it's cold I think of my brother, this
unfortunate person who had nothing to protect him from the cold.
When I was in Cambodia, when I was being stung by mosquitoes I
was thinking about my brother and all these unfortunate detainees
who were attacked and who were stung and could not react,
thinking of the detail of all that they had to undergo.  And I
also think and thought of the rhythm of interrogation, of
insults, illness, lack of sanitation, mental and physical
degradation and the deterioration which is forced upon you, a
task consisting in total dehumanization.
Mr. President, I thought that I had no more tears left in me.  I
thought that I had no more tears but I realize I still have some.
I continue to think about my brother, his 97 days of suffering.
And he probably then also thought about his children and his
wife, what would become of them; would they have enough to feed
themselves; would they be harmed. Because when he was arrested he
asked his younger sister to watch over his children, one of the
last words he uttered then.  Perhaps he had already understood
then that he would not be returning.
Before asking a few questions from the accused, two questions to
be precise, I cannot but recount to you a brief episode that
occurred when I returned for the first time to Cambodia in 1992.
One evening at a friend's there was a young woman who had the
ability to communicate with the spirits and I spoke to her about
my brother and she entered into a relationship with him.  We
Cambodians we believe in this sort of thing.  I don't know how to
define it.  And the young woman told me this -- and she was
communicating with my brother.  She said he is sad and
terrorized.  He had suffered a great deal in the world of humans.
He had suffered great pain during his life on earth and he did
not wish to reincarnate.  He said that he was very much afraid
and his soul sought refuge in a pagoda and said that he had
placed himself under the protection of a monk.  The young woman
told me the name of the pagoda.  I was totally upset.  And what I
heard that evening will always remain seared in my memory.
The next day I went to the pagoda with my sister and we organized
a ceremony.  Oddly, inside of the pagoda I was continuously
looking up.  And I could see the ceiling, and wished to preceive
the soul of my brother which was there.  And I tell myself that
every time I enter a pagoda I will look at the ceiling, because
perhaps it is the case that my brother is not the only one who
sought refuge in a pagoda and refuses to reincarnate, and instead
seeks the protection of Buddha.  Now my niece today is pregnant,
and when the child is born, together we will go to the pagoda and
present to him his grandchild.
Question for the accused, Mr. President.  First question.
Concerning the list of prisonsers of S-21, between 1975 and 1979,
document ERN 00171639 -- I repeat, 639 -- the date of entry in
S-21 which is mentioned is 13 February 1976, but in his
confession the biographical note of my brother, considered to be
a member of the CIA, is dated 23 January 1976.  This is document
ERN 00274282.  So there is a gap of more than 20 days between the
two dates.  What date should be retained?  And how can the
accused explain this discrepanecy between the two dates?
Second question, Mr. President:  the accused has previously
answered this question and stated that the prisoners were almost
systematically subjected to torture prior to confessing, but when
I read the confession of my brother, his handwriting is so strong
and so harmonious that I cannot believe that he might have been
able to write in this way under torture.  Does the accused have
any explanation with regard to my observation.  Thank you, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber accepts the request of the questioning by the civil
party, and the Chamber would like the accused to respond to the
civil party question.  First, answer the first question, and then
proceed to the second question.  And if the accused is unclear on
any question, you can ask for verification so that the civil
party can verify it.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I think it's going to take time if I have to ask
the civil party in client -- probably I would like to ask you --
he mentioned that the brother entered in S-21 in February, but
the confession was in January.
(Recording malfunction)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Let me now continue.
The accused, would you wish to ask the civil party regarding the
entry date of Ou Vindy?  Is that correct?  And also the date of
the confession of that person which was done at S 21.  Is this
what you intend to do?
The defence counsel, you may proceed.
MS. CANIZARES:
Yes, Mr. President.  The civil party spoke about a confession, a
confession in which the date of January 23rd, 1976 appears.
Would it be possible, Mr. President, therefore that the document
be displayed and in particular the particular page on which the
date of January 23rd, 1976 appears?
MR OU SAVRITH:
Mr. President, I can show this document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Civil Party, can you inform the Chamber again, the document
indicating the arrest of Ou Vindy and taken to S-21 Office, what
are the dates of the entry, et cetera, and what is the ERN or
document number of that document?  That is number one.
And number two, can you provide additional information on the
date of the interrogation or the date of the confession of Ou
Vindy at S-21?
MR OU SAVRITH:
Yes, Mr. President.
So regarding the list, the prisoner list at S-21 between 1975 and
1979, regarding February 1976 in this list, it is document ERN
00171639.  Now, regarding the biographical note which is
therefore dated January 23rd 1976, the confession, it is document
ERN 00274282.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV officer, can you show two documents on the screen?  The
first one is the Khmer document with the ERN 00171639 on the
screen.
Ou Vindy is on the number 159 from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Lo Vea Em.
Court officer, can you take that document off the screen and now
project another document on the screen?  The document is the
confession with ER Number 00274282.
Can you move down to the bottom part of the document?  We wish to
see the date of the confession.
MR OU SAVRITH:
Mr. President, may I continue?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Civil Party, can you hold on for a minute or so?  Let the
accused read the document first so he can ascertain the date of
the confession so that he can respond to your question.
Let me move down to the date of the interrogation.
MR OU SAVRITH:
Mr. President, the note, the confession dated January 23rd 1976,
the date is at the very bottom of the page.  I saw it go by in
fact.  But during the digitization it seems that it was half
erased so I suggest that we show the document that was translated
into French and that is indexed at ERN 00274241.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you show the document in French with the ERN
number 00274241?  Can you move down to the bottom of the page in
order to show the date of the confession?
The accused, before you respond to the civil party questions, do
you have any other matters that you need to seek verification
first or do you prefer to have the confession in Khmer language
to be shown?  As you can see on the screen, the date is the 23rd
of January 1976 and this is a French translation of that
confession.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first I thought that I could not catch up what I
heard but I already made the correct note.  I would like to
reiterate that the person entered on the February of 1976 but I
was surprised because I heard that the confession was on January
of 1976.
That's why I keep saying that the list of the entry or the entry
list of S-21 is not always accurate or regular because I already
talked to Judge Marcel Lemonde and when he asked Suos Thy about
the entry date.  And I told them that actually the important
people were put at the special prisons and that's why the date of
entry would be different.
And I, in my response to Madame Phung Guth Sunthary, that the
date of entry cannot be clear and we cannot really rely on the
date of the entry.  And when it comes to the matter of Mr. Vindy,
I think the date of his confession is precise but the Khmer
printing is not clear, but in French it is clear that it is the
23rd of January 1976.
And I would like to now state again that the date of entry is not
clear but the date in which the confession was taken is more
accurate.
And I would like to also indicate that any detainee who was sent
to S-21 had to be tortured, and I would like to guarantee that
torture cannot be avoided and I can really be pretty sure that
only one person who did not receive torture it was Koy Thuon.
And I think when Mr. Savrith said that because the clean writing
of the confession proved that his brother would not be tortured I
think his assumption is somehow plausible.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Ou Savrith, have already received the response of the accused
in relation to your question?
MR OU SAVRITH:
Mr. President, I would like to be sure that I understood the
answer of the accused fully.  Did he say that my brother had not
been tortured apparently?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, could you please emphasize or verify the response so
that the civil party can be sure of your information?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, it is difficult for me to tell him at this moment
because if I assure Mr. Savrith that torture would not be used at
S-21 then I would be considered as trying to evade responding to
the right question, to the right response, and I don't want to
take this opportunity to accuse myself from the crimes accused
against me by the civil parties.
So because I am not precise at each matter like that, I just
would like to reiterate that the tortures were employed only when
it was not avoided.  And interrogators had different natures.
Some would resort to tortures quickly.  Some would not be quick
to employ tortures.
So I am not here to actually please you by way of saying that
torture was not employed against your brother, but this is the
response that I already made.
That's all, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We would like now to give the floor to the civil party lawyers to
put questions or to seek further clarification from the civil
party if the lawyers so wish.
Mr. Hong Kimsuon, you take the floor.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Ou Savrith.  I would like to put a few
questions to you, just a point for clarification.
A. Good afternoon.  I am all ears.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. Ou Savrith, and thank Ms. Jessica for
her liaison during this videoconference.
My question is now referred to Mr. Ou Vindy -- the case of Mr. Ou
Vindy.  And the accused already made it clear that the document
in relation to the entry of Mr. Ou Vindy to S-21 is not clear.
So before the Khmer Rouge Angkar sent Ou Vindy to S-21 -- under
document with ERN 00274288 or another document  in Khmer
-- it reads on the last page of the document that on the 25th of
October -- here is the referral number from the previous date,
which is 1975:  So "On the 25th of October 1975 the Committee of
the Sangkat arrested all of us and sent us to the district
office."
So the Angkar made an arrest of about 10 people alongside Mr. Ou
Vindy.  So among the people did you know that other people,
including the in-laws and relatives, were also sent to S-21?
A. Yes, indeed.  Counsel, my brother was part of the same group
as Tioulong Raingsy because our families knew each other, we were
neighbours, and indeed they were arrested within a few months
from each other.  There was Tioulong Raingsy, Lim Kimari, Mr. Son
Kaset, my brother and other people.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Ou Savrith and Ms. Jessica Finelle.
Mr. Ou Savrith, Mr. Ou Vindy was arrested along with the other
people.  Did you know that when the Khmer Rouge arrested your
brother on the 25th of October 1975, before they were sent to
S-21 were they tortured back then?
A. I cannot answer you.  I do not know exactly what happened
before the 13th of February 1976.
Q. Thank you.  This is the last question.
You have already expressed your suffering for the last more than
30 years, and personally for you, and the suffering that had been
endured by the family of Mr. Ou Vindy have been tremendous.  So
in light of the suffering, and apart from the search for justice
for the people, do you think you are ready to forgive the accused
since he has already expressed his remorsefulness and request for
forgiveness?
A. Regarding this remorse and this request to be forgiven on the
part of the accused, on behalf of my entire family I must say we
will not forgive because forgiveness is beyond the death camps,
and today all that remains is despair.  So the answer is clear;
there will be no forgiveness from my side.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Ou Savrith.
Finally, I would like to ask you whether you would like to make
any request or put any questions beside what have been asked
already in the Court?
A. We have no further questions.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. Ou Savrith and Ms. Jessica Finelle, for responding
to our questions.
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit, could you please make sure that the new DVD is
replaced and please let us know when it is done?  Then we can
proceed further with the remaining of the hearing.
MR OU SAVRITH:
Mr. President, I would like to thank you and I would like to take
a few more seconds of your time.  (No interpretation)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Of course, we still want to hear more from you because the
prosecutors have not put questions to you yet, and that we will
give the floor to the accused to make his observation along with
the defence counsel, and we will grant you the opportunity to
express your final remark after this.
Next, the Co-Prosecutors, would you wish to put any questions to
Mr. Ou Savrith?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I have one or two questions to put to Mr. Ou Savrith regarding
what he told us earlier on, because there are one or two periods
here which he did not speak about regarding his brother.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Mr. Ou Savrith, I know that you were far away, but did your
family know where your brother was between April and October
1975?  You said that he had worked at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and that he had been detached to the offices of the Prime
Minister up until 1975.
So, therefore, what happens as of April?  Was he evacuated or did
he remain in Phnom Penh?  Thank you.
A. Good afternoon, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.  After the 17th of April
1975 my brother, as well as 10 family members, were evacuated, as
everyone else living in Phnom Penh.
How did I know that he was arrested and detained at S-21?  As I
said during my testimony, I learnt this when my sister-in-law
arrived from the refugee camps in Thailand, and a little while
afterwards I saw this prisoners list that was displayed.
So between 1975 and 1979, I had absolutely no news from my
family.
Q. I have one extra question only.
You said earlier on that your brother, when he was arrested,
passed on the message to a sister and asking her to take care of
her family.
Can you tell us a little bit more about the circumstances
surrounding this arrest?  Where did it take place and do you know
why he was arrested?  Was it because he had been identified as
being a member of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs before 1975 or
was it for another reason?  Thank you.
A. I believe that we have to connect here the history of my
brother with his arrest -- and to connect this with the history
of Tioulong Raingsy because they were part of the same group,
they were in the same village, and since we were part of the same
family and of the same social milieu, everyone was suspected.  So
maybe after having arrested Tioulong Raingsy, the district leader
maybe wanted to finish his job, so to say.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you very much.  I didn't quite capture your answer earlier
on.  Thank you very much.  I have no further questions.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, we would like to give the floor to the defence counsel to
put questions to Mr. Ou Savrith if they so wish.
MS. CANIZARES:
Defence has no questions for the civil party, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Then we would like to give the floor to the accused to make his
observation in relation to the substance of the deposition of Mr.
Ou Savrith.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, I have no specific further observation to make at
this moment.  And that's all, Mr. President, thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Ou Savrith, the proceeding to hear your statement through the
remote participation via the videoconference, which is the first
practice, has already come to an end, and we have just heard that
you would wish to make your final remark from that end to the
courtroom.  So you are now granted this final moment to express
your remarks.  The floor is yours.
MR OU SAVRITH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
First of all, I wish to thank the Court for having allowed me to
make this belated testimony, thanks to the work of the civil
parties group, and I wish to thank the team of the Tribunal of
Versailles which made it possible to organize this conference.
And I would like to reiterate my thanks -- my heartfelt thanks --
on behalf of my family to the Chair of the Bar of Paris, who made
it possible to enable me to take part in this trial and to cover
some of the expenditure.  Maître Sur, Maître Finelle and Maître
Kimsuon who are all counsel for the civil parties whom I wish to
take this opportunity to thank today.
Thank you once again, Mr. President and distinguished members of
the Court.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The hearing of the statement of the civil party Ou Savrith has
now come to the end.  We still have another civil party who has
already started providing us with the brief statement of hers
already and since we still have some appropriate time for her to
finish her statement, so it is now appropriate for her to be
invited to share her account.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, I believe that Mr. Ou Savrith probably has not
learned that his statement has come to an end because I could
hear conversation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Ou Savrith, we would like to reiterate that the hearing of
your deposition has already come to an end and that we are going
to disconnect our conversation now.
Madam Chum Neou, you may now proceed to tell the Court about the
damages and the suffering you have had during the period from
1975 to 1979 and that you have joined as a civil party to seek
civil reparation from the accused Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch,
the accused in this case file.
So it is now the opportunity for you to express this before the
Chamber.  You take the floor.
MS. CHUM NEOU:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours.  With your permission,
can I make my statement starting from 1970?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber grants you the opportunity but it should be brief.
Your main focus is for the period between '75 and '79 in
connection with S-21 regarding your family members or yourself at
S-24.  That is the main content of your statement, and of course
you can start from 1970, a brief summary of that event and later
on your suffering during the DK period.
MS. CHUM NEOU:
Thank you, Your Honour.
First of all I would like to thank the Chamber, the Trial Chamber
of the ECCC.  I would like to start my statement as follows.
In 1970 my family lived in the Prey Veng provincial town; we were
rice farmers.  Also in 1970 after the 18th March event, that is
after the coup d'etat to overthrow Sihanouk, I was still in the
Prey Veng provincial town.
Later on during the year there was fighting in the provincial
town and after the second round of fighting my family moved from
the towns to the liberated zone which is the native village of my
mother, in Prey Ruessei village, Tuk Laak sub-district, Prey Veng
province.
In 1971 my family, my siblings and myself voluntarily agreed to
join the revolution movement of the Khmer Rouge.  At that time I
was given a position as a chairwoman of the village.  In 1972 I
rose to be the Chairwoman of the Chea Khlang sub-district in and
in 1973 Angkar assigned me to be a combatant of the Prey Veaeng
sub-district.
There was only one platoon at that time to serve the battlefield
to transport food supplies and ammunitions to the battlefield.  I
was at a battlefront with the combatants although I did not
engage in attack; I only supplied ammunition and food.
Later on, in 1974, Angkar recruited me and assigned me to be a
female combatant of the east zone.  During the time I became a
female combatant of the east zone the fighting activities were
not that active.  I received military training and strategic
training at the Sa Py Roy school or S-200 School.  That school is
a place where people were trained to be ready as soldiers or in
Khmer, "sla pul".
We were trained in military techniques for four months.  Then
Phnom Penh fell.  That was 17th April 1975.  After the fall of
Phnom Penh, that is 17th April '75, I cannot recall the exact
period of months but two or three months later Angkar transferred
me to Phnom Penh to the Logistics Unit of the General Staff of
the centre and my assignment was to guard the ammunition
warehouse.
I was part of the Unit S-80 which is located somewhere near the
vicinity of Tuol Kok.  We were assigned to collect the war
spoils, ammunitions.  Some ammunitions were imported through the
Sihanoukville port or from Vietnam border through Kratie province
and I was stationed in Phnom Penh to receive those ammunitions
and to then place them properly in the warehouse.  During my time
working in that ammunition warehouse some of the ammunition were
placed in some concrete houses from the Antrak Tavey (phonetic)
High School to the Tuol Kok TV tower and extending to the
vicinity near Pochentong.  They were all houses to have the
ammunition.
Later on Angkar organized my marriage within the same unit.  My
husband was a combatant from the same unit.  However, before he
was transferred to the S-80 unit he was at the Division 310 in
Kampong Cham.
Later on, on the 9th of August my husband was taken to S-21 and
three days after his arrest I was arrested.  That was in the same
month in 1977.  I quote the date from the documents that I
obtained because I personally cannot recall the dates.
And I would like to tell the Chamber and the President that
before my husband and I left the S-80 unit from the general staff
my husband was first taken to the vicinity near Wat Kansan or
Kansan Pagoda near Chbar Ampeou.  I was still being hospitalized
at that time due to my four-month pregnancy and I had morning
sickness.  So my husband was sent first.
After I recovered, though not fully recovered but I gained some
strength, and because I missed my husband so much, I sought
permission to leave the hospital.  I was not allowed to return to
S-80 unit.  I was instructed to stay there for the moment and
then I was brought some clothes and I was taken.  I was told that
I would be taken to see my husband and, indeed, yes, I was taken
to see my husband near the Kansan Pagoda in Chbar Ampeou where we
grew vegetables to supply to our unit.
About a little bit more than one month later we were not
mistreated or anything.  That place was probably the place where
they tempered us.
Later on my husband was arrested.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Mr. President, with your leave I would like to have the
psychological counsellor to sit next to my client.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, the Chamber agrees.
MS. CHUM NEOU:
On the 9th of August '77 I farewell my husband and he was put
onto a truck together with about 10 other people.  I packed his
belongings.  And probably he knew something was going on but he
told me that he would not run away.
Three days later I was arrested.
In the beginning I did not realize that my husband was taken to
S-21.  I only learned of the word "tempering" at the time.
When they arrested me another person was also arrested, Chay
Bunkhoeun.  The person came from Svay Rieng and I'm not sure
whether the person is still alive or not.  He also was at the
logistics department of the general staff repairing weapons.  I
was taken in a car although I could not recognize the particulars
of the car or the model of the car.  I was taken to the
psychiatric hospital in Prey Tnaot (phonetic).  I knew that
hospital because before my arrest I used to collect ammunition
from that hospital.
However, I did not know that that hospital was used as a
tempering place for S-21.  In the late afternoon, around 3 p.m.,
I was walked from that office to Stueng Chrov, crossing a village
next to a river.  While I was walking I recognized the Krapeuha
Pagoda.  And when I reached Stueng Chrov I realized it was a
tempering place because I knew a person Vat.  He was from a
company of the logistics.  He was accused of being a CIA and he
was sent to S-21 for tempering.  Upon recognizing him I learned
that I now was sent for tempering.
At that location at that time they did not work in the rice
fields yet.  They grew other vegetables and there was another
group raising poultry and ducks and other growing other types of
vegetables.
I could not go and work with the rest of the group.  It's because
I still had morning sickness as I was not fully recovered and I
could not eat anything or I would vomit.
And the second reason that I could not go to work with the rest
of the group:  because one of my hands was handicapped and I
could not hold the hoe.  And I was so skinny already, in addition
to the morning sickness that I received.  Even when I drank water
I still threw up.  I kept throwing out and I could not eat
anything except a little rice with some grains of salt and
nothing else besides that.
And I was lucky as I knew that person Vat, so Vat gave me some
grains of salt to help me to eat with the rice.
During the time that I was at Stueng Chrov I stayed there from my
five-month pregnancy until the day I delivered my baby.  I have
never talked about this experience.  Only today is the time that
I speak out.  Even if I was near full term I was still ordered to
cut firewood, to carry water, and I slipped at the riverbank and
then I was bleeding and by seeing that they stopped using me to
carry water.
There was a midwife, Thach, who was also in that location.  She
was skilful and she looked after me.  She took care of me.  Those
people who stayed there asked her whether I was able to survive
and the midwife said yes, so the midwife looked after me until
the day I delivered my baby.
The person Chay Bunkhoeun, who also delivered a baby a month
before me, helped giving me some assistance.  So we took turns to
take care of each other during that period of time.
I could not recall the exact date of my baby delivery and about a
month or so after that I was sent to Prey Sar, or S-24, which is
a branch of S-21.  I was transferred up and down, and when I
walked to S-24 I had to walk across Stueng Praeak Kroes and
Preaek Tnaot.  It was quite a long distance.  One of my hands was
handicapped and I had to cradle my young baby as well.  I had to
stop for so many times.  I had to walk.  There was no
transportation.  I had to walk across the open field, the rice
fields.
I could not recall how long I was at Prey Sar.  I could not do
any transplanting of the seedlings yet at the time as I was weak
and my hand was still hurt.  Later on I was either sent to Bakou
or Stueng Chrov, as I could not recall correctly.  I was asked to
do and worked in the rice fields.  In the beginning I could not
do it, so I was assigned to look after the children.
So during the time that I looked after the children I looked
after about four to five children and, of course, naturally we
paid more attention to our children.  It was difficult for me to
look after those children.  And later on when I could work in the
rice field, that is two or three months later, I was assigned to
work in the rice field.  Although my hand was still a little
numb, I could hold the seedlings.
I could still recall the moment when my baby could -- I could
only breastfeed my baby one time per day, during the break at
noon.  Later on the infant of my friend, Chay Bunkhoeun, became
sick and that baby died.  On the night the baby died my friend,
Chay Bunkhoeun, dare not tell anybody.  So she slept hugging the
dead baby until the next morning.  Then she told the people in
charge there that her baby died.  Actually the baby was a girl
and my baby was a boy.
So in the morning when she told the people in charge, the baby
was taken and buried near the banana forestation nearby.  Five or
six days later my baby became sick.  During that time I told them
my baby had a fever and she needed to look after.  I told the
caretaker and I went off to work in the rice fields.
In the evening when I returned I was told that my baby was sent
to a hospital in Phnom Penh.  I was speechless as I was not
allowed to go.  Two days later a car came and I was told that I
would go to see my baby.  I was so happy because during the two
days that my baby was not with me I had to get rid of the milk
from my breasts, so I was happy when I was told that I would be
taken to see my baby.
On the contrary, I went to see the baby and I breastfed her but
only an hour later my baby died.  I believe it was an overlapping
of a measles that he received.
During the time that I was tempered at S-24, a branch of S-21, we
had to follow the instructions, the orders that were given to us.
After the death of my baby I requested permission to go back to
work in a rice field because I did not know what else I could do
at the hospital where my baby died.  At that time, my baby was
about seven or eight months old as I delivered the baby in
January, and the transplanting season was somewhere around
August.
Upon my return, the Unit K-14 was only for the married people, so
those people who also had children were put into that unit.
Upon my return, there was an announcement that I was a CIA so
nobody dared to talk to me.  I tried to ask my friends what's
going on; nobody said anything.  I tried to tempered my feeling
to give into them.  I pretend to be a person like a crazy person
and not to show my discontent with their behaviour and just try
to go along with the group.
In 1978, it was the year that the flood was huge.  It was
historical.  The dam at Bakou was broken and the rice fields was
overflowed.
(Technical malfunction)
Court adjourns at 1613H
