P R O C E E D I N G S
(Court opens at 0904H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber will hear testimony of a witness -- that is,
2-TCW-900 in relation to Au Kanseng security centre via a --
JUDGE FENZ:
We didn't have the translation of the floor.
MR. PRESIDENT:
-- via a video link.
Is there a technical issue with the interpretation? Please check.
JUDGE FENZ:
We didn't have a translation of the first part.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber will hear testimony of a witness -- that is,
2-TCW-900 in relation to Au Kanseng security centre via a video
link -- that is, a video link from this Chamber to the witness,
who is in Oddar Meanchey province.
Mr. Em Hoy, please report the attendance of the parties and other
individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present except Madam Touch Voleak, the stand-by counsel for
the Accused, who will be a little bit late.
Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell downstairs. He has
waived his right to be present in the courtroom. The waiver has
been delivered to the greffier.
The witness who is to testify today -- that is, 2-TCW-900, will
testify from Anlong Veaeng district, Oddar Meanchey province.
The witness confirms that, to his best knowledge, he has no
relationship, by blood or by law, to any of the two accused --
that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any of the civil
parties admitted in this case.
The witness took an oath already, and he has Mam Rithea as duty
counsel.
And the AV Unit personal informs the Chamber that the video link
setup has been done and the witness is ready to testify via a
video link.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Em Hoy. The Chamber now decides on the request by
Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 21st
March 2016, which states that, due to his health -- that is,
headache, back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long. And
in order to effectively participate in future hearings, he
requests to waive his rights to be present at the 21st March 2016
hearing.
He advises that his counsel advised him about the consequence of
this waiver, that in no way it can be construed as a waiver of
his rights to be tried fairly or to challenge evidence presented
to or admitted by this Court at any time during this trial.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the Accused at the ECCC, dated 21st March 2016, which notes
that Nuon Chea has a chronic back pain and feels dizzy when he
sits for long and recommends that the Chamber shall grant him his
request so that he can follow the proceedings remotely from the
holding cell downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via an audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies for the whole day.
And before we proceed to hear testimony of Witness 2-TCW-900 via
a video link, the Chamber will issue an oral ruling on the
request by the International Co-Prosecutor in relation to
questioning this witness. And second, the Chamber will hear
responses from parties to the submissions by the Co-Prosecutor to
hear two additional witnesses in relation to Phnom Kraol security
centre.
The Chamber now issues an oral ruling in relation to the
International Co-Prosecutor's request -- that is, document
<E319/36>.
The Trial Chamber is seized of E319/36, the International
Co-Prosecutor's request to admit 95 additional written records of
interview. This request includes a written record of interview of
2 TCW-900 -- that is, today's witness. And please refer to page
48 of document .
Considering the potential usefulness of this document to today's
proceedings, the Trial Chamber hereby makes a partial ruling and
admits 2-TCW-900's written record of interview -- that is,
document .5, into evidence and assigns it document
number E3/9734. Written reasons for this ruling and on the
remaining request of E319/36 will follow in due course.
The Chamber will now hear responses from parties to the request
by the Co-Prosecutor to hear additional witnesses in relation to
Phnom Kraol security centre -- that is, document E390.
On 16 March 2016, Co-Prosecutors filed a submission to the Trial
Chamber to call two additional witnesses, namely, <2-TCCP-1036>
and 2-TCW-1017, to replace some witnesses who are now deceased in
relation to Phnom Kraol security centre.
For that reason, the Chamber intends to hear oral responses by
parties in relation to this submission so that the Chamber can
use it as a basis for our decision whether to hear these two
additional witnesses or not.
And I'd like to first hand the floor to the Co-Prosecutor to
reiterate their submission that they filed on 16 March 2016.
You may proceed.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours, counsel.
I'll be fairly brief.
We filed this motion out of concern for an obvious reason. Last
month, when the witnesses were announced for the segment, the
Trial Chamber and the parties were informed by WESU that three of
the six witnesses that had been proposed for the segment by the
Co-Prosecutors had been determined to be deceased, so we started
a process of going back and reviewing from scratch the available
witnesses for the segment.
A number of other people who were potential substitutes are also,
it turns out, deceased.
We think it's important because this crime site involves several
different places at which prisoners were detained. The two
witnesses we've heard already were detained at this -- at the
sector office as part of a group of 80 people that were arrested
during a certain purge.
The allegations for this site, though, also include a larger -- a
much larger prison that was the regularly used security office
for the Centre, and the deceased witness, the witness we had
proposed, who was a former detainee from that security office, is
deceased.
The other witness, who had been identified and interviewed by
OCIJ, who had been detained at the larger security office, is
deceased.
Fortunately, we started looking at the civil parties, a number of
them were deceased. We were informed by the Lead Co-Lawyers that
there is only one surviving civil party from that group, one out
of five, and that is the person that we've now proposed, who I
think you've now assigned pseudonym T -- 2-TCCP-1016.
This person is a -- also is a former Division 920 soldier. There
is testimony that this security office was frequently used for
the detention of purged Division 920 soldiers.
The other substitution we proposed is a sister of a witness that
the Trial Chamber is considering or decided to recall, and we
propose in the process of going through all the witnesses at the
site, it seemed that this -- the sister may be able to be -- may
be more informative than the brother, who had worked at the
sector telegram office.
We set forth the reasons for that in our motion. She was eight
years or five -- five or eight years older than her brother, and
in addition, she took on a position in the sector military
towards -- in 1977. It was the sector military that had
responsibility for the Phnom Kraol Security Office.
So for those reasons, because of the kind of unique situation of
half of our proposed witnesses being deceased, we have proposed
these two substitute witnesses.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And Judge Lavergne, you have the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
<Just a clarification> to be sure that I've understood you
correctly.
<One of the persons> whom you are requesting to be called <is a>
civil <party, so the pseudonym might need to be changed, because
I believe the current pseudonym is a> TCW, and <not a> TCCP.<>
MR. LYSAK:
One of them is a civil party, the one who is the surviving
detainee from the prisoner. The other is a witness who worked at
the -- was the daughter of the sector secretary and worked at the
sector office.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I'd like now to give the floor to the Lead Co-Lawyers for civil
parties to make an oral remark or response to the request by the
Co-Prosecutor.
You may proceed.
MR. PICH ANG:
Good morning, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, parties. And good morning everyone in and around the
courtroom.
The Lead Co-Lawyers do not object to the motion filed by the
Co-Prosecutors since <both the> witness< and the civil party>
have information in relation to the security centre in Kaoh
Nheaek. And in particular in relation to that particular civil
party, we met him <last week>, and he confirmed that he could
testify.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And I'd like now to hand the floor to the co-defence teams, first
to the defence team for Nuon Chea, to make an oral observation or
response to the request by the Co-Prosecutors.
You may proceed.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours. Good
morning, counsel. We'll be brief.
In principle, we have no objection to the request from the
Prosecution. However, I do note that in the written request in
paragraph 4, it says that the Co-Prosecutors' request,
2-TCW-1017, either in lieu or in addition to her brother. Now I
only hear the word "substitute witness".
We believe that is in the interests of the defence to have her
brother still coming as a witness. I know he has testified
before, but we have quite a few additional questions that we
would like to put to him.
So I'm not quite sure why it's changing now to substitute and, in
paragraph 4, it is suggested either instead of or next to. We
believe it's necessary to have both brother and sister come to
the courtroom and testify.
My second remark is an observation, and is, in itself,
independent from this particular request. I would like to inform
the Chamber that we are also in the preparing phase of a Rule 87
request requesting one additional witness relating to the Phnom
Kraol security centre. It's almost done.
We would be happy to send a courtesy copy some time during the
day. Maybe it's something that the Chamber would like to decide
on at the same time.
If not, then we'll just file the request and then we'll deal with
it at a later stage.
Thank you.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning. Good morning, everyone.
<For> the Khieu Samphan defence team, <this will be a different
story>. We object to the principle underpinning this 87,
paragraph 4 application for the calling of a new -- of two new
witnesses for <several> reasons.
I would like to start by making some general remarks on the tardy
nature of this application.
The International Co-Prosecutor tells us <today> that in the wake
of <> the Chamber's decision of the <5th> of February 2016, they
reviewed materials on Phnom Kraol, and the agenda and the timing
of the Co-Prosecutor's application is not <insignificant>.
On the 5th of February <2016>, <there is the new list>, and it's
only on the 16th of March 2016 that this application is being
made.
This application is being made at a time when the segment on
Phnom Kraol has already started, since <it's> on the 2nd, 3rd and
7th of March <that> the two <first> witnesses were heard. And if
I were to focus on this sequence of events, we would see that
this is not the first time that the Co-Prosecutors are making an
application in the middle of a trial segment, that is to say
<when> witnesses have already appeared. And we, the Khieu Samphan
defence team, view this as an attempt by the Co-Prosecutors to
adjust what has been said during the proceedings.
If the fact that <> witnesses <have> died was the central point
in the application for these two witnesses to be called, they
should have made that application at -- before the beginning of
the segment, and they didn't do that.
Let me remind the Chamber that this also happened with regard to
the treatment of the Cham. A new application for the appearance
of witnesses, <E366>, was filed. <For the> Vietnamese, <two other
applications were filed>, E382 and E381<>.
Why do I say this? <As> we have already said this before the
Chamber, the principle of <Rule> 87, paragraph 4, is <supposed to
be> exceptional. <You ask to> call witnesses who were not
identified before or who have <> particularly relevant
information to provide which was not <possible to determine> in
the past or before then. This is not the case <here>.
Again, <as of> the 5th of February 2016, the Prosecution knew who
the witnesses who had to appear were. And we wouldn't like this
approach of calling witnesses in the middle of a segment become a
habit because that poses real practical problems to us, the
Defence, in terms of our preparations.
We have the example before us today. We have a Co-Prosecutor who
will respond to an application, another Co-Prosecutor who will
examine the witness, and we, the Defence, are the same <making>
applications, responding to applications, and <questioning every
witness at the hearings>.
So to call witnesses in the last minute during a segment is a
practice that must stop. It poses problems of preparation, it
poses <the> problem <of a non-level playing field>, and we cannot
prepare for the calling of these witnesses in the middle of the
segment.
We have <an average of> four weeks from the time when we are told
<which> witness <> will appear to testify with regard to a
segment, who will be called, <while also being present at
hearings regarding other segments.> So there are disruptions in
planning and scheduling independent of the Chamber in regard to
the <availability> of the witnesses, so <the multiplication of>
these 87, paragraph 4 applications pose serious preparation
problems for us.
And we can take the example of Witness In Yoeung. We are told
that very important witnesses will appear, and then, later on, we
do not really understand exactly why the witness was called.
So I want to focus on this point all the more so as we observe
that, recently, Rule 87.4 applications made by the Co-Prosecutors
are <almost> systematically granted by the Chamber, bearing in
mind that, quite obviously, this is evidence that is, a priori,
<inculpatory> evidence. And we have made applications for <seven>
witnesses to be called, and the Chamber has not yet ruled on
them, whereas we have witnesses who can testify on several
segments.<>
And they may have things to say regarding <past> segments,
relating to the Cham and the Vietnamese. But unfortunately, we
observe that a priori -- and this has been the case for -- with
regard to the last expert, the Chamber only seems to accept
witnesses who can be considered a priori as <inculpatory>
witnesses.
Now, regarding the new witness<> and civil party that is --
Co-Prosecutors would like to call to appear before this Chamber,
as regards the first -- that is, the witness, I didn't properly
note the <new> pseudonym -- I think it's <2-TCW-2017> (sic), <I
will call her "the sister of another> witness" --
I do not quite understand, in reading the WRIs, <how this>
witness would have any particularly relevant information on the
Phnom Kraol security centre.
That witness didn't work at that centre <when it was a security
centre>. If I <re-read her statements, she> only worked there
when it was a sector office in 1974. <The fact that she> worked
in a female battalion that has nothing to do with Phnom Kraol
<doesn't justify making her testify on this point>.
Furthermore, she doesn't talk <either> about purges or <security
or> Cham or Vietnamese in her statements, so we do not see how
her testimony will enlighten the Chamber on the Phnom Kraol
security centre <> since she didn't work there.
As far as we are concerned, it would be a waste of time<>. And I
want to <insist> on the fact that it is not because the
Co-Prosecutors are not satisfied with the evidence heard so far
that we should prolong the proceedings indefinitely in the hope
of obtaining further <disculpatory (sic)> evidence and, in so
doing, calling new witnesses <during the segment with no
particular justification>.
So I do not see, based on the statements of <this witness>,
anything that would be useful for the manifestation of the truth
<in relation to Phnom Kraol>.
As far as the civil party is concerned, we have a former
ex-soldier of a division, and as part of that civil party's
statement or application, <> the Phnom Kraol security centre is
not mentioned in that <statement>. So <again> I do not see how
that civil party's evidence will enlighten the Chamber pursuant
to Rule 87.4, <which is intended for exceptional circumstances
and if the evidence would not otherwise be available>.
And <when> there is no specific link between what the new
<witnesses or> civil <parties requested by the Co-Prosecutors say
and the statements of> deceased witnesses <who were supposed to
appear, I do not see this as a replacement but more so as an
addition. And they are requesting additional evidence and not a
replacement>, as the Chamber had envisaged; <this is> additional
evidence that would enable <> the Prosecution to <indefinitely>
prolong the proceedings.
So may we request the Chamber to reject that application because
the segment has already started and the application is rather
tardy?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And lastly, the floor is now given to the Co-Prosecutors to
submit their reply to the responses of the defence teams.
You have the floor now.
MR. LYSAK:
Thank you, Mr. President.
First, in response to the comments of the Nuon Chea team, let me
clarify when I say we propose these as substitutes, we're talking
about substitutes for the people who are deceased.
It remains our position that, in the case of the sister, she
could be called -- she could be called in lieu or in addition to.
We have no objection to the brother also being called if one of
the parties or the Trial Chamber wishes to hear from him.
So I want to make clear that our position remains the same. We're
proposing these people in substitution of people who are
deceased, and we have no objection if the Trial Chamber wishes to
hear both the brother and the sister.
In response to the Khieu Samphan team's arguments, I think that
the -- to suggest that the motion is tardy because it took us a
month to go back through the file -- this is a complicated
sector, when you read the witness interviews, to get your hands
around which detainees came from which security offices. I can
tell you it takes a little while when you're reacquainting
yourself.
I'd also point out that in respect to the point that the segment
has already started, the only reason this segment has already
started was because the first two witnesses were moved up. They
were moved up because, in part, the Khieu Samphan team requested
a delay in completing the hearings of expert Ysa Osman, also
because of some health problems with some other witnesses. But we
are still finishing the Cham segment, the testimony of Ysa Osman.
We are still finishing the witnesses from Au Kanseng.
The only reason we heard the Phnom Kraol witnesses when we did
was because of kind of a unique situation, again, of adjusting
schedules, so I don't think it's fair at all to say this motion
is tardy.
This is not an attempt to adjust. It's a response to an obvious
problem, which is that half of the witnesses we proposed are
deceased.
The defence itself, in response to this position that only the
Co-Prosecutors are making requests, 87.4 requests, and you're
only considering that, that's completely false. The Nuon Chea
team has made a number of requests during segments which have
been granted.
We've frequently received motions from both the Khieu Samphan and
Nuon Chea team days before witnesses are to testify, experts,
proposing additional 87.4 motions. We've been asked to respond to
those in Court the next day, which we're happy to do. This is a
trial. There are situations where we need to move expeditiously.
So I think it's unfair, again, to suggest that somehow only the
Prosecutors are filing these motions to supplement the evidence
and that the Trial Chamber somehow only considering our motions.
Last, in response to the specific points made about these two
witnesses by the Khieu Samphan team, the prison at which the
civil party, 2-TCCP-1016, is clearly the Phnom Kraol security
office. It's described in his civil party application as a
security centre near a mountain in Kaoh Nheaek district. That's
Phnom Kraol. It's the only security office next to a mountain.
It's the only place, also, where Division 920 soldiers were
detained, so there's no question that this person is relevant to
this segment.
And again, with respect to the sister, it's clear this witness
has relevant information. The Trial Chamber itself has selected
her brother, whose knowledge is principal -- principally relates
to the sector's oversight of these security offices.
The witness herself didn't work at -- inside the prison, but all
of these locations, these sector offices, were within a kilometre
of each other, so the people who were at these sector offices
have knowledge about the security operations. Her interviews
indicate that, so she would provide information about the
security offices, the sector's oversight and instructions from
the Centre because she worked at the telegram office for a
period. So that's the reason for her relevance.
Thank you, Your Honours.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Well, two points in response. Yes, it's true, in the Khieu
Samphan and Nuon Chea defence teams, <> there were 87.4 requests
that were made, but simply each time in reaction to 87.4 requests
from the Co-Prosecution, so we cannot be criticized for looking
for new elements when new witnesses arrive and we didn't have
another way of anticipating the appearance of these new
witnesses.
Now, concerning the civil party, I don't hear, again -- see the
reference made to the <Phnom Kraol> security centre <in her
statement>. The only <proper> name <mentioned> here is Ol Peou
(phonetic), but we do not see Phnom Kraol in the civil party's
statement.
Now, regarding the rest, of course, I will rely on my last
observations, but please do not criticize me for reacting to 87.4
applications. Yes, <> when we introduce new elements, there is,
of course, a chance that the Defence is also going to have to
look for new elements in response.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Co-Prosecutor, do you want to address your last observation?
If not, the hearing of submissions of the Co-Prosecutor's request
and responses as well as the reply to hear <2-TCCP-1016> and
<2-TCW-1017>, in replacement of other <deceased> witnesses in
relation to Phnom Kraol Security Office has now come to an end.
The Chamber is grateful to your submissions and responses as well
as the replies, and this can form the basis for the Chamber to
issue the decision in due course before we proceed to hear the --
these witnesses in relation to that fact.
Now the Chamber continues -- start to hear 2-TCW-900 from Banteay
Meanchey via video link --
from Oddar Meanchey, rather.
And since this witness is heard by the Investigating Judges in
case -- in other cases, the Chamber has informed <the parties>
already in its memorandum, document E29/47 -- E29/478/2,
<paragraph 9>. And <the Investigating Judges have determined
that> this witness is in the group A among the three groups, so
refer to document E319/35. And the Chamber requests that we
should use the pseudonym in order to protect the integrity and
confidentiality of the investigation and also the security of the
witness.
The Chamber consider that this is an appropriate measure and is
according -- is in accordance with the legal provisions. This can
also ensure the <balance between the public hearings and the>
integrity of the investigation.
So the Chamber again reminds party to adhere to the instruction,
as indicated in document E319/7, <in using documents from cases
003 and 004>.
Good morning, Mr. Nhem Samnang, the staff from WESU. You are now
coordinating this process via video link. Are you ready now?
MR. NHEM SAMNANG:
Good morning, Mr. President. We are now ready, and we are here
together with the duty counsel.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Samnang.
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Mr. Witness, in the proceedings before the Trial Chamber and
on the request of the Co-Investigating Judges, the Chamber will
use your pseudonym, 2-TCW-900. And parties will also use your
pseudonym or Mr. Witness, so please be informed that the Chamber
will not allow parties to use your surname and first name within
these proceedings.
Mr. Witness, now the Chamber would like to verify and would like
you to confirm your identity in document E3/5605; ERN in Khmer
00484143; English, 00488704; and French, 00488704 (sic).
Mr. Mam Rithea, the duty counsel, please hand over the page of
document E3/5605 which the greffier has prepared to the witness
for examination. Particularly, please instruct the witness to
read the highlighted points in relation to his name, birth place,
date of birth, occupation and current address, as well as <his>
parents and his wife <and children>. <Please confirm if the
information is correct.>
(Short Pause)
<2-TCW-900:
A. Yes, it is correct.>
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Have you already examined that page of document? And the
information indicated in that page of document relates your names
-- your name, place of birth, date of birth, nationality,
occupation, names of your parents and your wife <and children>,
and also your current address.
Is that information true, or is there anything incorrect in that
document?
2-TCW-900:
A. Good morning, Mr. President. I have examined the information
in that page of document.
So, my names, together with other information, is correct.
Q. Thank you.
Mr. Witness, to the best of your knowledge and also in the report
of the greffier, you have no relationship, by blood or by law, to
any of the two accused, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, or to any of
the civil parties admitted in this case. Is that report correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Thank you.
The greffier also made a report that you took an oath in
accordance with your religion via video link as well from your
location. Is that report also correct, and have you already taken
an oath?
A. Yes, I have already taken an oath, and it is true what is
stated in that report.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness.
I am now informing of your rights and obligations as a witness
before the Chamber.
Your rights: As a witness in the proceedings before the Chamber,
you may refuse to respond to any question or to make any comment
which may incriminate you, your right against self-incrimination.
Your obligations: As a witness in the proceedings before the
Chamber, you must respond to any questions by the Bench or
relevant parties except where your response or comments to those
questions may incriminate you, as the Chamber has just informed
you of your rights as a witness.
As a witness, you must tell the truth that you have known, heard,
seen, remembered, experienced or observed directly about an event
or occurrence relevant to the questions that the Bench or parties
pose to you.
Do you understand the rights and obligations as a witness before
the Chamber?
A. I have read the document mentioning about rights and
obligation, and I agree to it.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness.
Have you ever provided interviews to the Investigating Judges
and, if so, how many times did they take place?
A. Yes, I gave interviews. To my recollection, I gave interviews
three times, and most of them took place in the <district office
Trapeang Prasat in> Oddar Meanchey <province>, to my
recollection.
Q. Before you appear before this Chamber, have you read and
reviewed those interviews -- written records of interview to
refresh your memory?
A. Yes, I have read all the written records of interviews that I
provided to the interviewers.
Q. Thank you very much.
To your recollection and to your best knowledge, do the written
records of the interview you provided the previous time
correspond or consistent with what you told the investigators
three times, as you said?
A. I read the information in those documents. I agree <with them,
but> I observe that there are some points <that are> overstated.
And there <are> some points that I did not make mention at the
time because of my memory <-- it was a long time ago, so it was
not complete>. But I, in fact, indeed, have read <them and I
agree with the content that I have seen and stated in> those
written records of interviews.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
And as the Chamber has informed already, there is a duty counsel
during the proceedings, Mr. Mam Rithea. And Mam Rithea is sitting
close to the witness so it is normal in these proceedings. And
this duty counsel may assist the witness during the time that
there are questions which may incriminate the witness.
In accordance with the Internal Rule 91bis of the ECCC, the floor
is first given to the Co-Prosecutors before other parties. The
combined time for Co-Prosecutors and Lead Co-Lawyers for civil
parties is one day.
You have the floor first, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.
QUESTIONING BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President. And good morning to Your Honours. Good
morning to all parties. Good morning to the public.
Q. Good morning, Witness 2-TCW-900. I am going to spend a good
part of this day putting questions to you. Given that we are
speaking through video link, I will try to speak slowly so that
my questions are understandable.
I, first of all, would like to ask you two -- one or two
questions on the period that preceded 17 April 1975, so I'm
speaking here between 1970 and 1975.
So can you tell us very briefly when you joined the revolutionary
forces and who was your direct superior then?
2-TCW-900:
A. From 1970 to 1975, I was a soldier, and I became a soldier in
1971.
First I was in Regiment 39, and the commander -- my commander in
that regiment, the commanders in this regiment mostly came from
Hanoi. They were cadres from Hanoi. And I could recall their
names, Ta Cheng (phonetic) and Ta San. And as of now, I do not
know where they are living.
So again, I became the -- a soldier between 1970 to 1975.
Q. Thank you.
Do not worry if there's a gap between the moment when you answer
and that -- and the next question. It's because what you're
saying in Khmer is first interpreted into English and then into
French, so it might take a bit of time.
So at one point in time, did your regiment -- was your Regiment
39 incorporated into a division? And what was the <name and the>
number of that division, and who led that division?
A. Previously, Regiment 39 was under the Central. It did not
belong to any other divisions. And our headquarter was <around>
Phnom Santuk, or Santuk mountain in Kampong Thom province.
And at that time, we were engaged in Chenla II battle, so <the
Lon Nol> soldiers were mobilized to be stationed around Kampong
Thom province. And we made -- we conducted operation in locations
close to Santuk mountain in Kampong Thom province.
Q. Fine. And later on, did you join Regiment 82, and what was
your function in that regiment?
A. Later on, Regiment 39 was sent to be stationed in the
Northwest <> Phnom Penh. First we were stationed in Pal Hal
<village>, west to Praseth (phonetic) mountain. In relation to
Regiment 82, it was under Division 801, but before Division 801
had its name. In fact, that Division 801 used that number after
the liberation <of '75>. <Before that, it was called Division
14.> The Regiment <39 was combined with regiments> 81 and 82 <and
it> was under another division -- that is, Division 14 <in the
Northwest Phnom Penh battle>.
Q. Fine. So who was the leader of Division 14 before it became
Division 801?
A. After we were stationed in Phnom Penh -- <the Northwest> Phnom
Penh <battle>, San was the commander of Division 14. When we
started to conduct -- to be engaged in battlefield <990>, the
commander in charge was Sou Saroeun. He was from the south, and
he came to be part of Division 14.
And at the time, we were engaged in the battlefield 990, in the
northwest of Pochentong.
Q. Thank you.
Now I'm going to be speaking about the period that followed the
capture of Phnom Penh in April 1975, and I'll try to speed up a
little bit.
What was the role of your Division 14 after the capture of Phnom
Penh, and where was this division posted?
A. After the liberation of
April 1975, the Division 14 was 
          17   posted and conducted operation to protect Phnom Penh from the
location between railway station to the west close to Pochentong,
that is <Khmuoch Payab> (phonetic). And the headquarter of that
division was in Olympic Stadium.
Q. I have two follow-up questions.
You have referred to the railway station. After the liberation of
Phnom Penh, did you attend or were you aware of the fact that
there were meetings of the leadership<>, who met at the railway
station?
A. I was not aware of the location of that meeting.
Q. The headquarters of your division was the Olympic Stadium. Was
your division also in charge of providing <security> during major
rallies held at the Olympic Stadium in 1975?
A. There was a meeting held at the Olympic Stadium. However, at
that time, I was not there. I was somewhere <along the way to
Khmuoch Payab> (phonetic) since I was assigned by the divisional
commander to erect a communication -- a radio communication post.
And I actually went to the stadium at night time <where there
was> a performance, but I was not allowed in.
Q. Yet you said something, and I'll read out what you said in
E3/9734. In answer number 2, you stated that:
"After 1975, I met Sou Met when he attended a <rally> at the
Olympic Stadium. At the time, I was in charge of radio
communications of Division 14 headed by <Ta> Saroeun, which
became Division 801 subsequently. Son Sen came regularly to
attend meetings in Ta Saroeun's office."
Did you attend any rallies at the Olympic Stadium and, if so, can
you give us any details on that rally?
A. While I worked at the office of Division 801, which was a new
name for Division 14, I never attended a rally held at Olympic
Stadium, nor did I attend any meeting held within the vicinity of
the Olympic Stadium.
At that time, I was a radio operator, and my role was to set up
the chairs and the tables and the drinking water, but personally,
I did not attend any meeting there, although I knew there were
representatives from other divisions who attend<ed> meetings. And
my role was to set up the <meeting place with my friends in the
office> only.
Q. Do you recall when Division 14 was renamed a Centre Division
801? During <which> period <was this in> 1975?
A. To my recollection, the re-designation of number <from
Division 14> to Division 801 was made before it was deployed to
Ratanakiri province. And that could happen in around October or
November.
At that time, the weather was pretty cool.
Q. You talk of October or November 1975. At that time, had you
already been posted to Ratanakiri to work in the new Division
801, or it was <shortly> after that?
A. After I learned that the Division 14 was renamed to Division
801, troops within the division were prepared to be sent to
Ratanakiri province. Initially, there were only certain number of
troops who were sent to the province from the headquarters. And
at that time, we took along the radio, which we -- which were <>
the United States products <with the brand name Co-lang
(phonetic)> . And actually, its range was communicable <> between
<Kratie or> Ratanakiri province and Phnom Penh. <Other than that,
there were C46 and C25 radios for the communication between
units.>
I was one of the first soldiers who were sent there with Ta San,
and I resided in Ruessei Char <village>, in Kratie province, when
I was first deployed to that location.
Q. Among the tasks assigned to Division 801 in the <Northeast>,
did that division have to <specifically> guard <> the border with
Vietnam?
A. The division was assigned to be stationed along the border
area. <It was not called the three angles. It was called the
dragon's tail> -- that is, at the borders <of> Laos, Vietnam and
Cambodia, and also <at the border of Vietnam and Cambodia> at
National Road Number 19, in the area of Ou Ya Dav.
Q. In a word, between <> late 1975 when you arrived there and
1979, <what was the administrative structure of the Northeast
Zone?> Who was <part> of the <Northeast> Zone committee
initially? <Did the leaders> of the <Northeast> Zone <change> as
time went on?
A. I did not know <about> the <whole> Northeast Zone; I only knew
<> within Division 801. There were regiments subordinate to
Division 801 which were stationed in various locations, including
Siem Pang <district>, and there was another regiment <and the
special unit of the Division> stationed at the <dragon's tail>
area<>. And there was also another regiment stationed in Bar Keo
-- that is, to protect the border area <in Ou Ya Dav> and along
the upper part of Se San River. And that <was Lum Duo (phonetic)>
road, <which> is now called <Ho Chi Minh road>.
Q. Very well. Let me return to the previous question.
Who was the chief of the <Northeast> Zone when you were there?
And perhaps I can press on to ask you where the office of the
<Northeast> Zone was situated.
A. I did not know <where> the office of the Northeast Zone <was
located>. However, I was first stationed in Ban Lung. That is a
little bit to the south of Svay Mountain, and it -- that was a
former Lon Nol military barrack. And I saw many empty shells and
some unexploded shells.
There was also an office near Au Kanseng, and that office was
known as the sector's office, although, I, myself, did not go to
that office. <I only heard people say that the sector's office
was to the east of Au Kanseng.>
So let me repeat. I did not know where the office of the
Northeast Zone located.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Deputy Co-Prosecutor, and thank you, Mr. Witness.
It is now convenient for our short break. And Mr. Witness and
duty counsel, you may also have a break from now until 10.30 when
we resume. So please return to where you are before 10.30.
The Chamber will take a short break and resume at 10.30 this
morning.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1013H to 1033H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
Mr. Witness, are you ready now?
2-TCW-900:
A. Yes, I am ready, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And the floor is now given to the Deputy International
Co-Prosecutor to resume the questioning.
You may now proceed.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Witness, I'm going to ask you to listen to my questions
carefully because you're testifying by video link, and try to
answer these questions as clearly as possible without getting
sidetracked into details that were not requested from you.
So regarding the organization of Division 801, you already spoke
to us about Ta Saroeun, who was the commander of the division,
and you also spoke about Ta San.
Who was Ta Saroeun's immediate superior?
2-TCW-900:
A. I do not know who the immediate supervisor of Ta Saroeun in
that division. I only knew that Ta Saroeun and Ta San were
commanders, and how he communicated to the upper echelon, I do
not know about that.
Q. Well, indeed, I was not speaking about the fact that there was
a superior within Division 801, but who was Ta Saroeun's
superior, <since> he was the commander of Division 801? <Was the
upper echelon located> elsewhere, for example, at general staff
in Phnom Penh?
A. What I knew -- what I know is that he made the report via
radio communication to general staff headquarter in Phnom Penh.
And that location was Son Sen's office, who received the
information by radio communication.
Q. Fine. Beyond the radio message, would Ta Saroeun travel to
Phnom Penh on a regular basis for meetings?
A. When he was immediately in Ratanakiri province, one month
after his arrival in Ratanakiri, he went to Phnom Penh. And
because of road conditions -- bad conditions of the road, <it
took him a long time to travel; it was about a week or more>.
From Ratanakiri to Kratie, they had to spend the night -- one <or
two> night<s> in the middle of the road. And from Kratie to Phnom
Penh, they were on boats, so it <took him a while to go there>.
Q. You were in charge of radio communication within Division 801.
So do you know or did Ta Saroeun tell you if he had to consult
with <the> general <staff of the> army <or the Party Centre> for
any important decisions involving security in his zone, whether
it be regarding external or internal enemies?
Are you aware of the fact that he had to consult or not the Party
Centre or <general staff> regarding these matters?
A. The divisional report to general staff consisted of letters.
And I <converted> the information in <these> letters <into>
secret codes<>. <Before converting these letters into codes, I
often found that he was asking for advice.>
The report was about the situation at the border and also about
the internal affairs within units and the whole division.
Mostly, I saw him writing about that information, as I indicated,
in the report and he requested for advice and suggestions from
the upper echelon.
Q. And you said that he would ask for counsel from the higher
echelons, so what was he expecting, instructions or only
recommendations when he would ask for the opinion of his
superiors?
A. Regarding the advice or instruction from the upper echelon, it
was about the instruction of the complicated issues <on> the
<battlefield> in relation to medicines and <the sick people or
the situation> at the border. And he requested instructions or
opinions from the upper echelon on other issues.
Q. Now, regarding the issue of the internal enemies, that is to
say the enemies who could bore from within, in the division, in
fact, or regarding the issue of external enemies such as the
Vietnamese, would he <also> ask for instructions <in that case>?
A. I happened to see an issue in that letter. And at the time, I
put the letter of Ta Saroeun in an envelope. I, together with
other two people, had to take that letter to the general staff.
We were on a motorbike, three of us, from Ratanakiri to Kratie
province, and during that journey, we had to spend a night <in
the forest. The next day, we reached Kratie and we crossed from
there to the other side>. And after Kratie, we <rode the
motorbike> the whole day, <and we delivered the letter> to <the>
general staff. And I did not see the content of that letter or
the message <because the letter was in an envelope and it was
sealed>.
I -- my role at the time was to deliver <the letter> to the
general staff, and the -- on the top of the letter -- on the top
of envelope, it said "To Bong Khieu".
Q. Fine. So under which circumstances were you obliged to carry
these letters rather than sending telegrams?
Were these letters confidential? Did Ta Saroeun tell you that
<this was an> important letter<>?
A. To my limited knowledge of the Democratic Kampuchea's affairs,
some issues had to be communicated in a confidential way. It
could not be communicated in an open fashion.
<Even though> I was the one who decoded and encoded the messages
and was in charge of delivering the messages <to the general
staff>, I did not know fully all the content of messages, so I
<thought> that letter at the time was a confidential one. I did
not dare to open the envelope to read the content.
Man was <with Ta Saroeun and he went> with me at the time <>.
Q. Fine. So you didn't really answer my previous question,
however. And here, I'm speaking more about radio communication
rather than carrying letters.
In the <telegrams, the exchange of> reports <with the general
staff> that you would <decode or encode>, <was there issue of>
enemies boring from within or about enemies from the outside?
And regarding these issues, did Ta Saroeun ask Bong 89 or Son
Sen<, as it happens, for> instructions<>?
A. I have never seen the content of the messages mentioning about
the enemies burrowing from the inside. I have never seen such
content in the messages.
Q. Well, we'll get back to this later with certain documents that
I will read out to you.
Now, quickly speaking, the headquarters of Division 801 where you
worked in the radio communications department, can we say that
this -- the headquarters were in Ban Lung at first, and then they
were moved to Veun Sai?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And until when did you work at the headquarters of Division
801 in Veun Sai?
A. Upon my arrival in Ratanakiri province, first I was posted at
Ban Lung. And because the location there consisted of mines on
the land, and there was not much space to install an office, the
division moved the headquarter to another location.
First we wanted to be stationed in Lumphat, the provincial town
of Ratanakiri during the Samdech Euv period. I, at the time, was
<> with him to examine the location. <I drove a car there for
him.> And when we arrived at the location, we asked people in the
cooperatives, and they said that location was a flooding area
during the rainy season <so it was very difficult to stay there>.
And after receiving information, we came back <> and we decided
to <check out> Veun Sai. I had never been to Veun Sai to observe
the location <since we came back from Lumphat.>
After I went with him <to find> the location that we wanted to
stay, he, from time to time, went to observe a location which
<was> appropriate for the headquarter. <Then he went to Veun Sai
and made it the headquarter.>
Q. Fine. This was a rather lengthy answer to a very simple
question, so I'm going to ask you once again to please answer in
a more precise way if possible given that our time is <limited>.
Thank you.
You said in WRI E3/9734 at answer 7 that you worked at the
headquarters of Division 801 until you got married, which was on
27 March 1977. Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Then were you assigned to the re-education centre at Au
Kanseng, which was located close to Ban Lung in <Sector> 102?
A. Correct.
Q. Who selected you to work there? And did this person tell you
why you were selected to work over there?
A. I do not know the reason I was moved to be in that location,
and the one who reassigned me to that divisional office was the
head of the office. He told me to move to be stationed in Ban
Lung.
Q. Did he tell you which duties you were to exercise at the Au
Kanseng re-education and security centre?
A. Before I left, the evening before that, <Sung (phonetic)> told
me to pack up <my> belongings to meet Ta Chheng in Ban Lung.
Q. And who was Ta Chheng, and can you tell us if it is he who
assigned specific duties to you?
A. Ta Chheng was in charge of logistic. He was the head of
logistic. And after I arrived <there>, I met him.
Q. So I must understand that he was working as the head of
logistics within a unit called Unit 806 or Battalion 806 that was
in charge of logistics within Division 801? Is that what I must
understand?
A. Correct.
Q. And once you arrived at Au Kanseng, can you tell us what your
duties were on site, and who was the head of the security centre?
A. Upon my first arrival, I was with Ta Chheng. And I, at the
time, was not appointed any position.
Q. Let me put my question to you again. So who, then, became the
head of the Au Kanseng security centre?
A. Upon my arrival at Ta Chheng's location, half a month later, I
saw an individual by the name Se coming to Ta Chheng's location.
Q. And what was Se's duties -- what were Se's duties?
A. After I left Ban Lung to <stay> close to the stream at Au
Kanseng, Smien came to appoint Se to be chief, and Tim was part
of Unit 806, became the deputy chief, and I was a member.
Q. I will get back to that point because it's not quite clear to
me. I'm going to, for example, read out to you what you said in
your WRI, E3/9734, where the following is stated at answer 6:
"The security centre was attached to Battalion 806, and Ta Chheng
was the first person to <take> the <position of chief of> centre.
After one week working at the centre, Ta Se also took on his
duties. Later on, Ta Se was appointed commander, Toem (sic)
deputy commander, and I member." End of quote.
And I would like to get back, therefore, to another quote which I
-- in which you said that you were the deputy in charge of
interrogating, and that Tim was a member.
So can you tell us if that changed over the course of time? Were
you the deputy or were you a member, and what were Tim's duties?
A. Se was the chief, and Tim was the deputy chief. And I was a
member in charge of compiling the confessions or answers from the
detainees.
Q. And what were Tim's specific duties within the Au Kanseng
security centre, and which unit <or which persons> did he lead?
A. Tim was in charge of security guards at Au Kanseng.
Q. Does that mean that he was in charge of organizing the work of
the guards, in particular, supervision, supervising the security
centre, watching over the prisoners and possibly executions?
A. That is correct.
Q. <And possibly executions.> Was that his role?
A. Correct.
Q. Can you tell us how many people or how many -- how many staff
<> were working at Au Kanseng security <centre> on a permanent
basis, aside from Se, Tim and you, who <were the> cadres, <how
many> other people <were> working there on a permanent basis?
A. Not more than 10 people who were working in that office.
Q. I would like to read out what witness 2-TCW-840 said, and I
will ask the Chamber if I may say his name because this witness
already testified in Case 002/01 regarding the Au Kanseng
security centre.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you can do so.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Well, just to be specific about this, Chhaom Se, in his WRI
E3/407 at answer 20 said, and I quote:
"The staff working in my security centre was made up of 12 people
in total." End of quote. That is to say three cadres and nine
guards.
So do you remember the names of some of the guards at Au Kanseng?
2-TCW-900:
A. I can recall an individual by the name Lay and Chuop and Nhok,
and Ta Ouy, Chang, Set. And I cannot recall others' names.
Q. Fine. Can you explain the specific tasks that were assigned to
Ta Se? Was he in charge, among other things, of <generally>
managing the centre and, in particular, was he in charge of
communicating with the upper echelon?
A. Se had overall supervision at Au Kanseng centre, and he had
direct relation with the upper echelon.
Q. And when you talk of the upper echelon, are you referring to
Ta Saroeun directly or to the 806 logistics battalion? Can you
<clarify the relationship he had and the reports he had to make
to his superiors>?
Who, exactly, did he report to?
A. The detention unit was under supervision of Battalion 808 --
806. Se would report first to commander of Battalion 806.
Q. As regards sensitive issues and regarding confidential
reports, did he <address them> directly to Ta Saroeun <or> did he
meet Ta Saroeun <directly>?
A. I did not know whether he went to meet Ta Saroeun <or any
other> person. What I knew is that he would -- went to the
Battalion <806's> office.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, please have a slight pause before you respond to the
question since everything will go through the interpretation
system, and it seems there is an overlap between the question and
your immediate response. So please have a slight pause so that
your response may be interpreted into English and French.
2-TCW-900:
Yes, I understand that, Mr. President. Thank you.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Mr. Witness, <were> there times when Chhaom Se <attended> the
interrogation of prisoners led by you?
2-TCW-900:
A. On the issue of interrogating every prisoner, Se was always
present. And he was the one who interrogated those prisoners. I
was there to take note of the responses.
Q. Wasn't it too complicated for him to be always present since
he had to supervise the entire centre and <communicate with> the
<superiors>? <Are you sure that he was> present on each occasion?
A. I am sure on this matter <because> he did not go to see the
superiors every day<>.
Q. Very well.
Regarding guards, we've talked about the fact that there were
nine guards, and you named <six of> them. <>
Were there other guards apart from Lay, Chuop, Chang, Set, Nhok,
and Ouy that you would remember? For instance, did the name Tin
<> ring a bell?
A. Tim was a part of the committee that I was in.
Q. I wasn't referring to the committee member, but I was
referring to a person called <Tin>, <T-I-N>, who <was either> a
guard <or a prisoner> who was assigned to certain duties.
Does that name ring a bell to you?
A. I recall that name Tin, not <Tim>. Actually, Tin came from the
union, and he was sent there from the -- by the union. And after
he was questioned and there was nothing wrong with him, he was
assigned a certain task within the guard group.
Q. Did his duties change? Did he become a guard, or he was still
a prisoner who <was trusted and who shared daily life with the
guards>? What was his exact status?
A. After he was assigned to do certain tasks within the office,
he -- those assignments were to find food and vegetables for the
<people there>.
Q. Very well. You referred to Lay (sic) a while ago. Was that
person a guard who was a member of Division 801 initially and who
was <> assigned as a guard to work at the Centre, or was that
person also a former prisoner?
A. Lay was a person came from a handicapped unit which was
situated along Au Kanseng. And he was assigned certain duties at
the office.
Q. To clarify matters, I am not sure I heard the entire
translation of what you said.
You said in <the written record of interview> E3/5512 in answer
number 12 regarding Vietnamese prisoners, you said the following:
"We issued an order to a prisoner detained at the Au Kanseng
security centre called Lai to interrogate those Vietnamese
prisoners in order to obtain their confessions." End of quote.
So my question is, therefore, what was the status of that person?
Had he previously been a prisoner at Au Kanseng and, as Tin, was
subsequently assigned to work as a security guard to the extent
of interrogating Vietnamese prisoners?
A. I now understand your question.
The name is not Lay, but Lai. And this Lai person knew how to
speak Vietnamese.
Lai was originally from a special unit, and I did not know what
issues he had, <but> he was subsequently sent to Au Kanseng
security centre as a prisoner. And it was difficult for me to
record any responses from Vietnamese prisoners <because I do not
speak Vietnamese>, and since Lai spoke Vietnamese; he was used to
interpret the responses.
At that time, his status was not one of those guards. He was
still considered a prisoner, but we used him since we had
difficulty in understanding the responses from Vietnamese
prisoners.
Q. To wrap up this line of questioning, so there were two persons
called Lay. One was called L-A-Y, Lay, was a <security> guard,
and the other was a prisoner called L-A-I, who was an
interpreter.
Did I understand correctly?
A. Yes, that is correct. Lai was an interpreter, while Lay was a
security guard.
Q. Very well. Within the guard corps at Au Kanseng, were there
any guards who were not from Division 801, but from the <sector>
army in Ban Lung, for instance, and who were assigned to Au
Kanseng to back up the staff there?
A. Besides the forces under subordinate of Division 801, there
were also security forces from the sector and, actually, there
were two of them.
Q. To be absolutely sure that I understood you, were those two
guards -- those two persons permanently assigned to work in the
Au Kanseng security <centre> and were, therefore, <> subordinate
to the <leaders> in charge of Au Kanseng centre?
A. The two individuals from the Centre, who came to engage in
the<> security guard work <>, were under the supervision of
<Tim>, who was in charge of the security there.
Q. Very well. I have another question regarding the role of
certain prisoners.
Did the leadership at the centre, notably Se, assign certain
prisoners to carry out duties, for instance, guarding certain
places within the Au Kanseng security <centre> perimeter or to
keep an eye on other prisoners or to guard other prisoners?
A. There was Tin, who came from the union, and before he was
assigned to find fruits and vegetables for the kitchen unit, he
was sometimes assigned to guard the prisoners.
Q. Do you know a prisoner who was called Phan Thol, at the time,
P-H-A-N, and the other word is T-H-O-L, Phan Thol?
A. I have not heard about any prisoner named Phan Thol.
Q. It may well be that he had a nickname, at the time. I would
like to read out what he said at the hearing of the 2nd March
2016, shortly after 15 hours 22 and 26 seconds in answer to a
question put to him by Counsel Koppe. This is what he stated:
"After having cleared the prison, I was sent to stand guard in a
jackfruit plantation. I was in charge of preventing intruders
from getting in and stealing fruits in the plantation." End of
quote.
Could such work have been assigned to some detainees who did not
pose any <danger> or who had not been imprisoned under a severe
regime and who were working at the security centre?
A. The work that they mostly did was to clear grass at the potato
plantation or to clear a forest area <for plantations and
planting potatoes,> and those <tasks> applie<d> to prisoners who
could work.
Q. Given the difficulties involved in carrying out certain tasks,
were prisoners who were assigned to work at the Au Kanseng
security centre sometimes assigned to dig pits or to fill up pits
when prisoners died of disease or from executions? Were prisoners
sometimes assigned to dig pits or to fill up pits?
A. Mostly that was the job done by security guards -- that is, to
dig up pits.
Q. I am somewhat surprised because there were nine security
guards and they were in charge of guarding those who worked
outside during the day, inter alia; were there any guards also
assigned to guard the interrogation rooms when prisoners were
interrogated?
A. Please repeat your question.
Q. I'm sorry. I am wondering because there were only nine guards
in all and you said earlier that they came to guard the entire
perimeter of the security centre and had to guard the prisoners,
<some of whom were working>, and <> they had to <watch them while
they were working>, and that <perhaps> they <also> had to guard
prisoners when they were interrogated. <Was all of that> part of
their duties, <and> did they also have time, therefore, to dig
pits and to fill up pits?
A. There was only one guard at the interrogation room and, as
usual, at the time, there were three guards who always took the
prisoners out to work outside. And I did not know how many guards
were assigned to dig up pits or to cover pits with dirt because
usually they did this task at night time.
Q. Very well. Was that also because it was under the duty of
<your colleague, Toem (sic),> to organize the security unit at
the centre? Is that the reason why you did not know everything
regarding that particular matter?
A. That task was under the arrangement and instruction of Tim.
Q. I would like to put a question to you regarding the nature of
the centre because, as you <and Chhaom Se> said, it was referred
to as the "re-education" or "security centre", <in reference to
prisoners>. Was there any form of re-education offered to the
prisoners at the centre apart from the fact that they had to be
refashioned <through> work? I am thinking, particularly, of
re-education sessions; were there any such re-education sessions?
A. Besides the labour work, namely working in the plantation or
rice fields, every tenth day, there was an education session and
certain materials were used including the "Revolutionary <> Flag"
<and "Youth Flag" (sic)> magazines, and it covered topics
including how to make the socialist revolution.
Q. Unless I am mistaken, the "Revolutionary Flag" was a magazine
reserved for members of the Party. <Are you suggesting that> Ta
Se used the magazine and its <rather secret> content <> to talk
to the prisoners about it? Or <do you mean that he talked about
it to staff members> at the <re-education> centre<>?
A. Every month, the office received the "Revolutionary Flag"
magazine and the youth magazine. And when there was a meeting to
educate the workers there, the meeting would focus on the
development of <socialism and> on the loyalty to the Party, for
example.
Q. I have a few minutes left; I'll put a few questions to you
regarding the buildings at that security centre.
How many buildings housing prisoners were there at the beginning
when you went to the security centre for the first time, and how
many buildings were there at the end? Were certain buildings
constructed to increase the security centre's capacity to house
prisoners?
A. After it was relocated from Ban Lung to the area along or near
the Au Kanseng stream, there were two buildings to detain
prisoners to the west of the stream and there was a long building
to the East; then there was a kitchen hall and there was another
house, where I stayed. So, in total, there were five buildings in
the centre and they were made from bamboo and roof with a thatch.
Q. My question was, therefore, whether, after that, some
additional buildings were put up, inter alia, in order to be able
to house more prisoners in them.
A. Later on, there was a building constructed to the east part
and, actually, the building was made by workers who knew how to
build a building in the centre. And the building was in a proper
and better condition. The sleeping quarter was also better.
<After building the new one, the west building was no longer
used.> That was -- that building was built to the east of the
long building.
There also was a building where <women> were housed and, as I
said earlier, there was a kitchen and then there was a house
where I lived.
Q. So if I reckon correctly, what you said was that, at the end,
there were five buildings housing prisoners; two to the west <of
the stream> and two to the east that were bigger<, and one more>
for the housing of <female> prisoners. This is what Chhaom Se
said in <his written record of interview> E3/405. And he says in
answer number 11: "<In this centre, there> were four <prisoner>
buildings<, each measuring four by six metres,> and in each
building, there were a group of prisoners consisting of 12
persons. But subsequently, as the number of prisoners increased,
three <additional warehouses> were built for prisoners<>." And
I'm skipping a passage.
Later on, he says: "In addition to all that, there were two
buildings used for housing particular prisoners, who were
detained under severe regimes, and who <required> very thorough
surveillance".
I <calculate> that the security chief said there were four
buildings in the beginning, <plus three additional warehouses>
and, subsequently, there were two buildings built for <>
prisoners <> under severe <regime>.
What is your reaction to this; did you take <into account the
buildings> for prisoners detained under severe conditions?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, can you respond to the last question and have you
actually heard that question?
2-TCW-900:
A. Yes, I heard the question and I shall respond only when I see
my video on screen.
The building to house the serious-offence prisoners, yes, there
was such a building and that building was guarded day and night
since those serious-offence prisoners were chained or shackled
all the time.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Thank you. A last point before we break for lunch, Mr.
President
You were in charge of the interrogations, so can you describe the
room or the shed where the interrogations took place, and maybe
you could tell us how far this place was from the different <>
prisoner <cells>?
2-TCW-900:
A. The interrogation house was not far from the house where I
lived. It could be less than 100 metres away. And actually that
interrogation house was not a fully enclosed house. It was -- the
roof was made from thatch and the <interrogator's seat> was made
from bamboo, and the place where the prisoner sat was also made
from bamboo. And there were, actually, no walls, <> there was
<only> forest to the sides of the interrogation house.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. It is now appropriate for our lunch break. We take a
break now and resume at 1.30 this afternoon.
And thank you, Mr. Witness, as well as, the duty counsel and Nhem
Samnang. It is now time for us to have our lunch break and please
return to where you are at 1.30 this afternoon so that we can
resume our video testimony.
Do you understand that, Mr. Witness?
2-TCW-900:
A. Yes, I do, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may rest now.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him returned to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1135H to 1333H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
Good afternoon, Mr. Witness. Are you ready?
2-TCW-900:
Yes, I'm ready, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Witness. And I would like to inform you that
please give a little bit pause as in this morning since there is
interpretation in this court and in the morning I intervened
because it has -- it has something to do with the technical issue
and now, I advise you to give a little bit pause before you give
your answers.
And the floor is now given to the Co-Prosecutor to resume the
questioning to this witness. You have the floor now.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President, and good afternoon.
Just to make things a bit clearer, in relation -- I'm going to
continue putting questions this afternoon until 4 o'clock and
tomorrow morning, the civil parties will question you, Witness,
until a quarter to 10.00 in the morning.
Q. Now, first, I'd like to get back to your role within the
security centre at Au Kanseng because I found the quote that I
was looking for earlier.
You said to us, earlier, that you were a member and it was Tim,
who was Ta Se's deputy. And in a written record of interview,
E3/5512, at question 4, you -- the question is; "Please describe
the structure of the Au Kanseng security office." And you
answered:
"Three cadres supervised this office. Se was the <director of the
centre and was in charge of the general direction>. <Then there
was myself, who> was deputy <director> in charge of
interrogations and <> prisoner <archives>; and Toem (sic), <who
was simply a> member, <was in charge of the security unit and of
surveillance>. He died in 1979." End of quote.
So I would like, simply -- I would like you simply to clarify
this because of the contradiction between two of your statements;
if you were the deputy <chief> of this centre or if you were,
simply, a member of the committee at the Au Kanseng security
centre.
2-TCW-900:
A. My actual role at Au Kanseng security centre was member and Se
was the chairman and Tim was the deputy, as I said.
Q. Fine. At the Au Kanseng security centre, did Ta Saroeun, the
head of Division 801, come to visit; did he come at least once or
he never came?
A. Ta Saroeun, after the establishment of Au Kanseng security
centre, never came to visit that location.
Q. And what about the leaders of Unit 806 that was in charge of
logistics, and you mentioned Ta Smien, in that regard, S-M-E-A-N
(sic), and possibly Ta Mon, M-O-N, did they come to the centre <>
to <hold> meetings there?
A. Those who were in charge of -- of Battalion 806 consisted of
Smien. Smien used to come to attend the meetings at Au Kanseng
security centre.
Q. And what were these meetings about, at the security centre,
with the staff <of> the centre; what were these meetings focused
on?
A. The meeting -- the meetings were about the internal issues and
monthly issues of our work, particularly, in relation to security
matters. At that -- in that -- in those meetings, we were told to
prevent prisoners from fleeing the prison.
Q. And what would happen if a prisoner escaped -- I don't know if
it happened <that> prisoners were able to successfully escape
from the prison, but <> did they say <or> did he say that <you>
would be punished?
A. At that security centre, Mao, the prisoner, made an escape. He
made an escape to the west of the security centre. He wanted to
go to Phoy (phonetic) village. The villagers there arrested him
and returned him to the security centre.
Q. And once Mao was caught, was he placed in the cell for <>
prisoners <under severe regime>, <> because he had tried to
escape?
A. After his arrest by villagers and after he had been returned
to the security guards, Mao was then placed in a house where
prisoners had their ankles shackled.
Q. And just to finish with this line of questioning, did Mao
survive the regime; did he survive until the end of the centre at
the end of 1978 or did he die?
A. He did not die yet in 1978. He survived after 1978, and he
also joined the fighting against the Vietnamese.
Q. You spoke about the fact that Ta Smien would come to the
centre for meetings, in particular, regarding internal operations
and maybe his successor, as well; so did the leaders of Unit 806
have the power of determining who had to be executed at the
security centre in Au Kanseng or were these <types of> decisions
made by Ta Saroeun?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on. There is an objection by the defence team for the
accused. You have the floor now, Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I object to this question. Whatever
happened to asking open questions first? I don't recall the
witness saying anything yet about executions, whether there was a
practice, and if yes, how did that -- how was it implemented.
So, out of the blue, the prosecutor is now talking about
executions, so I object to this question. He should move very
slowly with -- with this subject.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, I'll get back to this later. It will be easier
than proceeding in steps right now.
Q. Well, more simply speaking, Witness, did you ever go to Ta
Saroeun's place <while> you were assigned to the Au Kanseng
security centre? And if that was the case, did you go to Ta
Saroeun's alone or did you go there with Ta Se?
2-TCW-900:
A. After I came to work at Au Kanseng Security Office, to my
recollection, I visited Ta Saroeun's his wife -- Ta Saroeun's
wife; I never went to his house to discuss the issues <> at Au
Kanseng Security Office.
Q. Now, regarding <this> point, I would like to read out to you
two excerpts from your WRIs. The first is at E3/5607<>. It is
answer 8 and you said the following, and I quote:
"One day when I went to visit my wife at Veun Sai, Saroeun said
to me, personally, that someone from Phnom Penh was going to work
in my unit at Au Kanseng. Back then, my centre had been moved
from Ban Lung to Au Kanseng." End of quote.
And I'm going to read, directly, the second answer, as well; it
is in WRI <E3/5512> at answer -- question-answer number 11, and
you speak about a certain number of Jarai who had been arrested
and detained at the security centre. And you say the following:
MR. KOPPE:
I object to the reading out of the second excerpt, as a matter of
fact, the first excerpt, as well. It was not a subject discussed.
It seems that this prosecutor is, again, moving too quickly,
going directly to whatever the witness has said in his WRIs. He
should, at first, ask open questions about the Jarai and ask open
questions as to what was discussed at Saroeun's house rather than
going straight to reading these excerpts.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, I asked an open question regarding the meetings
that the witness might have had with Sou Saroeun. He said that
there were no <> meetings. And I read out two excerpts in which
he said that he met Sou Saroeun back then. So I'm not going to
speak about the Jarai in detail, right now, but I simply want to
quote what the witness said regarding a meeting with Ta Sou
Saroeun.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection is overruled. It is premature since the Chamber has
not heard yet the purpose of question put by the International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
You may resume your question since your question does not go deep
into the matter of Jarai, so please reformulate your question.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
So the excerpt that I was going to read out, it is answer 11 of
WRI E3/5512, and the answer is the following: "There were more
than one hundred of those Jarai."
MR. PRESIDENT:
You said you did not go deep into the issue of Jarai and the
International -- the International Counsel for Mr. Nuon Chea
objected to the question that you did not put an open question
and I assumed that you wanted to ask <whether or not he attended
the meeting with> Ta Saroeun, but not about Jarai. And if that's
so, it appears that you read to the witness, in advance, about
Jarai issue, so this can be considered the -- the leading
question. If it is so, it is not appropriate. So please
reformulate question -- reformulate your question please. <It's
different from what you have responded to Nuon Chea's defence
counsel.>
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Well, okay, then I will read out only one single sentence of this
excerpt because I have to do so to demonstrate that the witness
spoke about a meeting.
You said the following, Witness, "Back then, Ta Saroeun <asked>
me and <Se> to <go see> him." I will stop there for the moment
and I'll get back to the Jarai later on.
So I quoted two excerpts from your WRIs; one in which you said
that Sou Saroeun had told you personally that someone from Phnom
Penh was going to work in your unit and the other regarding the
Jarai. And <he had asked you> and Se <> to go see him.
Q. So does this refresh your memory regarding the fact that you
met Ta Sou Saroeun back then?
2-TCW-900:
A. I want to make it clear about the meeting with Ta Saroeun. I
met him and he said that there was a person from Phnom Penh and,
after I left his house, while I was -- after I visited his wife,
I met him and, at that time, he told me that there was an
individual assigned from Phnom Penh to work <there>.
Q. Fine, so regarding the excerpt that I read out to you, did you
meet him a second time, this time in his offices in Veun Sai with
Ta Se?
A. Correct.
Q. Witness, aside from the Au Kanseng security office, <> were
there other security centres <in your region or> in the Northeast
Zone, whether they be military security centres or whether they
be civilian security centres, at <> Sector 101, Sector 102,
Sector 104 or Sector 107?
So do you know of any other re-education or security centres<>?
A. There was a centre located at Kach Changkeh mountain under the
supervision of Division 801. And besides that security centre, I
have no idea.
Q. Was the centre managed by Ta Vanna? In any case this is what
you said in your WRI. Do you confirm that<>?
A. Yes, that was managed by Ta Vanna.
Q. And do you know why this centre was created at one point in
time and which kind of prisoners were detained there?
A. I do not know the reason that led to the establishment of that
security centre. All I know is that a centre was established and
located at Phnom Kach Changkeh or Kach Changkeh mountain under
the command of Vanna. And <there were> people who <> were sent to
work in the <rice> field<s and plantations,> and they were
assigned to grow vegetables<>, particularly sweet potatoes.
Q. And did prisoners from Au Kanseng, which also was <attached
to> Division 801, were those prisoners transferred to this other
centre that was led by Ta Vanna next to Kach Changkeh mountain;
did this happen?
A. No transfer. No transfer of people from Au Kanseng security
centre to that -- the one managed by Ta Vanna.
Q. Now, I would like to turn to the kind of prisoners who were
detained at Au Kanseng. And at Au Kanseng, when you were there,
were former Lon Nol soldiers ever detained there or members of --
or family members of these former <Lon Nol soldiers or civil
servants>?
A. Those who were detained at Au Kanseng security centre did not
consist of former Lon Nol soldiers or former officials. They were
workers from unions and cooperatives as well as some -- as well
as soldiers.
Q. And regarding the soldiers of Division 801 who were detained
at Au Kanseng, what were their ranks or -- they <brought>
soldiers <to Au Kanseng> up until which rank? Could you tell us
if beyond a certain rank these soldiers were not brought to Au
Kanseng but were sent elsewhere?
A. Those who were at Au Kanseng security centre, the highest rank
was from a battalion -- was from company and some were from
platoon and besides were combatants.
Q. And if there were people <arrested> of higher ranks than that,
do you know where they were taken to or where they were
transferred to?
A. For those with higher ranks, after they were arrested, I do
not know where they were sent to.
Q. And who arrested the soldiers from Division 801 before
<arriving at> Au Kanseng? And who brought them to Au Kanseng?
A. Those who were in charge of transferring those people to Au
Kanseng, in fact these people were sent from regiments; for
example, Regiment 81, 83 and so on. And also they were sent from
Regiment 82.
Q. Did you know the reasons why those soldiers were arrested,
that is to say, the offences they were accused of having
committed? And can you give us examples of the kinds of offences
they may have committed or the reasons why they were arrested?
A. After I went to live in Au Kanseng security centre, I
encountered those who were sent from units under Division 801.
Most of them were combatants. After their transfer, there was an
accompanying letter saying that these combatants were lazy and
stole stuff.
Q. Were there any of them <> accused of belonging to <a> network
<> of traitors <or> opposing the line of the party?
A. A little while after I went to live there, and actually this
morning I was asked whether there were any people coming from
Phnom Penh to work there. In fact, <after that person arrived,
soldiers belonging to a battalion> were sent <by> the <unit, and
it was said that they had been implicated in confessions in Phnom
Penh>.
Q. I'm not sure I did understand your answer. Among those
soldiers from Division 801, were there any soldiers who were
arrested on the grounds that they <> opposed <> the party line or
they were arrested because they had made criticisms or
disapproved of the instructions?
A. I did not mention soldiers who were sent from their respective
units because they opposed the <party or the> instructions. <For
instance,> workers who were sent from the union <> were accused
of not respecting their leaders. Soldiers were -- who were sent
were those who were implicated in the responses from Phnom Penh.
Q. Very well. So if I properly understand your answer, when you
say that they were implicated in answers from Phnom Penh, you are
referring to the fact that persons arrested and imprisoned in
Phnom Penh had denounced them or implicated them in their
confessions. Did I properly understand your testimony?
A. That is not quite right. Let me give you an example. There is
this person whose name was Pheng Phoy <> from the company level
and who was under the battalion of Lay Sarim. After Lay Sarim was
arrested, Pheng Phoy was also arrested and sent to Au Kanseng
security centre.
Q. Was that person part of Say (sic) Sarim's network?
A. After he went through the interrogation, Pheng Phoy said he
was under the supervision of Lay <Sarim>.
Q. To absolutely clarify that point, I'll read out to you what
your former chief at Au Kanseng said. And it is the record of
interview of Se, number E3/405, in answer number 6. He said the
following and I quote:
"This centre was created to detain prisoners who <were> soldiers
from Division 801. The latter were considered as undisciplined
elements and were <implicated> in the <records> of confessions,
<of denunciation>." End of quote.
Do you agree with Se that among the soldiers from Division 801
who were arrested were elements that were <undisciplined>?
A. Yes. That statement is correct. There were those people who
were arrested and brought to the centre and they were accused of
<not respecting the discipline>.
Q. And he also stated that the soldiers were implicated in
records of confessions regarding denouncements. Do you agree with
that and would you like to react to that?
A. Yes, I agree to the statement that they were implicated by
others.
Q. Whether the persons arrested were soldiers or not belonging to
Division 801, you said a while ago that there were also workers
or members of <> rubber plantation <unions> or members of
cooperatives. <In any case>, were there any procedures for
registering new arrivals at the Au Kanseng detention centre?
A. When they were sent to the security centre, the centre would
draw a list of their names, namely the units and the locations
they were brought from.
Q. A while ago you spoke of letters accompanying them. Was there
always a letter or a <file> in which the biography of the
detainee was established, including the offences they were
accused of?
A. When they arrived, this comrade would question them. <There
were> initial questions <regarding the> units they were from and
the reasons for their arrest.
Q. But in addition to those initial questions, could <you> rely
on <a> written document <that explained> why those persons had
been arrested?
A. I <never had> any <specific> proof <when they were brought
into the centre>. Sometimes we did receive a list of names<>. For
example, their name, their unit and the reason for their arrest;
either they were lazy or they stole stuff. Another instance is
that the person <did not adhere to the discipline> or <was
tricky>. This was the information sometimes I received on the
document.
Q. And in those documents, did they never make mention of, <in
particular,> soldiers <> of Division 801 who had been arrested
because they were too close to the Vietnamese or too close to the
CIA or the KGB?
A. While I was there, I was not shown any document illustrating
this point, for example, whether the person A was an agent, a
Vietnamese spy or KGB or CIA agent. No.
Q. Under the Democratic Kampuchea regime, who were considered as
the enemy gnawing from within? <How could one recognise an> enemy
gnawing from within? Were there any criteria whereby such persons
could be identified?
A. At Au Kanseng security centre, no detailed analysis was made
against those people whether they were Vietnamese spies or
whether they were agents for CIA or KGB. During the
interrogation, if a prisoner confessed that he was a CIA agent or
not, it would be recorded. However, most of the prisoners never
admitted that they were spies for the Vietnamese<;> the majority
of them said they were CIA agents.
Q. Thank you. As regards to the concept of <> enemy, did you ever
hear about or read instructions by Ta Saroeun regarding what had
to be done as a matter of priority with enemies identified within
Division 801? Do you recall any specific instructions regarding
what had to be done with enemies identified within Division 801?
A. <I have heard of> the term "enemy" <> who opposed the
revolution, who opposed the <socialist affairs>, used during the
end of the <year> workshop that I attended. Anything that
interfered with the progress of the Party or the socialist
revolution would be considered <activities of the> enemy. Let me
make you an example on the transplantation of rice seedlings.
For example, you had to <transplant> the seedlings <> 20
centimetres <from each other>, and if you actually put it a bit
<further> than that, <> the person would be accused of opposing
the revolution, and for that reason, <they> would be accused of
being <the> enemy. That is what I heard from Ta Sou Saroeun
during the end of the <year> workshop<, which they called "open
training">.
Q. And can you tell us when you attended a workshop conducted by
Ta Saroeun?
A. I cannot recall the exact date. However, I can recall that
since I came to work at Au Kanseng, I attended such a workshop
for one time only.
Q. I would like us to revisit the time when you were in charge of
radio communications at the Division 801 general staff. I will
read out to you an excerpt of report number E3/1164 dated the
25th of November 1976, a report which Roeun, a member of the
Committee of the Party of Division 801, sent to Senior Uncle 89.
I'll read out an extract of that report and ask you whether you
recognize the terms used by Ta Saroeun and his instructions at
the time.
So in this document there is title number 4, titled "A Number of
Priority Measures", and among them are five command measures. In
Khmer it is on ; in French, 00532754; and in
English, 00516711.
I will read out the command measures in this report <made by
Roeun, and I quote>:
"Those who are suspected of being enemies must absolutely be
arrested.
As for those denounced by the enemy, the document must be studied
and I request that they be arrested <for the time being>.
Number 3. <Those who travel freely or violate the discipline and
who, after re-education, do not mend their ways,> measures <must
be taken> to remove <them> and put <them under> surveillance.<>
4. Any company or <section> cadres who are inactive, deceitful or
lazy must absolutely be removed.
5. Those who <had any> political <tendencies> shall be <removed>
<one after the other>."
And further down: "The good <ones> shall be <> kept. Anyone who
is resisting or inactive shall be removed and put into
<quarantine>."
And at the end of the report, we find the following conclusion on
the last page:
"This is a report of Committee 801 regarding enemy activities and
measures as stated above. <I> request <of you, Senior> Uncle, to
<give your advice> and <opinions>. We look forward to receiving
the Party's recommendations." End of quote.
Now, regarding these priority <command> measures proposed by
Roeun to Son Sen, <who is Uncle 89,> for him to make
recommendations, are these measures relating to arrests, measures
that were sent to all the cadres of Division 801? In other words,
were you aware of those five command measures regarding possible
arrests <or> measures against the enemy?
A. Allow me to respond to that question. After I was reassigned
to work at the Au Kanseng security centre and in reference to the
five organizational measures that you just mentioned, I actually
was not aware of those measures or of a report sent to Phnom Penh
because when I came to work at the Au Kanseng security centre, I
<didn't know anything regarding telegrams>.
Q. That being the case, do the five measures reflect what you
observed at Au Kanseng, that is to say, that persons suspected as
being enemies <or who> were denounced, or those who had political
tendencies, were those who were arrested within the forces of
Division 801?
A. Those who were sent to Au Kanseng security centre, some of
them would fit into these five points. For example, those who
were accused of being lazy or those who did not implement or
adhere to the discipline or those who were implicated by other
people, yes, some of them would fall into these five points.
Q. I have a question for you, a specific question regarding
rubber plantation workers who were referred to at the time as
"unionists". A number of unionists <> were arrested; what were
the reasons for such arrests? And can you tell us whether they
were suspected of being members of a network?
A. Regarding the union workers who were sent to Au Kanseng
security centre, they were sent through the union chairperson
named Tum. I met him but not at my place, nor at his place.
Actually, it was along the way while I was travelling to Bar Keo.
He said that those workers were former elements and former
workers of the previous regime. They were workers of the rubber
plantation in the previous regime and that they did not strictly
adhere to Angkar's disciplines. For instance, if they felt
hungry, they would stop working and went to find food. And they
rarely adhered to the instructions and he requested us to further
question them.
Q. Were those arrests in the rubber plantations not likely to
affect economic production? <We are evidently speaking about> the
production of rubber.
A. I cannot tell you about that. I did not know how it< was
affecting> the <economic> production of <the union>.
Q. Was there any difference <between> when soldiers or civilians
arrived at the Au Kanseng centre? Did all <new arrivals> come
shackled or handcuffed or <did the circumstances differ>?
A. From what I saw regarding those people who were sent from the
base or from the union, they were not tied. In fact, they were
walked and they had their <black> backpacks or some -- at the
back, or they actually carried their belongings on the head. As
for the ethnic minorities, they also came with a basket that they
carried along. As for soldiers, they were transported by truck
and when they got off the truck, I saw that they were not tied or
cuffed.
And there was an instance that one or two soldiers were tied.
Their hands were tied and one of them was Dom (phonetic). I knew
the person so I went to untie his hands because I saw it swollen.
In fact, Dom (phonetic) was a medic that I knew. <He was a humble
guy. I saw him behind the truck with his hands tied up. I was
wondering why he was tied up.>
Q. Once they were taken to Au Kanseng, were they placed in cells
and were they shackled when they arrived; that is to say,
shackles around their feet or other <constraints>?
A. When they were sent to Au Kanseng security centre, they were
not chained or shackled except when they were brought in, in a
special case for example, that they were brought in by a truck
and on the truck there were armed guards. After they got off the
trucks then they would be cuffed. <For instance, Pheng Phoy was>
escorted by <a few> armed soldiers <in the truck. When he> got
off the <truck, his hands were tied behind his back>. <Then his>
hands <were> untied <and he was then shackled>.
Q. Fine. But in order to be clear about this, I was speaking
about the moment when they would enter the buildings that were
reserved for the prisoners at Au Kanseng. Once they would <arrive
for their> first night <or their first day,> were they chained or
were they tied?
A. As I have just told, on the first night, they were not chained
except only one prisoner as I indicated for the Chamber because
that prisoner was -- in fact the armed soldiers <were> cautious
<about> the prisoner <named> Pheng Phoy. <So he was shackled
after he arrived.>
Q. <> Witness, we didn't hear the end of your answer. So could
you please repeat your answer?
A. Let me make a clarification on this point. When those people
were sent from unions or from military units, workers from unions
were not tied to any strings. They were walked by <another
person>. Then these people were delivered to the security centre.
As for soldiers, they were brought by trucks or vehicles. They
were in two different categories. One category was from Bar Keo,
<they had travelled in the truck with injured> soldiers <and sick
people>, and most of them were not tied. <>
And <the person who was tied up> after <he> arrived at the
security centre <> was <> Pheng Phoy, he was part of the company.
On the first night, he was chained. The guards were cautious. And
as I said, there were one or two armed soldiers <standing> on
<the back of> the truck, and <after he got off the truck, he was
put in a detention room and he was shackled>.
Q. Fine. I am going to try to be quick about this. I simply would
like to read out what a former prisoner, an ordinary former
prisoner at Au Kanseng who was a former worker in the rubber
plantations and who was arrested in 1978. I'd like to read out to
you what he said. He said that, "Even people who were working
during the day were chained at night."
And he also speaks about handcuffs that were given to him, at
least for a certain while when he arrived. So this is witness
Khoem <Peou>, K-H-O-E-M, <P-O-E-U (sic)>. This is E3/7684 WRI. In
French on ; in English on ; and in Khmer 00221753.
And this is what he says regarding his arrival at Au Kanseng and
also about happened to him afterwards.
"I was shackled around my ankles in a cell for one month, before
being released to go work <> picking <herbs,> potatoes and corn
with my hands. Even though there were knives, we weren't given
any. This work gave blisters on my hands, but I didn't dare say
so. While I was working there were two soldiers watching over us
and they were heavily armed."
And the last sentence which I quote: "At night the <guard>
soldiers would bring the prisoners back <in> and chain them up
again." End of quote.
So what is your reaction to this excerpt? This is a person who
says that he was chained for one month before he was able to
start working and who also says that the prisoners were chained
at night after <their> work.
A. Regarding the answer of Ta Peou, I know Ta Peou. I can recall
this individual after hearing his name. He was a man in charge of
sawing wood. I was close to him <after he was out of the place
where he was shackled>. I agree to his answer or testimony that
at first he was -- his ankle</s> was</were> chained. Later on
after interrogation, after his interrogation, nothing was
noticeable or was significant in relation to his issues. So later
on he was released to work as normal as other workers.
Q. A few quick questions on sanitation and on the detention
conditions. You spoke about the fact that the buildings at Au
Kanseng were made out of bamboo and that <the> roofs <were made
of leaves, I believe>. So were the cells waterproof or would the
roofs cave in when it rained very hard? <In other words, would
it> sometimes <> rain inside the <prisoner> cells<>?
A. There was good roof and the bamboo walls <were not proper.> It
could not prevent the cool air or the heat <> from going through
<the> walls, and those people <usually made> fire within the
hall. Those who went to work outside, some of them carried wood
<back>, and <some of> those woods were used to make fire to warm
themselves at night time. Some wood were placed in the kitchen
hall. That location was near the stream<> so it was quite cold.
Q. Were there insects inside the cells and, more generally
speaking, can you describe the sanitation conditions within the
cells?
A. Within <the hall where the prisoners were, there were> many
mosquitoes; no mosquito nets for prisoners at night time.
Q. Regarding the sanitation conditions can you tell us if all
prisoners had access to water when they wanted to and if they
could wash or if they had access to latrines during the day as
well as during the night?
A. Regarding the use of water at Au Kanseng security centre,
there was no strict rule for prisoners. At night time, they were
told to urinate into the bamboo tube. Each of them get -- got one
bamboo tube and for bathing, after they returned from work from
the plantation or gardens, they bathed themselves at the stream
or river by themselves <behind the building>. And at night time,
they had drinking water in the bamboo tubes to drink. In
Ratanakiri, plenty of bamboo tubes were available, so all of them
had bamboo tubes. The bamboo tubes were used to put the water in,
<each of the bamboo tubes could contain five to six litres of
water>. For some prisoners who had no water in the bamboo tubes,
they would share with other prisoners who had the water in those
bamboo tubes.
MR. PRESIDENT;
It is now break time. The Chamber will take a short break from
now until 3 p.m.
Thank you, Mr. Witness.
And duty counsel, it is now a break time. The Chamber will take a
short break from now until 3 p.m. So please be present again
before 3 p.m. to be ready for the testimony. Do you understand,
Mr. Witness?
2-TCW-900:
Yes, I do, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1443H to 1501H)]
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
And good afternoon again, Mr. Witness. Are you ready?
2-TCW-900:
Yes, Mr. President, I am ready.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And again, I would like to hand the floor to the
International Deputy Co-Prosecutor to continue putting further
questions to the witness.
You may proceed.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you very much, Mr. President.
Q. We were talking about the fact that there were lots of
mosquitos and we were also talking about sanitation <in the
prisoner cells at> Au Kanseng detention prison. Did the prisoners
often fall sick and do you know what types of diseases they were
sick of?
2-TCW-900:
A. Prisoners usually faced the following diseases; <firstly>,
malaria; <secondly, inflammatory bowel disease,> dysentery <> due
to unclean <water> or <drinking> unboiled water.
Q. As a general rule, was any appropriate healthcare provided to
the prisoners by competent healthcare workers?
A. When a prisoner got sick there was a medic on the compound who
provided the treatment. As for the medicine, usually it was
homemade. It was in the form of a rabbit drop pellets and the
ingredients were herbal. And it was mixed with a powder <and made
into pills, just like> modern medicine.
Q. Was that enough to prevent deaths amongst the prisoners caused
by those diseases as well as malnutrition?
A. As for the condition where the medicine was not effective or
the limited food that led to malnutrition, <the illnesses became
more serious until the> prisoners died<>.
Q. Was that particularly <the> case <for> prisoners who were
shackled <day and> night<, that is, those who were under special
surveillance or> under severe conditions? <Did> their <health
worsen faster> than that of others?
A. As for prisoners who were chained since they were considered
serious offence prisoners, they did not face any serious
illnesses. Some of them actually had a flu or cold and then the
medic would provide them with medicine.
Q. You have just told us that they received better treatment than
the others, if I understood you correctly, or, <to the contrary,>
the fact that they <were chained all day and unable> to move <>
predisposed them to such -- to certain <afflictions> such as
swollen <ankles, infections, leg oedema. Did you notice such
things>?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, please hold on. Counsel for Khieu Samphan, you have
the floor.
MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I thought I heard the Co-Prosecutor say
that he was going to rephrase his questions. I believe he
understands that I will always object whenever he puts words in
the witness's mouth.
MR.DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. I <will> rephrase<> my question<> in another manner: <did>
people who <were chained day and night and who were unable> to
move <suffer from ankle injuries caused by handcuffs or chains?>
2-TCW-900:
A. As for prisoners who were chained I did not witness any of
them who had wounds as a result of being chained <nor shackled>.
Q. I would like to put to you just one question regarding the
number of prisoners who were detained at Au Kanseng Centre at a
time when you worked there. Do you know approximately the total
number of different prisoners who were brought to the Au Kanseng
security centre during the period you spent there, that is, from
April <'77>, up to the end of the regime?
A. I cannot tell you what the situation was in 1975, since I
<managed that place> in 1977. <>The period <from> '77 <to late>
'78 <was not that long>.
<The> prisoners <at Au Kanseng security center were no more> than
200. <And> I cannot <remember the exact> number. <But> based on
my recollection of the number of those whom I saw every day,
there were not many of them. As I said, I could say they were
somewhere near the number of 200.
Q. Very well. Regarding the number of deaths at Au Kanseng, are
you able to give us an estimate of the number of persons who died
there by comparing the number of those who <entered> and those
who were still alive at the end? <You told us earlier that> there
were no transfers. Can you give us an estimate of the persons who
died at the Au Kanseng centre?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on.
Counsel Koppe, you have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
I am not sure if I understand this question assuming no
transfers. Why not assuming any transfers? If I understand other
testimony, people were transferred. So asking the witness to give
evidence as to the number of people detained and then who didn't
live at the end of that period, but without transferring and --
it's a very complicated question, I think, for the witness, and
also I do not see any basis for saying that there weren't any
transfers.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I believe the counsel for the Defence didn't hear what the
witness said because he said there were no transfers to <the>
other security centre<, at Au Tang, where> Ta Van (phonetic) was
the head of that centre, but I will rephrase my question.
Q. Witness, can you tell us approximately how many people died at
the Au Kanseng security centre between April 1977 and the end of
1978, that is, the period when you were there?
2-TCW-900:
A. I cannot recall the total number of prisoners who died at Au
Kanseng security centre from illnesses. And from my recollection,
there were not many of them who died <of> illnesses, namely
malaria or from the malnutrition or dysentery. <Most of them died
of dysentery.>
I could say the number is somewhere near 10 although, as I said,
this number is not that precise.
Q. I would like to read out to you <an excerpt from> your record
of interview, E3/406, in which you <were> very specific, and it
is <answer number> 6, and I quote:
"There were, nevertheless, lots of prisoners who died at the
centre. They died of disease and hunger. Chained prisoners didn't
eat to their fill. They were <skeletal> and they died as a result
of their diseases. As for prisoners who worked normally, they ate
sufficient grains of rice, particularly those who were under my
orders. The prisoners we eliminated by following the orders of
the hierarchy, apart from the Vietnamese and the Jarai, were
numbered 10. They were among the soldiers. Consequently,
all-in-all, the prisoners who died at the centre were to the tune
of a few hundred. There were not more than 1,000 in number." End
of quote.
Does that refresh your memory as regards the number of prisoners
who died at the centre, which you said were in several hundreds
in <> your record of interview?
A. When I was first interviewed, I was asked whether prisoners
died as a result of illnesses or that they were killed, and
whether there were thousands of them who died at Au Kanseng
security centre, and my response was that I would not acknowledge
that the number was in the several thousands.
And I added that from my recollection, <the number of prisoners
who died was possibly hundreds of people>, <but> this matter
happened many, many years ago. <When they asked me, it had
happened many years before. So I cannot remember well.>
Q. And among the hundreds of prisoners who died, what was the
approximate proportion of that number of prisoners who died of
disease or of malnutrition and the proportion of prisoners who
died because they were eliminated, <to> use the terms <> in
<your> record of <> interview that I've just read out to you?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, please hold on, and Counsel Koppe, you have the
floor.
MR. KOPPE:
I object to the formulation of this question, Mr. President.
The witness just testified that in his recollection there were
about 10 people who might have died from illnesses such as
malnutrition or malaria.
Then the Prosecution read him this excerpt, but I didn't hear him
acknowledge that hundreds of people died from illnesses.
So having that excerpt then read back to him and sort of implying
that he had confirmed that is, I think, misleading.
So the evidence in this courtroom is still that he believes in
his recollection only 10 people died of illnesses.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, may I respond? I read out the extract and the
witness confirms that he had said that <several> hundreds of
prisoners died at Au Kanseng, but he didn't say that they all
died of <hunger or> illnesses.
But <there was also talk of> elimination, and I asked him whether
it was possible for him to give <an> estimate of the proportion
of persons <who> died as a result of <illness> and the proportion
of those who died because they were eliminated.
I believe this is a legitimate question which would enable me to
move on in my examination of the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection by the Defence Counsel for Nuon Chea is overruled.
There is a proper message for the question and, Mr. Witness, if
you recall the last question put to you by the Deputy
Co-Prosecutor, you may respond.
2-TCW-900:
I cannot give any precise number or answer to the percentage of
prisoners who died.
In reference to my written record of interview, <> there were
hundreds of them who died, that included those who were smashed
as well as those who died in the detention centre from illnesses.
As to the estimation of the percentage, I could say that there
were a lesser number of prisoners who died from illnesses than
those who were smashed.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. I would like to put a question to you
regarding interrogations. Did you have access to written
confessions from Phnom Penh, that is, confessions made by
prisoners who had been interrogated in Phnom Penh, on the basis
of which you were able to interrogate the prisoners who arrived
at Au Kanseng? In other words, did you have in hand confessions
of prisoners from Phnom Penh?
2-TCW-900:
A. I never had any <document> in hand, <in relation to> those
confessions from Phnom Penh.
When a prisoner was interrogated, only Nau had in his hand a
confession document from Phnom Penh, and Nau himself was the one
who interrogated the prisoner. I was sitting nearby to take notes
<of> the questions and the answers, but I did not have access to
that kind of a document.
Q. A while ago, you referred to a person who came from Phnom Penh
and gave his name; the name was Nau. Did he come with a number of
confessions with him, that is confessions from Phnom Penh? And do
you know where those confessions were from? In other words, from
what entity or from what security centre?
A. I did not ask him from which security centre those confessions
were. I, myself, had to be careful in what I said or what I
asked. If I were to know more about the affairs of other peoples,
it means that I put my security at risk.
However, from my observation, he interrogated prisoners based on
the documents he had with him.
Q. Did Ta Se or Ta Saroeun have access to confessions of
prisoners from Phnom Penh?
A. I never saw Se consult with Nau or with me in relation to
confessions from Phnom Penh.
Q. Regarding Ta Saroeun, let me read out to you what you said.
It's E3/5512, answer number 13; and this is what you stated:
"As for myself, I received a record of interview given to me by
Ta 05 which was supposed to be used for interrogating prisoners
at Au Kanseng." End of quote.
And elsewhere in the Record of Interview, you say that Ta 05 was
Ta Saroeun. Can you tell me whether that refreshes your memory as
regards a record of interview <> that Ta Saroeun gave you?
A. I cannot recall that.
Q. Very well. Did Ta Saroeun, at any point in time, issue
instructions to Se or to yourself as regards the interrogation
methods you had to use in interrogating prisoners who refused to
answer questions put to them or who refused to confess? Did you
receive any instructions regarding interrogation methods and
techniques?
A. I received instructions on the interrogation techniques. The
instructions were to get the prisoner to write his answers and
after we received such documents, then we <could> use <them> to
question the prisoner further.
Q. Very well. That was a situation which everything went very
well and the prisoners cooperated.
But when the prisoners clearly didn't want to tell the truth,
were there any instructions issued to the guards to use force by
beating the detainees or using electric wire? Did Ta Saroeun
issue any instructions in that regard?
A. Ta Saroeun never <instructed any techniques. In case> the
prisoners <> refused to confess,
I only heard from Nau who gave instructions to the security
guards that when they had to feed the prisoners with rice, the
guard should mix with more salt so that the prisoners would
become thirsty and then would beg for water from the guards who
stood watch outside.
And in a case when a prisoner asked for water, then the guards
should tell the prisoner to tell the truth to Angkar when Angkar
questioned him. <And the guards gave a notebook and pen to the
prisoners.>
Q. In the interrogation room, were there instruments that could
be used to torture the detainees who refused to tell the truth?
A. During the period that I worked at the interrogation room,
there was no instrument, namely, club or electrical wire there.
Q. I would like simply to read out what you said in WRI E3/5512
at answer 8. And the question was put to you about whether or not
there were torture instruments at the Au Kanseng security office
and you said<>:
"There were. There was equipment to apply electric shock. I saw
security personnel use them on the ethnic Jarai prisoners that
had been captured on the battlefield. There were clubs too, but
they were not kept there<>. When they were required, they went to
get them." End of quote.
So, witness, does this somewhat refresh your memory regarding
what you said to the investigators of the OCIJ?
A. <From my recollection>, those electrical shocks were used when
Jarai were sent into the security centre. Security guards, from
my observation, carried the phones in Lon Nol's regime to shock
the prisoners. <When I was working at the division office, I used
that kind of phones and it shocked my hand. I saw that> they used
<that> kind of phones to <give electric> shocks to the prisoners.
Q. So I'd like to read out what Ta Chhaom Se said, who was the
head of Au Kanseng, in his WRI E3/405 at answer 14, and I quote:
"Sometimes there were acts of torture, but they were not
committed in a systematic way on all prisoners. The acts of
torture were carried out with the aim of obtaining confessions
and they were carried out on prisoners who were suspected of
having hidden information, or on those who did not want to tell
the truth. These prisoners were beaten up and they were beaten
with a whip. They were electrocuted with electric power." End of
quote
So here, Chhaom Se makes no distinction between the prisoners who
were Jarai or not. <Do you have a> reaction in relation to what
Chhaom Se said regarding torture that was inflicted in a
non-systematic way on the prisoners?
A. I have listened to this testimony of Se in relation to
torture. It was the conclusion of Se in relation to torture
inflicted on prisoners <during the interrogation>.
Q. Well, I will stop here with this issue because I must now
start talking about other issues.
You said that among the <hundreds of> people who died at Au
Kanseng, most of them had been smashed <or eliminated>. So where
were these people executed? Were there pre-existing pits in which
these people were buried? So can you tell us a little bit more
about that?
A. I can recall that when prisoners were taken to be killed,
mostly <they took them out> at night time. The <one who took>
action <was -- because we slept at the same house, for instance,>
Tim, Se, Nau and I were sleeping in <the same house but in>
different rooms< -- but> around 7 or 8 p.m., and at the time, I
did not see Tim. Usually, Tim would be there when the prisoners
were <not> taken away to be killed, but on that particular day,
Tim was not present.
And <>at night-time, I do not know where those prisoners were
sent to be killed <and I never asked them whether the killing
site was near or far.>
Q. Just a point of clarification. When you said that Tim was not
there each time a prisoner was executed, what do you mean by
that? Because I understand that, since he was in charge of the
security unit, it would be he who would be in charge, or <> who
would supervise the executions? So tell me if I somewhat
misunderstood here.
A. In relation to the <security> management, <taking the>
prisoners <away to be killed>, it was Tim who was in charge of
it.
And there <was> a question from you <about the pits which I have
not answered yet>. There <was a pit> used to put the Jarai people
who had been killed. That pit was the result of a B-52 bombing.
<I knew that they buried them in the B-52 bombing pit because on
one> occasion, <a few days after all the> ethnic Jarai were
<smashed,> I went to <the upper area> where there were
jackfruits. <When I was there, it stunk>. So I assumed that
perhaps the ethnic Jarai had been killed at that location.
Q. Well, in fact, yes. I would like now to turn one of the last
topics in my examination and it is the Jarai prisoners. Were
there -- was there one or several groups of Jarai who were taken
to the Au Kanseng centre in 1977 or 1978?
A. Regarding the ethnic Jarai who were sent into Au Kanseng
security centre, they were transported <in groups in GMC trucks.
They were big trucks. From my recollection, there were> two
<trucks>, in fact. They were sent in at night time. It was so
noisy at the time that those ethnic Jarai were sent into the
centre, <because> there were too many <of them.> The space <to
sleep was full, but we put them in that tiny space because we
knew there was a door which can be> locked<>.
Q. Well, indeed, I would like to clarify things a little bit
more. So was there only one single incident when Jarai people
arrived in two big GMC trucks, or were there several occasions
when Jarai were transported massively to Au Kanseng? So can you
tell us if this happened once or several times?
A. I may have not remembered well <in> how many trips <those
Jarai were sent to the centre or whether they were all sent to
the centre in one trip>. <But I just knew> that many ethnic Jarai
were sent into the security centre by <trucks> and there were one
or two armed soldiers on each truck or vehicle.
Q. Do you have an idea or can you give me an estimate of the
number of Jarai people? You told me that there were very many of
them who were brought to the Au Kanseng security centre, once or
in several trips?
A. I cannot give you the exact figure <because I cannot remember
well>. What I can say is that there were plenty of them, more
than one hundred. Perhaps there were around 105 or 110 of them,
but I cannot tell you the exact figure<>.
Q. And do you remember the year and the season when these Jarai
people, more than 100 as you said, arrived at Au Kanseng?
A. From my recollection, it was in rainy season.
Q. Was it at the beginning of your job at Au Kanseng in 1977, or
was it closer to 1978, closer to when the Vietnamese arrived? Can
you give us an idea?
A. There were clashes at the border from late 1977, and
<especially> the clashes <that> took place at road 19. There were
sporadic clashes. At the time, <> ethnic Jarai were sent into Au
Kanseng security centre and I cannot tell you the exact timeframe
of that time.
Q. Do you remember the reasons for their arrests or do you
remember the circumstances of their arrests? What did you learn
regarding these arrests?
And could you also tell me if these Jarai people transited
through another place before being brought to Au Kanseng after
they had been arrested?
A. After those Jarai were questioned, <it appeared that> they in
fact did not reside in Cambodia, and these people <who were
arrested by the front line army> were <Jarai people who were>
living in Vietnam. They were not arrested <> on Vietnamese
<territory>, however, they were arrested in Cambodia.
Q. I would like to ask you if, when they were arrested, you were
told that they were armed?
A. <When I received those> ethnic Jarai <at> my centre, I <did
not receive> any information that <> they <were> armed. They
<just> delivered ethnic Jarai to us. And some of them were in
<their> thirties, some others below
and there were elderly 
 
         25   <people> in <their> forties, in late forties; one or two of them.
Q. Were there women or young girls among this group of Jarai?
A. There were not many female Jarai and, as I said, I cannot tell
you whether there were five or ten female Jarai. Most of them
were male, and as for female, there were around
or
of them. 
           5   Q. I would like to read out to you right now a telegram regarding  
          6   this incident, or regarding one of these incidents, E3/240, which
is dated 15 June 1977, and which was sent by Vy to the "Respected
brother" and copied--
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Co-Prosecutor. You have the floor first, Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I object to the formulation of this
question. That is, indeed, one of the questions that the Trial
Chamber has to answer, whether document E3/240 has anything to do
with what the witness is testifying to.
That is disputed. It is unclear. I remind the Chamber of the
testimony of one of the prisoners who put the event of him
possibly seeing Jarai victims somewhere in March '78.
So saying now that this particular telegram has anything to do
with the observations of this witness is disputed and it is
unclear and doesn't -- is not supported by the evidence so far.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, I put many questions regarding this incident, when
the Jarai arrived. I have put questions about the composition of
the group, about the period, and where they came from, etc.
So I believe that I am now entitled to confront the witness with
one of the elements on the case file to see if we're speaking
about the same incident or about another incident.
Now, regarding the date, it's only the date of the telegram. This
does not mean that this is the date when they entered Au Kanseng.
It's just a report on the fact that they were arrested and not on
the fact that they were taken to Au Kanseng, which might have
happened much later. That we don't know, in fact.
So may I please read out this telegram and then put questions to
the witness regarding its content in order to understand if we're
speaking about the same group of Jarai people?
MR. KOPPE:
I really object to this way of proceeding, Mr. President, because
he is not the author or the recipient of this document, and he
is, other than most witnesses who are confronted with S-21
documents, someone who could possibly say something about those
Jarai. So now leading him to make a connection between that
telegram and his evidence, is I believe is unacceptable.
So he can be shown the document, however, I believe it should be
shown in a very neutral way and not by suggesting that this
document has, in fact, something to do with the evidence that he
just gave. That is leading him into evidence that I'm sure the
Prosecution would like to hear, but it should be done, if at all,
very neutrally.
Of course, I object to him being the document in the first place,
but you'll reject that objection. However, if it's being shown,
it should be shown in a very neutral way and not leading the
witness into something the Prosecution would like to hear.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber decides to overrule the objection put by the Defence
Counsel for Mr. Nuon Chea, Koppe.
The Chamber allows question to be put to the witness and the
witness can provide observations on that question lastly put by
the International Deputy Co-Prosecutor.
International Deputy Co-Prosecutor, please reformulate your
question. It <might not be complete because there was
interruption>, and perhaps the witness may not have listened
fully to your question.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Indeed, Mr. President, I was about to explain what this telegram
was about and to read an excerpt of it before putting a question
to the witness.
Q. So I repeat. This is telegram E3/240, dated 15 June 1977 that
was sent by Vy, V-Y, to "The respected brother" and copied to
Uncle Nuon, Brother Van, Vorn and Khieu. And the French ERN is,
00282550; Khmer, 00001266; English, 00897665 (sic). And I quote
point 1 at the beginning of the telegram.
"At 9 a.m. <on> June 14," -- <understood to be> 1977 --
"Production Unit 801, stationed at 107, while patrolling arrested
209 <Vietnamese> soldiers, including nine <young girls>, in the
vicinity of O La'ak" -- L-A <apostrophe> A-K <> -- "four
kilometres south of road number 9. Almost all of them are Jarai
who speak Khmer with an ethnic accent. They have <> been <sent>
in custody." Further, "They said that they had been in the army
for two to 10 years, and they were transporting an AK rifle,
three AR-15 guns, two pistols and three US-made grenades. As far
as I'm concerned, these are external enemies who are burrowing
from within."
And later on in this telegram -- and the telegram ends:
"<Additional recommendations are requested from> Angkar,
<Production Unit 801> proposes an immediate decision and
definitive decision. I am expecting your favourable answer." End
of quote.
So, Witness, you heard the content of this telegram which
describes an event during which 209 soldiers described as
Vietnamese were arrested close to O La'ak and it is indicated
that most of them were Jarai. There were nine <young girls> among
them.
So do these elements allow you to tell us if the people you saw
arrive at Au Kanseng correspond to the people that are described
in this telegram?
2-TCW-900:
A. I think that the testimony in relation to the capture of <209>
Vietnamese, when I compare to the real situation happening at my
location, I think the number was overstated. <When> I <> received
<them> at the security centre, <there were less than 200 people>.
<In fact, 200 people could not have been put together in a
building which was> about 10-metre long and six-metre wide.
Together with previous prisoners who were soldiers, that centre
could not accommodate <all of them>. <So I react to this number
that it's just the number given by another witness. But
personally,> I cannot tell you the exact number<>.
Q. I only have a few minutes left, witness, to clarify this, in
fact. The group that you saw arrived at Au Kanseng, was this
group accused of being Vietnamese soldiers or not?
A. They were not accused of being Vietnamese soldiers. From the
information I received from the battlefield, they were considered
<as> Thieu-Ky soldiers <in the war before> 1970.
Q. A while ago, you stated that they were not residing in
Cambodia but that they lived in Vietnam. Were those persons of
Vietnamese nationality or they were considered as being
Vietnamese by the officials of the division and the centre?
A. From that tone of language, they may have been ethnic Jarai,
but I do not know how to speak Jarai language. But from the tone
of language and from their accent they may have been Jarai.
As for the colour of their skin, they were not Vietnamese. They
<> resided in the mountainous area as those who were living in
Ratanakiri province.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Mr. President, I'll need an additional five minutes today, if you
would allow me.
Q. Mr. Witness, to be very clear, I wasn't referring to the
ethnicity of that group, but to its nationality. Do you
understand that difference?
What I wanted you to tell me was whether those were persons
residing in Vietnam who spoke Jarai and who were <of> Jarai
<ethnicity>, or they were nationals of another country, that is a
country other than Vietnam?
2-TCW-900:
A. <In> fact, <if they> resided in Vietnam, so they <were of>
Vietnamese nationality.
Q. A while ago, I referred you to a meeting you had with Ta
Saroeun and also with Se regarding that group of Jarai. What did
Ta Saroeun tell you regarding those persons and what did you have
to do with them, and what was their fate?
A. After I had met Ta Saroeun or 05, <the commander of Division
801> together with Se, he asked me about the management issue. We
were asked about <whether or not> Au Kanseng security centre
<could> manage<> the ethnic Jarai.
Then at the time, Se made a report that the management of large
number of ethnic Jarai, and in light of the limited number of
security guards, they were not able to control and manage ethnic
Jarai prisoners.
And, number two, Se made a report also about the <difficulty in
providing shelter> for the detainees. <That's what> Se <reported>
to Ta Saroeun in the meeting.
Q. I have very little time left. I'll read out to you what you
stated in E3/5512, in answer number 11.
You refer to that incident and you stated the following:
"The Jarai were indeed arrested and imprisoned at the Au Kanseng
security centre. Soldiers at the Ou Ya Dav battlefield <arrested>
them and transported them by <vehicle> to the Au Kanseng security
office, accusing them of being soldiers under Thieu-Ky. There
were more than 100 <> Jarai and there were five to six females
among them. At the time, Ta Saroeun, Ta 05, <asked> me and Se to
meet with him and he told us <> to sort out those Jarai<>. When
we returned to the security office, we <ordered> the security
<unit> to sort <them> out<>. The term 'sort out' <> meant that we
had to <execute> them." End of quote.
Does this refresh your memory as to what Ta Saroeun told you as
to what you had to do <with these> Jarai, that is to say, to
execute them?
A. I can recall the instruction of Ta Saroeun, or Ta 05, about
ethnic Jarai after the report of Se. And after hearing the
report, he <summed it> up <by saying that>, "Please solve it."
<"Solve it" is the term they used.> And <from what we>
understood, <> the word "<>solve it" meant <to> kill.
And <I agree that the> answers <that I gave> to the investigators
when they came to interview me <were what I told them.> After we
met Ta Saroeun, Se invited security guards and me to sit together
and solve the issue.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. Witness. I think it is time for us to adjourn.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. Thank you, as well, Mr. Witness. It is now time for
the adjournment.
The Chamber will resume its hearing tomorrow, Tuesday, 22 March
2016, at 9 a.m.
Tomorrow the Chamber continues hearing the witness 2-TCW-900, via
video-link. Please be informed and please be on time.
I am grateful to you, Mr. Witness, 2-TCW-900. The hearing of your
testimony as a witness has not come to an end yet. You are
therefore invited to come and testify once again tomorrow at 9
a.m.
Thank you, Mr. Mam Rithea, the duty counsel. You are also
excused. You are invited to come and sit close to the witness <to
consult with him during> tomorrow's <hearing> as well.
Do you understand? Do you hear me well, Mr. Witness? Tomorrow we
will start again at 9 a.m.
2-TCW-900:
Yes, I understand it, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now take a rest.
Security personnel are instructed <to bring the two accused> Nuon
Chea and Khieu Samphan back to the ECCC's detention facility and
have them returned into the hearing tomorrow before 9 a.m.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1609H)
