P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
This morning, according to our schedule, we are now in the
process already of hearing the testimony of the survivors of
security office of S-21.
The Greffier, could you please verify the attendance of the
parties to the proceedings and people who are involved in today's
proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the parties to the proceedings are all present.
The witness is also now available at the waiting room.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Before we begin our session regarding the testimony of the
survivors of the S-21, the Trial Chamber would like to pronounce
the decision on the removal of witnesses from the witness list.
The Chamber wishes to inform the parties and the public about
issues discussed at the trial management meeting on the afternoon
of the 23rd of June 2009 and subsequent decisions.
In order to ensure the conduct of a fair and expeditious trial,
the Chamber reviewed the list of witnesses with a view to
reducing the number called to testify in person.
After observing the evolution of the proceedings and at the trial
management meeting, the Trial Chamber, after reviewing the
progress in the trial to date, proposed removing a number of
witnesses from the witness list, clarifying that it will put
before the Court a statement of those witnesses who were heard
before the ECCC during the investigative phase.
The Chamber sought the views of the parties on this proposal and
enquired whether they wished any of these witnesses to be heard
in person.
The Co-Prosecutors did not comment on individual witnesses, but
suggested that a reserve list of witnesses be retained for
consideration at a later stage.
Civil party groups 1, 3 and 4 supported the Co-Prosecutors
decision.  Civil party group 4 asked to hear witnesses KW-12,
KW-13, KW-14, KW-18, KW-19 and KW-28 in person, but failed to
give reasons for the request.  Civil party group 2 requested to
hear witnesses KW-13, KW-18, KW-25, CP2/6, KW-28, CP2/4 and
CP2/1.
The defence agreed with the Chamber's proposal, with the
exception of the suggestion to remove Raoul Marc Jennar from the
list.  The Chamber notes that the defence did not seek the
presence of any of these witnesses for the purpose of
confrontation.
In summary, reasons given by the parties are: KW-13 was in the
special unit and made arrests and the Chinese were involved.  The
accused has contested that this unit made arrests.
KW-18 would testify that the accused conducted interrogations
personally, in particular, on foreigners and important prisoners.
This is contested by the accused.
KW-25 would testify about meetings between the accused and the
upper echelon, asserting that this is contested by the accused.
CP2/6 would testify about visits of the accused to Choeung Ek.
Again, this situation is that this is contested by the accused.
KW-28 would testify that the accused ordered arrests and torture
after 1979, which would demonstrate that his claim that he hated
this work and was fearful for his fate is not credible.
CP2/4 would testify about the conditions of staff and forced
marriages at S-24.
CP2/1 would testify about direct communication between the
accused and Division 2 and give evidence about the time after the
collapse of the Khmer Rouge regime.
Raoul Marc Jennar is a researcher of the crimes during the
Democratic Kampuchea period and has visited 196 prisons.  He
would, therefore, be in a position to compare them with S-21.  In
addition, it would be unfair not to let the defence call an
expert to give testimony.
The decisions:
1.  The Chamber notes that during the trial management meeting no
party objected to the
removal from the witness list of the following witnesses and to
their written statements made before the ECCC during the
investigating phase being put before the Court pursuant to Rule
87(3).
In the absence of any objection from the parties, the Chamber
considers that the parties do not request the personal appearance
of any of the following witnesses in Court; KW-16, KW-17, CP2/7,
Nic Dunlop, KW-27, KW-06, CP2/10.
Are there any objections that the Chamber has not already heard
concerning these witnesses?  The Chamber hereby removes these
witnesses from the witness list.
2.  The Chamber notes that civil party group 2 has withdrawn its
request to hear
witnesses CP2/2 and CP2/3.  The Chamber decides not to call these
witnesses.
3.  The Chamber rejects the request of civil party group 2 to
hear witnesses KW-13, KW-
18, KW-25 CP2/6, CP2/4 and CP2/1; civil party group 4 to hear
witnesses KW-12, KW-13, KW-14, KW-18 and KW-19.
Reasons:  The Chamber has considered the list of witnesses and
finds that a number would give similar testimony on relevant
facts.  The Chamber has, therefore, selected a group of witnesses
who are likely to give the most relevant testimony in person.
The parties should bear in mind that all statements made before
the ECCC during the investigative phase will be put before the
Chamber at the relevant time.
The Chamber, therefore, removes witnesses KW-12, KW-13, KW-14,
KW-18, KW-19, KW 25, CP2/6 and CP2/4 from the list of those who
are to be heard in Court.
The Chamber wishes to inform the parties that, after further
consideration, it has decided to keep witness KW-28 on the list
because the witness can testify to relevant facts concerning Prey
Sar.
The Trial Chamber considers it unnecessary to retain a reserve
list of witnesses who might be called to give evidence orally.
4.  On Thursday, 25th of June the Chamber informed the parties
that it wished to remove an additional witness from the list,
namely KW-24, and informed the parties that they would have an
opportunity to comment on this proposal today.  Are there any
comments on the proposal to remove KW-24 from the witness list?
Judge Silvia Cartwright, you take the floor.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President.
The President has asked me to state clearly that if there are to
be any comments concerning KW-24 that absolutely no identifying
details be made concerning this person.  By that we mean no
identifying details as to occupation, sex, and address, nor any
details about his occupation at the time that we are considering.
So if there are any comments could you please bear this in mind.
Thank you.
Of course, this is because this is a public discussion about this
particular potential witness.  Thank you.
MR. PETIT:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Thank you, Madam Judge.
We have indeed brief comments about this particular witness.  I
would either suggest, however, that the substance of these
comments would be lacking if we cannot address specifics of his
expected testimony.  Therefore, I would suggest, perhaps for the
sake of efficiency, either go in camera -- which might not be the
best -- so that we can get on with the witnesses, or perhaps
written comments by the close of business day tomorrow could be
forwarded to the Chamber and then we can proceed with the day's
business.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Co-Prosecutor, for your observation.
Since this needs to be discussed in closed camera -- or in closed
session, then we will give opportunity for you to make your
observation concerning this KW-24 before we can make the final
decision.  So the Chamber would like to give opportunity to you
to file the written submission by tomorrow, 4 p.m.
Is there any other party who would wish to make any observation
concerning KW-24 since our last notice to the parties on Thursday
afternoon?
The defence counsel, would you like to make any comments
concerning this proposal?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Regarding the proposal to remove KW-24
from the witness list, we do not have any objection because there
have been several witnesses already and since these two witnesses
would only testify on the same fact and since one is already
selected, I think it is significant to have one witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Lawyer.
5.  In addition, the Chamber wishes to inform the parties of the
following technical details.
The Chamber will hear KW-10 for one and a half days; David
Chandler for one day; KW-23 for a half-day; CP2/5 for a half-day;
KW-34 and Françoise Sironi-Guilbard jointly for one day and a
half.  The Chamber will hear Françoise Sironi-Guilbard in person.
It will hear Richard J. Goldstone and Stephane Hessel through
videoconference.
The Chamber does not accept the suggestion of the defence to
provide it and the Co-Prosecutors with the opportunity to be next
to witnesses testifying by videoconference.
The Chamber takes this opportunity to inform the parties that
Charles Figley has declined the invitation to testify, and the
Chamber does not plan to compel him to appear.  So this is the
decision regarding -- or the subsequent decisions from the trial
management meeting conducted on the afternoon of Thursday.
Except witness KW-24, since the written submission is pending
from the Co-Prosecutor, the Trial Chamber will make a decision on
this matter after we have received his written submission first.
There are still remaining issues concerning the legal aspects and
in order to clarify this, for example, the matter of the joint
criminal enterprise, I would like to give the floor to Judge
Lavergne to make his observations concerning the matter.
The floor is yours.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President.  On this last point, the Chamber has
taken note of conclusions submitted by the Co-Prosecutors on the
8th of June, 2009 whereby the Chamber is requested to, on the
hand, state that the legal concept of joint criminal enterprise
in its three forms is applicable before the Extraordinary
Chambers and on the other hand, to apply this notion in its
judgment as regards the commission of crimes charged against the
accused as well as his responsibility as a participant in a joint
criminal enterprise.
The Trial Chamber recalls that the Co-Prosecutors have indicated
their intention to rely on the notion of joint criminal
enterprise during the initial hearing.
Consequently, the Trial Chamber considers that the issue of the
mode of responsibility of the accused, including as a participant
in a JCE, is currently before it and invites the parties to make
submissions on the filing by the Co-Prosecutors in accordance
with the practice directives and, in particular, following
notification in the languages which they require.
Finally, the Trial Chamber clarifies that at this stage it
considers rendering its decision on this matter at the same time
as the judgement on merits.
MR. PRESIDENT:
So next, the decision to hear the testimony of the survivors of
S-21.
Court officials, could you please bring the witness, Vann Nath,
into the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Vann Nath?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you have another name besides Nath?
A. No, I do not have one.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I am 63 years old.
Q. Where is your current residence?
A. I live in Mittapheap -- Sangkat Mittapheap, Prampi Makara
district, Phnom Penh.
Q. What is your occupation?
A. I am a painter.
Q. Are you still practising your profession as a painter?
A. Due to my poor health, I do not work much as a painter.
Q. Have you taken an oath yet?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Are you related by blood or by law to any people in this case?
A. No.
Q. Today, the Chamber invites you to provide your testimony
regarding the S-21 office, which is now known as Tuol Sleng
prison, and in the proceedings the Chamber would like to inform
you your rights and obligations as a witness, as follows.
As you are summonsed by the Trial Chamber as a witness in this
proceeding, you have the obligation to testify to the facts that
you have seen, have heard and, secondly, as a witness, you have
the right to refuse to answer if you think it's going to
incriminate yourself.
Do you understand what I have said regarding your rights and
obligations?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Can you recall, before the 17th April 1975, where did you live
and what was your profession?
A. Mr. President, from what I can recall, in 1975 I lived in the
Battambang provincial town.  I was a painter at the time.
Q. And until the 17 April 1975, where did -- now, on the 17 April
1975, which was the main date, where were you and what did you
do?
A. On the 17th I was still in the Battambang  provincial town.
Q. In the provincial town of Battambang, did the Khmer soldiers
enter and occupy on that date, or when?
A. From what I can recall, that was the day -- that is the 17
April 1975 -- at 11 or 12 p.m.  --   at noon we received a lot of
information in the provincial town that the liberation soldiers
reached the Veal Bek Chan which was about one kilometre from the
town, and that they surrounded the area, and that the war would
be over very soon.  So we were all aware of that information in
Battambang.
Q. And after the 17 April, 1975, where did you go and what did
you do?
A. After the liberation soldiers took control of Battambang for
two days, they had a plan to evacuate all the people from the
province.  I and my family were evacuated to the northwest of
town, about eight kilometres.  It was the rice field, and there
were no people at the time.
At that location, we had to find accommodation for ourselves and
we had to work in the rice fields, all of us.
Q. What village was that?  The rice fields where you lived and
worked.
A. It was in O Mony Pir village, 41 District  in sector 4.  That
was the names before the liberation soldiers entered.  It was
also known as Norea Commune, Sanke sub-district.
Q. On what day did you leave the Battambang provincial town?
A. I left Battambang on the day that we were all evacuated, and
five days later we -- five or six days later we arrived in that
location because the walking was slow and the situation was
rather chaotic.  So from my estimation, it took us five, six or
seven days.
Q. What were you asked to do when you were at O Mony Pir in 41
District  ?
A. First, we had to find a shelter for ourselves.  There was no
houses, there were only trees and rice fields, so we went through
the brush to find the trees and the palm leaves to make our
temporary accommodation.  And in the afternoon we were called for
a meeting to divide into various groups for working in the rice
fields on the next day.
Q. So, first, after you made your own shelter, they had you work
in the rice field.  Is this correct?
A. Yes.
Q. How long did you stay there?
A. From my recollection, I stay there from the day that I arrived
until the 30th of December 1977 when Angkar arrested me.
Q. So you were arrested by Angkar at O Mony Pir, in sector 4,
right?
A. At that time, I was called from that location and I was
arrested in Balatt Co-operative.  It's near the Songke River,
which was about five kilometres from the co-operative where I
lived.
Q. Can you describe to the Chamber the events concerning Angkar
from the day of your arrest until you were transferred from
Battambang to Phnom Pehn; that is to S-21 office?  So it means
the details from the day you were arrested until you were
transferred to S-21.  Can you describe all the events within that
period?
A. Mr. President, I will describe, based on my recollection of
the events, from my arrest.
On the 30th of December '77, by the time that I was working in
the rice field.  It was harvesting season which was north -- it
was about five or six kilometres from the co-operative where I
lived.  At about five p.m., the chief of the Co-operative, Luom,
who was in charge of economics for sector 5, went to the
work-site and he told me Angkar instructed him to go to Pursat,
and he collected some forces already.  However, he still needed
some forces and he pointed to me whether I could go with him.
When he pointed directly to me, at that time I was about to get
my food ration.  I was worried because Pursat was a far distance
from Battambang, but I did not object to him and I told him,
"It's up to you, brother, if that was the Angkar's instruction,
then I have to go".
So you have to pack he told me, but because we were in the rice
field I did not have my possessions, just a few sets of old
clothes.  So I was on his oxcart with him, and when we arrived at
the co-operative it was nearly dusk already, and I asked him to
go to my house quickly and he allowed me to go but he said you
had to return soon.
So I went into my house and I told my wife that I was instructed
to go to the province.  I did not say much, so I left my house,
and when we arrived at big co-operative, and this Comrade Luom
was standing there waiting for me.
So then we rode on an oxcart.  There was only himself, myself,
and a militia man.  I was not aware that I would be arrested.
When we arrived at the Balatt Co-operative, he told me to go and
rest, and after I rested for about half an hour I was woken up
and I was instructed to go and bring the oxcart, another oxcart.
I asked him how could we bring another oxcart because we do not
have extra cows.  He said don't worry, just go and pick up an
oxcart.
Only two steps after I walked, I was arrested.  Those were the
militia whom I recognized.  They were from my village since I was
young, and that one militia man, from what I know, had killed a
lot of people.  So I resisted the arrest but Comrade Thean, the
chief of the co-operative, instructed the militia to tie me and I
asked him, "What did I do wrong?"  He said he did not know but
there was an instruction to arrest myself.
So in the co-operative there was a prison and I was sent there.
It was a rice barn and they shackled my legs, the same type of
shackles used at S-21.  I was not know all the times, but quite a
while later they took me out and they walked me and we rode on
the oxcart for -- it was about midnight and I was placed at the
Samrong Pagoda.  The Samrong Pagoda was a very popular detention
site in sector 4.
So they detained me there, together with another cousin of mine,
Say Sarak, so we stayed there overnight and we were not
interrogated.  In the morning on the next day at about 10 a.m., I
heard the sound of a motorbike, a Honda motorbike, so the prison
was in fact a Bible hall as part of the pagoda.  They opened the
door and they called my name, Heng Nath; that was my name at the
time.  Heng actually was the name of my godfather, so I used the
surname Heng Nath.  Actually, my father was Vann Sam, but after
he had me as his godson I used his name as my surname, Heng Nath.
So that was what I know during the Khmer Rouge regime.  After my
name was called, I raised my hand and they took me out and a
prison guard told me to go out and to resolve the matters, and I
asked where.  And the guard said, "No need to talk.  You will
know when you go and meet them, and you have to resolve the
matters with them.  And if they decide to let you go then you
could go back home."
So I was placed on the Honda motorbike with Sarak, and there was
a rider and a militiaman with the AK rifle behind us but we were
not cuffed.  So we rode and we left the pagoda to the Kandal
Pagoda along the Songke River.  I did not know that Kandal Pagoda
was also a prison.
After we arrived, there were four or five soldiers in black.
They arrested us immediately and sent us inside.  Sarak went to
one direction and I went to another direction.  In that room, I
saw another person who was shackled with a wooden shackle, and
later on I realized there were other people; there were five of
us.  So the wooden shackle was thick.  It's about 10 centimetres
thick and the height was rather high.  They drilled a hole and
our feet were put into the holes and they used a clamp to tighten
the wooden shackle.
At about 7 p.m., I was taken off the shackle for interrogation,
so they tied my hands to the back and they put another shackle,
and I thought probably that was the end of my life.  So they
walked me to the back of the pagoda and I was interrogated as it
was alleged that I was a traitor for Angkar and the revolution,
and they wanted to find the treacherous network of soldiers.
They asked me for things that I never knew.  For instance, how
many times were the meetings held and where, and who participated
in the meetings and what are their names, and where are they now?
I, myself, I never attended any meeting with anybody.  I did not
have time.  In the morning when the bell was rung we had to go
and work, and sometimes we rested for a bit and we went to work
again.  The meetings were only those meetings held at the
co-operative.
Then a person said, "You have to try to remember because Angkar
never made any wrong arrest".  How could I think if I never
attended such event?  So then they used an electrical wire.
There was a table four or five metres away from me and they
dragged a cable from that table to the location where I sat on a
chair, but when I went into that interrogation room I was already
shocked.  There were red plastic bags hanging on the wall; there
were screws; there were metal screws and clubs; and the chair
where I sat there were blood drains, blood spots everywhere.
So then the person asked me again whether I remembered, and as I
could not say anything, they used the electrical wire attached to
a pin and attached to my pants and my flesh on my foot, and
another one was attached to the back of the cuff, and then they
turned on the electricity.  After that, I became unconscious.  I
became conscious again after they splashed the water on my face
and then they kept asking me again on the traitors, on the
treacherous network.  Those events I did not know.
I became unconscious several times, then they brought me back to
the room.  I was not sure what I answered to them because my mind
was not clear at the time.  I thought if they did that to me
again tomorrow then I would be dead because in my mind, after
they took me back to the room and if there was a big jar of
water, I would drink it all because I felt so hot.
But next day, another person was taken out for the interrogation,
so they did not interrogate me again until the 7th January 1978,
when a few guards holding some documents, calling the names of
the prisoners from the rooms, including my name.  So we were
unshackled from the room and we were lined up outside and we were
cuffed.  There were two trucks waiting for us, so we were
instructed to board the trucks.  So I thought that would be the
end already because when we boarded the truck, probably they
would take us to where they would kill us.
So I boarded the truck and then they shackled us again with a
wooden shackle.  There were six of us in that long row and there
were 18 people altogether in that truck, and on another truck
there were 32 people.  So in the afternoon, the trucks left.  I
became hopeless already, every one of us, because we knew that we
would be killed.  But the trip was so long, and when the night
fell we did not have even have anything to eat or were given
anything to eat.
At about midnight, the trucks stopped but we were not sure where
we were.  At that time, I did not know where the trucks stopped;
only later on that I knew.  It was in front of the current
Beehive radio station.  So the trucks stopped there and, with our
feet shackled, they did not allow us to disembark the trucks yet.
So then they used cuffs to cuff one hand of each prisoner to
another hand of another prisoner.
Then they took off the shackles, but we were so weak and tired
already, no-one could not walk.  So we were unstable, we could
not stand, so they instructed us to sit in two lines and we were
asked about biography, where we came from, what is our name, so I
told them my name, that I came from the fifth cooperative from
the Northwest Zone.
After I answered the biography questions, all of us were
blindfolded and they used the hammock rope to tie our necks in
line and walked us with that rope.  At that time we could not
see, it was dark, so first of all we only listened and followed
the footsteps.  Sometimes we didn't know that we had to turn so
some of us stumbled and hit the zinc fence and they laughed at
us.
And they said, they joked around that we were like the blind and
sometimes they kicked us and I was kicked as well.  I did not
know what wrong I made or I did.  So I fell and I got up and
continued walking.
And after we arrived into a room we were each photographed.
After they took off the blindfold I saw the camera in front of my
face already.  So then one prisoner would be photographed while
the next would sit because we were cuffed together and we take
turns to be photographed.  And I think it was -- I was then
placed in the second floor, which is now marked Building D, and
we were put into the long row of shackles.  There were 20 or 30
of us in each row of those shackles.
And the black clothes that we were wearing, we were stripped of
those clothes.  Some had shorts and they just wore the shorts.
For those who did not have any shorts, they were given shorts
about an hour later.  They were only like shorts with nothing to
tighten the waist because probably they were afraid that maybe we
would take the string from the waist tightening to hang ourselves
to commit suicide.
The conditions were so inhumane and the food was so little.
There was a big pot of gruel to be distributed among 50 or 60 of
us, so we only had three spoons of gruel for each meal and the
spoon was like a coffee spoon -- so little.  It's not like a
normal rice spoon.  And the spoons would be collected and if any
prisoner hid or concealed a spoon and if they found it out, then
they would beat up or kick.
So the living conditions and the food during the two or three
days was so inhumane.  I lost my dignity because the condition of
the prisoners and the guards were so distant.  It's like humans
compared to animals.  Even with animals they would give enough
food.  So I stayed in that room.
I arrived on the 7th of January '78 and I entered that room on
the night of the 7th and I stayed in that room for more than one
month, probably one month and a few days.  The condition of the
people living in that room, from what I can say, at night -- I'm
talking about the rights of people in that room.
They were only allowed to lie down and we would not be allowed to
sit up unless we sought permission from the guards.  Otherwise we
would be beaten up.  On the whiteboard there was regulations,
internal regulations.  For example, we would be warned not to
make noise or communicate with one another.  We had to listen to
the guards and not be liberal, and so on and so forth.  So we
could not do anything without any permission.
We had received a bowl of gruel at eight o'clock in the morning
and we got another one at eight in the evening.  We were allowed
to do exercise in the morning but while we were still shackled.
In our room, we slept there and ate there and relieved ourselves
inside the same room, and we were not allowed to move even an
inch from where we belonged, where we put.  And when we were
allowed to do exercise, our legs were still shackled to the metal
bars and we could like hop to do exercise.  If we didn't hop then
they would beat us also.
We were so weak, and how could we hop?  But we just did it
against our will to avoid being whipped.  And while doing the
exercise, we could only stop hopping after we received an order
or permission from the guards.  Otherwise we would hop until we
died.
And they allowed us to have a bath and a young guard would use a
hose, a water hose, and pour the water on approximately 50
prisoners all at once and after five minutes they would stop
pouring the water.  So we had never been washed or had a bath for
quite some time, so we had developed some kind of skin rashes and
we felt so itchy and the floor was wet and we couldn't sleep
after the bath.
So we had to remove our clothes to dry the wet floor until it
dried so that we could sit up.  Of course, we had to remove our
clothes to do so but it was so uncomfortable because we were
shackled and then we had to remove our clothes while still being
shackled.  You could imagine how difficult it was.
And we were so hungry that we could eat insects, even the insects
that dropped from the ceiling.  Then we would immediately grab it
and eat and when we were eating such insects and spotted by the
guards, then we would lie to them that we did not do anything.
If they found out that we were eating insects we would be beaten
also, so we could do that only if we avoid being seen by the
guards.
So the death is imminent and people died one after another, and
at about 10 to 11 p.m. the corpse would be removed, and we ate
our meal next to the dead body and we did not care anyway because
we were like animals and everyone would be treated the same.  And
until the day we were -- I was taken downstairs.  I could hardly
walk because after more than one month being motionless, I was so
skinny and weak.
And then after hearing that I would be called, I started to
realize that my day had come because people came to ask in my
room to see whether there was the brother named Nath, which was
my name.  Then I was so frightened to hear that people would be
looking or searching for my name, and then I told myself that I
didn't care any longer because I could be killed any time if they
would wish to do so and I better died rather than living in such
condition.
And I did not think of any other thing other than being thirsty
and hungry.  I was so hungry that I had never experienced that
hunger before and I thought that even eating a human flesh would
be a good meal for me also at that moment.
And then when they searched for my name and called my name, then
they asked people to remove my cuff and I was the last person in
a line of other prisoners, so they had to remove other prisoners
before they could really remove me from the cuffs.  And as I told
you, after I was removed from the cuffs I could not stand up.  I
needed assistance to make sure I could stand up and because I
could not move any inches during the last more than one month
under detention.
And that day I came downstairs and I was not blindfolded,
although my handcuffs were still on, and I noticed earlier that
when prisoners were taken to be interrogated or taken away, then
they would be blindfolded, but I observed that I was removed my
blindfold because I believed that they did so not to -- I mean,
when people were blindfolded because they didn't want people to
recognize anything, so I felt a little bit different when I was
not blindfolded.
Then I was walked by three people.  Two helped me to walk from
upstairs downward and then we went into the middle building --
the room -- and then I saw a few people sitting there.  At the
beginning I did not know who they were, but later on I knew they
were the chiefs in that location.  I didn't know his name because
people called him Brother East and I just called him Brother
East, and then he asked me how long I had been in painting.  And
then I told him about my background of my painting experience in
1965, so it's almost five -- sorry, 10 years.
Then I saw the other people who were already there.  I remember
Bou Meng and another person from France, Sunkhun, and the other
three people before me.  And he said that the Angkar needed a big
portrait of the leaders and they asked us whether we could
produce or paint such a picture.
And I told him that I had not been practicing this painting for
long, but I would do my best to paint the portrait.  And then he
gave me a big photo and I did not know who he was because I was
in the rural area and I did not know that a person I knew, he
would have been the leader, but he asked me to paint a bigger
portrait of this individual.
And my ears, at that time, were difficult to listen to him and he
asked me to take a rest for three days and he said that I smelled
like shit and then asked me to have my moustache and hair shaved,
and asked that two guards had to accompany me in order to avoid
me being committing suicide and I told him that -- I assured him
not to worry because I was already freed and I enjoyed this
moment.  So they gave me a scarf, a Khmer scarf, and sets of
clothes to change, but I had developed skin rashes all over my
body.
I didn't remember when or what date it was, but it was about 12
that I was given the rice.  I could not chew the rice because my
jaws became so sore that I could only chew about a few chewings
and then I stopped.
And after a moment then the East Brother advised me to work on
the portrait and he asked me to try to paint a draft of a
portrait, and then I tried.  And after my detention and for long
then I felt so trembling holding the paintbrush and I knew that
if I did not paint well I would be in big trouble.  I was so
nervous.
The first portrait was bad because it was a black and white
portrait because I did not learn that.  At school I learned how
to mix colours in painting, but when it comes to black and white,
it was a new skill for me.  I told him that I would like to
switch to painting the colour portrait.
Then he asked -- he gave me the choices; he said that okay,
whatever you could be good at, then you should choose it and to
make sure that Angkar would be pleased.  And then I realized that
it was the life and death situation.  Of course, the colour
portrait could save my life.  If I made the portrait attractive,
then the Angkar would be pleased with the painting; then I would
be spared from being executed.
At the beginning, the portrait was not that good but he believed
that I was a painter so he could make use of me at the location,
and I had been working hard on my work and then they picked
guards to guard my work until the 7th of January 1979.  I hope
this is the brief summary of my background and story.
Q. You said you were arrested at Battambang province but you were
not told of any offences of yours while being arrested?
A. They did not tell me anything.  They asked me to collect
rattan in Pursat.
Q. Then when you were interrogating, then you were asked to
produce the networks -- the traitorous network and other
associates to topple the regime at that time; is that correct?
A. That's correct, Your Honour.
Q. When you were sent to Phnom Penh, how long would it take to
get to Phnom Penh?  Is it one night or one day and a half?
A. So far as I remember, I left at about 12 o'clock and I arrived
at Phnom Penh at about 2 a.m. in the morning.
Q.  You said that you were not given any food on the road when
you were on the way to Phnom Penh.  So you wanted to relieve
yourself were you allowed to do so among the other people?
A.  They would not allow us to do so.  They only threw a
container, a five-litre container, for us to relieve ourselves in
such a container.  It's an ammunition box.
Q. You said that there were six -- there were two truckloads of
people.  So there were 36 people on those two trucks.
My question is that when people were shackled to their legs with
the wooden form of shackles, were their hands also cuffed or
handcuffed?
A. Our hands were not handcuffed.
Q. Were you blindfolded when you were being sent from Battambang
to Phnom Penh?
A. No, we were not blindfolded, Your Honour.
Q. You already told us about the arrest Angkar made against you,
and you told us details, a brief detail about your captivity
until the 7th of January.  The Chamber would like you to also
tell us more concerning the food ration.  You said you were
detained at Building D and that you were given three spoons of
gruel two times a day.  So how could you manage to eat your meals
since you were shackled to the legs and that you could not even
sit up, or how -- could you elaborate about eating habits at that
location?
A. Mr. President, there was a guard who would bring a big bowl of
gruel and place it next to the metal bar and then ask us to share
the gruel, to distribute the gruel among ourselves.  So we were
given the spoons to take the gruel from that big bowl and then
the gruel was distributed.
So we were given a plate and a spoon; a teaspoon, not a rice
spoon.  And there was a dish of soup, a very small dish of soup
with banana tree used as vegetable and then we could eat -- we
could finish in just two or three spoons.  Since it was the
teaspoon and we could feel like it took longer to finish the
meal, although it was very minimal.
And then we could not move from our location.  We just left the
plate next to us until they were collected by the guard.
Q. So after eating your meals then the guard would collect all
the big bowls and plates and spoons.  Do I understand that
correctly?
A. Mr. President, that is correct.
Q. During the time when you were detained and, as you said, you
had to relieve yourself into a container and then you ate there,
you slept there; the question is that how could the waste, human
waste, be discarded?
A. The guards -- there was one young guard who would come and
collect the waste to be discarded and then would bring us the new
containers for us to use it for another day.  So he would repeat
these routines.
Q. You mentioned something which is of good interest, that you
said that the prisoners were allowed to only wear the underwear
while the clothes were stripped off.  And the belts of the pants
or the shorts would be removed to avoid -- to ensure that
prisoners could not use it to commit suicide.  So when you
mentioned about clothes, clothes refer to shirts and trousers.
So can you tell us whether prisoners would be stripped of their
clothes entirely?  I mean some of them would be naked waiting for
the guards to bring clothes to them or all had some clothes to
wear on?
A. When our clothes were stripped off they only removed the black
clothes because the black clothes would be taken away.  Other
clothes other than the black ones would be left with us.
However, those clothes would not contain any kind of string or
belts and we could not even see any shirts with buttons.
Q. So a prisoner could have a shirt, pants and some spare
clothes, or would they be allowed to have one set of clothes
only?
A. Your Honour, actually we were allowed to only have only the
dress or the clothes that we were wearing, not other additional
clothes.
Q. You said that after having a bath you got soaked or wet but
how could you really take off your pants?  I mean to dry it -- I
mean for the shirt it would be okay but how could you really
remove your pants from the shackles, because you said that your
legs were already attached to the shackles?  So I don't know how
you could remove it from the shackles.  Could you please explain
how it worked?  And I mean how you could dry your clothes before
you could put them on, please?  I think we find it difficult to
understand and need your further elaboration on this.
A. Mr. President, I would like to clarify it as follows.  Our
legs -- I would like to apologize.  Actually, I would like to put
my legs up here.  The legs were shackled.  So if we removed our
pants then we can remove the pants entirely from one leg but then
we insert the remaining of the pants into a, you know, like the
margins of the shackles so when it got soaked, then it was soft
so it could be removed, but it took about 20 minutes to remove it
from our body entirely.  So then we would dry it and then wear it
in the way how we actually removed it.  So it took us so much
time.  That's how it worked.
Q. We notice that when you were arrested on the 7th of -- you
arrived at the place on the 7th or 8th of January 1978; it was
cold during that time.  Could you please tell us the condition in
that room when it was cold and then you got wet?  Were you given
any blanket or any other kind of scarf to cover during the night
to make you warm or were you left soaked?
A. Mr. President, we had no other choice other than being very
patient and we had to bear with it, whatever it was.
Q. What about the other prisoners?  Were they subjected to the
same condition or were they exceptional?
A. Mr. President, everyone would be treated the same.
Q. In your room, you shared a common big room.  How many
prisoners were there during the time when you were in captivity
for more than one month?
A. Mr. President, in our room the number of prisoners could vary.
Sometimes there were 65 people; sometimes there were only 40; and
sometimes there were 50 of us.  It depends on how prisoners were
being moved from one room to another.  I think the highest
prisoners in that room was more than 60 people.
Q. In general, through your observation, you noted that when
prisoners were removed or were taken away from the room -- were
taken on a regular basis, and how many of them would be taken
away each day?
A. When I was in that room, I only knew what happened in the room
because I could not see outside.  It was not very frequent that
my inmates were removed.  Sometimes three of us would be removed
and one only came back.  Sometimes three were taken away and then
all of them would be returned, but sometimes they never came
back.
Q. You said during the time when you were detained there were
dead bodies, and normally when people died you said that they
would be left on the floor until they would be removed from the
room.
My question is, how often did you see such dead bodies or such
incidents?
A. Mr. President, so far as I recollect during the more than one
month I was detained, there were four people who died in such a
manner.
Q. From your description, you yourself were not interrogated by
the S-21 interrogators.  Was it correct, or you were not
interrogated at all during the time of your detention by the S-21
staff?
A. Mr. President, I was not interrogated at that location.
Q. So it means you were not tortured besides being detained and
starved in that room in such an inhumane condition.  Is that
correct?  It means you were not taken out to be tortured?
A. Mr. President, no, it did not happen to me.
Q. Did you witness any incident of torture being done by the S-21
staff or interrogators or prison guard on any other prisoners?
If so, what did you see and what led you to see such tortures?
A. On this matter, I would like to tell to the President that
when I went to work on the ground floor I experienced some
incidents, that is, the interrogations.  Let me highlight an
incident to you, Mr. President.
What I clearly saw was highlighted in my painting.  When you see
the location of the wooden frames where children used to climb, a
prisoner -- he was an artist but I do not recall his nationality.
At that time, Brother East -- let me use the word Brother East
because that's the word I used to call him -- Brother East
brought that person and that he could sculpture Brother number 1,
and the sculpture was exact and in a short period of time because
the three of us would spend five or six months just to make one
sculpture.
Probably that artist was clever so that he wanted to tried him
and through the experience he, in fact, not know anything about
sculpturing.  He couldn't even mould.  So when the sculpture was
brought in, there were four or five guards and they watched him
doing the sculpturing.
So then Brother East saw that he was useless and he left.  And
the guards took him back, but he was not taken to his room.  He
was taken to that location that I described, and from the view
through the window that I could see, I could see that view
clearly.  It was not done during the day.  It was like 10 or
10.30 p.m. at night.
So I draw that painting in order to depict what I saw, but the
painting was actually like during the day time, but when it
happened it was during the night time.  However, when the guards
saw that we could see it, the guards came and shut the windows so
that we could no longer see, and that was one incident that I
saw.  And I did not see any other incidents except the screaming
from the prisoners.  We heard screaming almost on a daily basis,
sometimes from this building or that building.
Q. And you, yourself, when you were allowed to paint, how were
the living conditions?  Where did you live or stay because you
were a prisoner but with a special condition that you were
released in order to do the painting?  So where did you live and
what was the food like?
A. There were two stages, Mr. President.
First, after I went to the ground floor at night-time, a guard
took me to a separate room.  It was not into the same room; it
was a separate room.  There were other workshop people who stayed
there, like woodcrafters, and we were not shackled in that room
and there was a sleeping mat.  There was a mosquito net, although
we could not use it as a mosquito net but we could use it to
cover our bodies.
And, later on, Angkar seemed to trust me more, then I was allowed
to stay at the workshop and the food ration was brought in by the
guard from outside.  It was proper.  There was rice and soup as
the food ration for the guards.
Q. Was it for all, for those people who worked in the workshop,
like Bou Meng?
A. Yes, the same.
Q. What did they order you and your group to paint and how many
paintings did you do?
A. I could not recall on the number of paintings, however, from
my vague recollection we only painted the pictures of the Party;
that is, the picture of Brother number 1.  I could not recall,
maybe five or six portraits of Brother number 1.  And another
painting, the beating of the Vietnamese in front of the
microphone, I painted that painting as well.
And, besides, I had to do the touch-up on the sculptures, on the
moulds, so the three of us -- Ieng Chan, Mok Sonkhun and myself
-- the four of us, actually -- we made the mould for making
sculpture of Brother number 1.
This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. You said "Brother East".  Do you mean the accused whose real
name is Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch?  Is this correct?
A. Mr. President, yes, I meant the accused.
Q. During the time they had an interest in you and ordered you to
do the paintings of the leaders of that regime, did you observe
that Brother East, or the accused, come often to the place where
you do the painting in the workshop?  If so, how many times?
A. My apology, Mr. President.  Could you repeat your question?
Q. In the workshop, how many times did you see Brother East come
to inspect your work?  If so, how many times, from what you can
recall?
A. Mr. President, I thought he came almost every day.  He came
very often.  It was rare that he did not come.
Q. What did you observe regarding his attitude?  He's a laughing
person, a serious person, or he was a very worried person?
A. Mr. President, every time he entered the workshop, when we
knew that he entered the workshop, we had to move to another site
in order to wait for his instructions.  And the second point,
it's typical that we, the prisoners, had to be afraid of him and
to respect him as the top leader, as the Angkar in that location.
And his character, from what I could observe, he was one of the
leaders who was clever, vigilant, and so his main power, and that
we were afraid and had to respect him.  So every time he entered,
I did not dare to sit in the chair.  I had to stand up and waited
for his instructions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time to have a break and it's also time for changing
the DVD recording, so the Chamber will adjourn for 20 minutes and
resume at 11 a.m.
Court official, can you provide refreshment to the witness and
bring him back when the Court resumes?
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1041H to 1101H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Uncle Nath, you did not yet respond to my question that you
said you saw the accused visiting the place where you worked very
often, and how could you describe his facial impression, whether
he was happy, sad, or he was full of worries whenever he went to
that location?  So what can you tell us about this?
A. Mr. President, normally when he came into the workshop he was
complimenting or he was appreciating our work; for example, the
good job we done.  And sometimes when we were behind the schedule
then he was not very happy.
Q. You mentioned about a portrait you painted about a torturing
scene in which you could see through a window from the place
where you were working.  It was at night.  And you said that in
order to visualize the incident you only brought it to a portrait
of the daylight and you said that you mentioned about a person
who could mould a sculpture of Pol Pot and that he said he could
make it faster but then he could not do.  And then the accused
was present at that time.
So when the person who said that he would be the good sculptor
failed to keep his promise that he would be a good sculptor, so
what happened to him?  Had you heard anything from the accused
whether he told something to that person or reprimand him, or
else?
A. So far as I recall, when the person could not do his work,
then he asked the guard to take him back and then he left.  And I
don't know for sure what happened to that person, and I did not
hear any orders toward that particular individual but, so far as
I noticed, the guards had the rights to do such things very often
during the time when I worked as the painter, because the guards
could do something spontaneously and made such a decision very
often spontaneously.
Q. You said that the guards could do some things spontaneously.
What kind of activities in which the guards themselves could make
such a decision spontaneously that you have observed?
A. Mr. President, the East Brother who came to visit the place
where I worked, he -- I think there was a kind of threatening.
He said that if he could not work properly then he would be in
the hands of the guards.  So I could presume that the guards have
exercised the full rights to make their own decision without any
further consultation.
Q. In your statement before the Co-Investigating Judges there was
an annex attached and there were 13 sketches drawn by you,
yourself?  Are all those sketches, or the drawings, yours?
A. Yes, they are mine.
Q. So that drawings reflect the activities of the officials of
the Angkar who treated you personally, or what?
A. The drawings, I would like to classify them into three parts.
First, I saw it with my own eyes.  Number two, I only heard but I
never saw it, but I could imagine how the situation -- how it
happened.  And number three, I heard from prisoners who shared
the room.  So this is how the drawings could be produced.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV unit, could you please attach the
drawings with ERN  
         13   from 00163721 to 00163734?  And D28/9.  Could you please make
sure that they are projected on the monitors?
Could you please start from the first drawing?  ERN 00163721
first?
The AV unit, what happened?  Could you please advise us whether
it is possible to have it projected on the monitors?
The Co-Prosecutors, could you please be of any assistance to
project that picture?
MR. PETIT:
Mr. President, with pleasure.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Uncle Vann Nath, could you please observe the pictures?
Please move to the next slide, and until you reach the final
picture, but please be slow.
Thank you very much, the prosecutors.
Could we please move to , please?  Please move to
the Khmer ERN regarding the sketches 00163731.
MR. PETIT:
I'm sorry, Mr. President, could you repeat the Khmer ERN, please?
MR. PRESIDENT:
00163731.
MR. PETIT:
And which page would you like to see, Mr. President?
MR. PRESIDENT:
, please.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Uncle Nath, please look at these sketches.  There were two
people, who could be the guards and a man who was sitting near a
water jar and putting one of his hands into the jar.  Is the
sketch describing yourself or other prisoners?
A. Mr. President, these sketches show my picture the first day I
came downstairs and it reminds me of my recollection, the memory
that I could see the light that I could live when I was asked to
shave my hair and moustache.  And from the day I was detained
until the day I had a bath it had been almost more than one month
that I had the first bath.  And I broke a mirror, a kind of glass
that I use to reflect myself inside such a mirror.  I could see
how weak l looked in that mirror and two guards were guarding me.
Q. So this sketch is about the treatment of the staff of the
Khmer Rouge Angkar on you during the time when you were arrested
from Battambang and sent to Phnom Penh at S-21 to that workshop;
is that correct?
A. That is correct, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could the Co-Prosecutor once again help show another picture with
P000027 and the following pictures, please?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Uncle, please look at these pictures.  There were a number of
prisoners inside a room and people were shackled to the legs on
an iron rod.  Is it your painting and does it reflect the real
situation in which prisoners were detained and while you also
were detained at that time?
A. Mr. President, it is the room where I once was detained in and
it shows the exact number of people who were detained at that
time and how we put to sleep and that we could not sit up without
any permission, and only when we raised our hand to ask for
permission to sit up that the guard could allow us to sit up.
This is how we were treated.
MR. PRESIDENT:
So could you please move to the next photo or picture?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What about this picture?
A. This picture is about a prisoner who was detained in an
individual cell under Building C, A, B and D because when I was
first sent in under those buildings there were individual cells.
But later on only Building A could have the individual cells.
The other cells were removed.  So after any prisoner was
interrogated then the hope was very slim that they could survive
or live.  That's why they were detained into an individual cell
and being desperate and hopeless.
Q. So you only drew this picture or painted this picture based on
your recollection of other people having told you, or based on
your experience?
A. I used to see these cells because during the time when I
worked there I would pass some of the cells.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please move to the next photo?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Can you tell us anything about this picture?  What is it
about?
A. Mr. President, I did not see this incident.  I only heard from
what happened in Building B because normally the guards -- a few
guards would take children from their parents, and I could hear
the scream of those parents and the parents who would probably
have tried to take back their children from the guards.  So it
was based on my imagination and what I heard.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The next picture, please.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Does this picture show anything; could you please tell us?
A. Mr. President, this photo -- this painting -- was drawn based
on the information I was told by a prisoner who was interrogated
by water-boarding technique; that he was suffocating.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please show the fifth picture, please?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What about this picture; could you please tell us about it?
A. This picture was drawn from the recollection of what the
prisoner told me, Mr. Pa Tha Chan, the Vietnamese translator
during interrogation when Vietnamese were interrogated, he told
me about this.  And I think Brother East knew that because he was
placed -- immersed into a basin filled with water and he drank
too much of the water and then later on the guard would step on
his stomach to make him vomit all those water.
And in 1981, the German people -- East German people who came to
file the document for S-21 and he gestured in that movie -- the
documentary about being immersed into that improvised basin, and
that's why I could draw such a painting based on his request of
his recollection of the torture.
Q. Has he survived S-21?
A. He had survived, but he died in 2002.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please show picture number six?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q, Could you please describe the painting here?
A. Mr. President, this photo -- or this picture was not drawn
from my -- what I witnessed or from what people told me, but we
can see these equipments to the south of the special prison; we
saw these implements.  And then there was a meeting end of 1981,
and then we analyzed how the container was used for torture
during that time.
So there were two handcuffs and a tap -- water tap -- and people
could not -- no, after the discussion, people could presume that
any prisoner would be hung and then plunged into the water in
that container because there were cuffs inside the container, so
it suggests that the head of any prisoner would be immersed under
the water.  So that's why I think -- it based on from what we
analyzed during that time.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please show the next painting?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
What about this painting, what does it show?
A. This painting was drawn by showing a description of a female
prisoner from the
kitchen.  I personally went into the kitchen and briefly she told
me that she lost her female character, and I did not ask her in
detail.  And she said she was interrogated and that her female
character was lost.
And with the scorpion -- with the poisonous insect, were based on
descriptions of the guards.  There was an old guard.  He was
feeding those insect and when I asked him what he did, he told me
that he was asked to feed those insects.  And sometime he fed
those insects with ants and sometimes they would come and take
those insects or the centipede,  and when I asked the female
prisoner, she said she was interrogated and she was bitten with
that centipede.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please move onto the next painting.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What does the painting reflect; the types of torture?
A. Mr. President, a victim, but he already passed away.  His name
was Oeng Bech.  He was the -- he used to be the chairman of the
Genocide Museum of Tuol Sleng.  He told me that his nails were
pulled in that way.  So he lost some of the fingernails as the
result of this types of torture, so I painted this image for him
as a souvenir.  So this one reflects the actual torture done by
the S-21 staff on Oeng Bech.
Q. After you did the painting, was Oeng Bech still alive to --
and whether he receive it and he reflected that it was the actual
torture reflection on him?
A. Mr. President, from what I can recall, the S-21 museum was
opened in 1981 and he died in 1997, so he had that picture for
more than
years.           10   Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please move onto the next painting; that is painting number nine.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Can you describe this painting?
A. This painting was a reflection of Bou Meng.  It was his idea
that he describes the way he was tortured; that they took turns
to beat him up.  So I made that painting for Bou Meng.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please move to painting number 10.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What about this painting; can you describe the painting, what
does it reflect?
A. Mr. President, it is unclear.  I only made this painting to
reflect what happened at Choeung Ek from the hearsay, but I don't
think it was the way it was done, but because the -- or the
unclear information.  And, actually, only one hand was tied, and
after the person was dead then the throat was slashed, so this
painting does not reflect the reality.
So it was less cruel than what happened at Choeung Ek.  At
Choeung Ek, the tied was not done in that way.  After the person
was clubbed and died, then the throat was slashed.  That's what I
learnt later by a person who used to be a former person in the
special force group.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  Please move on to painting number 12.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. So you already described this painting, the reflection of
torture on a person who boasted to be a good artist, but it
turned out that he was not a real artist.  Then the accused
ordered him to be returned and then the guards tortured him that
way, and you saw this view during the night.  But in order to
make it easier on the eyes in the painting, you painted it as it
happened during the day.  Is this the picture that you referred
to?
A. That is correct, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please move on to painting number 13.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. And what about this painting; what does it reflect?
A. I saw two people carrying a very skinny person whose hands and
feet were tied into a wooden pole.  Mr. President, I saw this
incident personally.  When the prisoners were moved out during
that time, I thought they would be moved out and to be integrated
into the co-operatives for rice production, for instance.  That's
what I thought.
This person could not walk.  He didn't eat and he was so sick for
quite some time, and he could not walk by himself, so that was
the way that he was carried by young guards about 15 to 16 years
old.  And when I turned my head and I saw this incident, and I
was rather moved and shocked by what I saw.  I thought the person
already died but, actually, he was still speaking and his eyes
were blindfolded, so it means he was not yet dead.  So he was
taken out to be put into the truck which was waiting outside.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please move on to the last painting, number 14.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. And this painting drawn by you, what does it reflect and what
is the likely location of your reflection in this painting?
A. Mr. President, after I heard about Choeung Ek as a burial mass
grave site, we went there and we saw a lot of mass graves, so we
knew about the umbrella branches of S-21 at Choeung Ek where
people were killed.
Q. Thank you.  You left the Security Office S-21, and when was
that?
A. Mr. President, I left the S-21 compound on the 7 January 1978
at 12.30 noon.
Q. How many went along with you and where did you go?
A. Mr. President, on that day after I heard the gun explosions on
the main street, we were gathered into the painting workshop.
There were woodcrafters and some other artists totalling more
than 10.  There were about 12 or 13 of us in the workshop.  At
about half-an-hour later, that was 12.30 noon, there were four or
five armed guards came and ordered us to leave the room, to walk
in one line, to follow them.  And they threatened us to walk in
one straight line.  If we stayed one -- if we even made one step
out of the line we would be shot dead.  We were so scared.  And I
saw that was the time.
So we walked.  I did not even dare to pick up my scarf; it was
nearby.  I only had the clothes on me.  So we followed them,
walking across the Tuol Tumpoung market.  That was so quiet at
the time.  So we walked past that area down to Boeng Tumpoung
area and towards Chamkardon, and we arrived at Prey Sar almost at
dusk.
And when we arrived there, we saw a lot of people who were
already there and we walked throughout the night.  So because of
the chaotic situation, some of us separated and we reunited in
the early morning, and then I walked and I almost reached Ang
Snuol.
The four or five prison guards were already waiting for us there,
so we did not have anything to eat for one day already on the 7
of January.  And on the 8 of January, when we arrived at that
location, the soldiers asked us to eat the watermelons, and after
that we had to cross National Road Number 4 and then we would be
out of harm's way.
So at 8 a.m. in the morning, we crossed the National Road Number
4 in a number of lines.  There were some lines to the left and to
the right of my line, and almost -- we almost reached the
National Road Number 4.  It's about 100 metres away.  We saw some
trucks with the Vietnamese and Cambodian soldiers on the trucks
with a flag displaying on the truck.  The lines on the right of
my line fired at those trucks and then they responded and then
there was an exchange of fire, and those forces who guarded us
fled in separate directions.
So we all were separated.  Ieng Chan, Oeng Bech and Ta Kong and I
were the only four in one group, so we waited for those who would
arrive later on.  For example, we expected that maybe there would
be guards or other prisoners who would arrive, so we would wait
for them, and we dared not to go anywhere because we were afraid
that the Vietnamese soldiers would shoot us and kill us.
And because we were so hungry we did not have anything to eat, so
we were waiting nearby the main road.  So when we made a decision
whether to follow them or not, and I was afraid that I would be
dead if I had to follow them because we did not have anything to
eat and I wanted to go back to Phnom Penh, but then I was told if
I go back to Phnom Penh then my throat would be slashed by
Vietnamese soldiers.
I, myself, I was determined to go back to Phnom Penh and the two
or three of them then followed me.  And then we saw some trucks
driving by and they waved to us not to go to that direction.
And on the 8th of January at 4 p.m. I felt a bit liberal and when
we arrived in Phnom Penh it was the 10th of January and there
were some Cambodian soldiers waiting to receive us.  They were
friendly.  They gave us rice and food amongst with other people.
And there were only four of us in the group.
About one year later after the museum was established, then we
saw three others:  Bou Meng, Pha Tha Chan, and Chum Mey.  So
initially only four of us who arrived.  This is my response, Mr.
President.
Q. Thank you.  And another view that the Chamber wants to know is
that during the 7th of January 1979 -- on that day, when the
liberation army arrived, the armies of the National United Front
with the support of the Vietnamese soldiers to come and liberate
Phnom Penh, and when you left, that you were ordered to walk in
one line.
The question is, for the remaining prisoners, how many of them
altogether?  And when you were asked to go along with them,
besides the guns pointing at you, were you cuffed or were a
string used to tie all of you up?
A. Mr. President, from what I can recall, at that time we left
the painting workshop there were woodcrafters, electricians,
blacksmiths and there were about 13 of us.  We were ordered to
leave but we were not tied or handcuffed.  We walked with our
bare hands but we were ordered to walk only in one straight line.
And there were no other prisoners remained in the prison.
Probably only a few left after the October or November; the
prisons were quiet since that time.  There was a special prison
at Building A.  There were some when I left.  When I left there
were some of them there.  I saw their heads from what we saw from
the distance but we didn't know when they died.
Q. The remaining prisoners who were later on buried there, how
many of them did you see at the Tuol Sleng museum?
A. I saw 14 burial locations or tombs here at the Tuol Sleng
museum, so I presume there were 14 of them left and later on the
chairman Oeng Bech made a concrete tomb for those 14 people who
died.
Q. Regarding your personal matter, when Khmer Rouge Angkar
arrested you and sent you from Battambang to Phnom Penh to be
detained at S-21 Detention Centre, what happened to your family,
your wife and children, because you have not yet mentioned about
your family?
A. Mr. President, on the day I was arrested I only was arrested
alone and my wife and children were at the cooperative number 5.
I had two children staying with my wife.  The eldest was five and
the youngest was six months old.  After I was freed and after I
returned I learned that my children died.  Only my wife survived
and she is with me at the present time.
Q. Thank you for your information in this testimony to depict the
incidents and the events that you went through during the
Democratic Kampuchea from the 17 April 1975 to the 7th of January
1979.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, I would like to inquire if any Judges of the Bench have any
questions to ask this survivor who is now as a witness related to
the fact of S-21.
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Could you explain to us the difficulties that you encountered
after your release, after you left S-21 and the traumatic
experience that you went through and how you were able to
eventually overcome this?
A. Mr. President, Your Honour, the one-year period of my
detention at S-21 was the period that I tried my best emotionally
and physically to accomplish the tasks ordered by Angkar.  I
tried to use all the skills I had to accomplish those tasks for
the only purpose; that is, survival.
So my suffering and my separation that happened to me during the
one-year period and during the three years eight months period of
the regime as a whole cannot be erased easily from my memory.
Even I tried my best to forget and try not to remember, it still
haunts me.  It still makes me to remember what happened.
So in summary it cannot be forgotten.  I don't think I can never
ever forget what happened to me, Your Honour.
Q. We have seen that you made many paintings and, if I understood
correctly, you returned not too long after you left S-21, back to
where S-21 was set up, to paint paintings.  Your also partook in
documentary films and I believe you also wrote a book.  Can you
tell us why it is so important for you to testify in this way?
A. Your Honour, Mr. President, this is what I have thought since
I was detained at S 21.  I determined if one day I survived and
had freedom and that I could leave that location, I would compile
the events to reflect on what happened so that the younger
generation knew -- would know of our suffering, and that the 36
of us who were transferred over to S-21 never committed anything
wrong.
Therefore, those who came along with me to S-21, the majority of
them did not know anything or any offence that would lead to
their arrest.  They were perplexed as to what happened, why they
were arrested  So I had to reveal, I had to write, I had to
compile, and it can be served as a mirror to reflect to the
younger generation of the lives of those who were accused with no
reason, who committed no wrong, and that they were punished that
way.
That was the very suffering that we received and the suffering
that we had because we told them the truth and they did not
believe it.  There was nothing else more than that.  That's why I
determined, I attempted, and I tried to explain to the younger
children through various programs, through them, so that the
younger generation would understand the experience so that they
would consider and that they would try to avoid the repeat of
such historical events.
Q. You came today to testify.  Are you expecting anything in
particular from this trial?  Would you -- are you wishing for
something special in this trial?
A. Your Honour, I have thought from the beginning -- that was
after 1979.  I never imagined that I would be able to sit in this
courtroom today to describe about my plight of the experience to
the younger generations, to the general public to understand what
happened to me, and now I have the ability to testify before this
Chamber in public.  This is my privilege.  This is my honour.  I
do not want anything more than that.
What I want is something that is intangible, that is justice for
those that already died.  Whatever way the justice could be done
is my only hope that can be achieved by this Chamber.  And I hope
by the end of the Tribunal that justice can be tangible, can be
seen by everybody, and that it is something that I expect as a
result, as an outcome of this Chamber of this Tribunal, and this
is what I wanted, Your Honour.
Q. I would like to revisit an incident that was a bit specific
that you mentioned involving another painter who was working with
you in the workshop at Tuol Sleng, an incident between this
painter and Duch.  You were relating an incident involving Bou
Meng.  Do you remember what happened between Bou Meng and Duch?
A. Your Honour, Bou Meng was tortured for his mistakes but I
don't know what kind of mistakes he had.  But at that time at
about 11 p.m. we were about to break from work.  Then there was a
guard, Mr. Peng, a rather higher or senior staff.  And then he
was watching us at the place for some time and I was scared but I
did not ask him any questions.  I just continued working.  And
then later on he said, "Contemptible Meng, get out".
And then Meng wore his shirt on and then he left.  Then I asked
him that, "Now the guard asked you to go out and when you come
back don't forget the cigarette, to bring the cigarette for me
also."  Then when he left I never saw him again for long.  I was
waiting to see him back but it was in vain.
I thought that probably he would be released and integrated into
the cooperative but after about two weeks I took a rest -- I mean
after work -- and I was about to fall asleep.  Then I heard
someone calling from downstairs and asked me to send back the
painter -- the guard to send the painter.  And I thought what
would happen then?  Then I came downstairs and I was working, was
back to work.  There were four people:  Comrade Chan, Sunkhun, I
myself and another person and we did not know what would happen.
A little while later we heard the sounds of the chains which were
being dragged along the corridor and then at the door we saw Meng
who was chained to his neck and legs.  He was pale and his hair
grew longer and my heart beat so quickly at that moment.  And
Brother East was there at that moment and then Meng was called in
and he said "Contemptible Meng, what have you promised to me?"
And then Bou Meng said, "I did not know anything," and then he
sat right in front of me, kneeled down and apologized to every
one of us.
And actually, I did not know anything about what happened to him
when he was taken away.  And then he was taken back, and later on
he said that whether contemptible Meng could be used any longer
or could he be used to make fertilizer.  And I thought that
fertilizer here means the fertilizer for plants or crops at the
cooperative.  And then -- and I thought that since he was also an
artist and when he was made to work to make fertilizer, it would
not be a proper job for him, so that's why I talked to him that
please forgive him for his wrongdoing and give him an opportunity
to stay here and if he made further mistakes then he would be
decided.
I think he probably did not listen to me but since Meng could be
a good painter then he would be longer used at that location and
his leg was shackled, chained, and then he asked me to watch him,
and that he must not move any inches from that location, and that
was the last time that he could correct himself so he would -- he
was back to work.
So this is what I could recall about that person, your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is now time for lunch, so the Chamber would like to take an
adjournment until 1:30 pm.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 12H05 to 13H27)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We will continue to hear the testimony of a witness who is also a
survivor from S-21, Vann Nath.  I would like now to give the
floor to the Judges of the Bench if you have questions to be put
to this witness.
Judge Ya Sokhan, the floor is yours.
JUDGE YA SOKHAN:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY JUDGE YA SOKHAN:
Q. Uncle Nath, can you confirm when you were first detained in
the rice barn?  Was it a prison to detain people in that
subdistrict or was it a temporary detention?
A. Your Honour, I was first detained in the rice barn.  It was
the cooperative detention.  The cooperative name was Cooperative
5.
Q. So it was for the Angkar district detention centre?
A. No.  It was not.  It was the cooperative prison.  When people
were first detained, they would be detained there temporarily.
Two or three hours later they would be sent to the subdistrict,
and District 41.  That was at the Samrong Pagoda.
Q. So they were sent to be detained at the Samrong Pagoda.  What
was the prison like in that pagoda?
A. Your Honour, the prison at Samrong Pagoda belongs to District
41 of Sector 4.  It was for the entire pagoda.  It was converted
into a prison and after the liberation of 1979 it was noted that
a lot of people died, and there was a memorial site, it was quite
a big one, built there for those lost souls.
Q. So it was at Samrong Pagoda.  What about the detention centre
at the Kandal Pagoda?
A. Your Honour, the detention at the Kandal Pagoda, from what I
understood, it belongs to the Northwest Zone.  Because people
were sent there from various other prisons, for example from
Moung Ruessei District, Banan District, they were all sent to
that big prison.
Q. When you were detained at the Samrong Pagoda were you given
food on that day?
A. Your Honour, on that day we were given a meal around 8 or 9
a.m. in the morning.  It was a small bowl of gruel and with a few
salts, pieces of salt.
Q. When you rested during the night, were your handcuffs taken
off?
A. On the first night that I was detained at the Samrong Pagoda,
my legs were shackled but I was not handcuffed.
Q. Did they interrogate you at the time?
A. No I was not interrogated.  I only stayed there for a short
period of time.
Q. When you were sent to Kandal Pagoda, how many guards
accompanied you and were they armed?
A. Your Honour, I departed Samrong Pagoda to Kandal Pagoda in the
company of two soldiers.  One rode the motorbike.  The other one
carried an AK rifle, sitting behind me.  So there were four
people on that motorbike:  the soldier who rode the bike, then
myself, another prisoner, and then another soldier behind us.
Q. You stated that the Kandal Pagoda Prison was a zone prison.
Did you know who supervised that prison; that zone prison?
A. Your Honour, I did not know that detail.
Q. When you arrived at the Kandal Pagoda did the guards at Kandal
Pagoda Prison come to receive you?  Or were they the two militia
men who took you there, led you to the people at the Kandal
Pagoda Prison?
A. Your Honour, at that time the two soldiers who took us there,
once the motorbike stopped, three or four soldiers came out from
the Pagoda.  It seems like they had a prearrangement.  So then
when the motorbike stopped they tied my hands to the back.
Q. Did they blindfold you or tie your hands to the back?
A. My hands were tied to the back but I was not blindfolded.
Q. Did they register your details and were you photographed?
A. No, not at that Kandal Pagoda Prison.
Q. Where did they take you after that?
A. After they tied us up they split us.  Say Sarak was sent to
the left and I was sent to the right direction, into a room.  It
used to be a former monk residence, and inside that room there
were already four detainees.  So they untied my hands and they
shackled my legs.  There were five of us there at a time.
Q. When did they interrogate you?
A. Your Honour, at about 7 p.m. they came to call out the names
and we were tied and taken away.
Q. After returning from being interrogated, were you still cuffed
or uncuffed?
A. After we returned from being interrogated we lost our spirit.
They took off the cuffs and they shackled our legs.  Although we
asked for water, we were not given any.
Q. From your statement, you were detained at the Kandal Pagoda
for seven days.  And the subsequent days, were you being
interrogated and tortured?
A. Your Honour, at the Wat Kandal I was interrogated once.  That
was on the first day.  I was interrogated for one time only.
Q. What the food ration was like?
A. The food at the Kandal Pagoda was for the row of the shackle,
and there were five or six of us.  We would be given one small
cartridge container of gruel, and they place it on the wooden
shackle, and if there were five of us, there would be five spoons
there.  And then they -- there's a small pat of salt.  Sometimes
they put it on that wooden shackle, sometimes they put it on the
bowl.  So we took a grain of salt each and we ate the gruel from
that common pot together.
Q. When you were taken out from the Kandal Pagoda Prison, did you
know which force or which group came to tell you and did you know
-- or if you know the unit of that group?
A. Your Honour, at that time I did not know anything or which
unit or which force came to take me.  My name was called and the
truck was waiting for us.  So after they lift the cloth cover
then we were boarded and then they verified the names of the
prisoners.  Then they uncovered the truck and we could not know
which unit came to pick us up.
Q. Did you look at the plate number of that truck?
A. No, I did not.
Q. In each truck how many guards were there?
A. Your Honour, from what I can recall, in that truck there was a
driver and a person who sat next to the driver.  There is one
guard sitting on the roof and another guard sitting in the back
with us.  They were all armed.  So in total the armed guards,
there were three armed guards plus the person sitting next to the
driver.  So if I can recall it, there were five of them
altogether in one truck.
Q. Did you ever think about the detention at the zone prison and
at S-21 Detention Centre?  Which one had worse conditions than
the other one?
A. Your Honour, from the feeling that I had at the time that I
came across three prisons and when I arrived at S-21, while I was
being photographed I had a feeling that that was a detention
centre closer to the senior leadership and I had a slim hope that
there might be justice and that because we did not do anything
wrong, and if Angkar found that we didn't make any offence, then
we would be released.  That was the feeling I had at the time.
However, after I entered the second floor of the D building two
days later, my hope just died.  It's gone.  That was also based
on the behaviours of the young prison guards, so I completely
lost my hope.  They degraded us.  It's indescribable, the way
they treated us, the prisoners.  Sometimes when we laid down,
when they woke us up sometimes while it was just -- while we were
asleep they suddenly woke us up and if we could not sit up on
time then they used their rubber -- their tyre thongs to kick our
heads.
So with such a view for the last few days when I was there, I
lost my hope and when I compared my detentions to the sector and
the zone prison, I could not have any hope.  The situation, the
security was tight.  We were forbidden not to talk to any other
inmates and that at S-21 is where I really had the real test of
being detained in the prison conditions.  My hope was zero.
JUDGE YA SOKHAN:
I have no more questions, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Any Judges of the Bench have any questions?
The floor now is given to Judge Thou Mony.
JUDGE THOU MONY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY JUDGE THOU MONY:
Q. Uncle Vann Nath, I want to clarify on a few points that you
have stated this morning.  You told us you were detained at S-21
for more than one month and after that you were assigned to draw
paintings.  Can you tell us the condition of your first detention
and the condition after you were assigned to work as a painter?
A. Your Honour, the two conditions were completely different.
When I was upstairs, as I said, we had no rights.  If we were
ordered to sleep we had to sleep.  We had to ask for permission
for everything that we wanted to do.  However, when I was on the
ground floor I had certain freedoms.  I could move around freely
in the workshop in that room.  That room was about three times
10, or four times
metres, and if I wanted to go out of that           10   room then I would need to ask permission from the guard who
guarded outside that building, that room.
And for lunch or for taking a bath then we were -- I was allowed
to do that.  So the conditions were completely different.
Q. What about resting at night?  Were you cuffed or shackled?
A. Your Honour, while I was working on the ground floor I was no
longer cuffed or shackled.  I had freedom.  I could sleep freely.
I was allowed to have a mat, although it was not a new mat but,
yes indeed, it still was a mat and I could use a mosquito net as
a blanket.
Q. So you were not cuffed or shackled.  However, were you guarded
strictly during the time you rested at night?
A. When I rested on the upper floor together with other workshop
people, yes, we were guarded strictly and we were checked almost
every hour.  But later on, when I rested in the workshop, nobody
guarded me.  They locked us from the outside and we could rest in
that workshop.
Q. What about the food provisions? Was there a difference between
the time you were upstairs and the time you worked as a painter?
A. Your Honour, it was totally different. Upstairs, as I said
earlier, we only had a few spoons of gruel each time for each
meal.  Downstairs in the workshop I could eat.  I could have my
fill.  I had rice to eat, so that was the difference.
Q. You stated this morning that when you worked as a painter, a
prisoner who declared that he was a real artist and could work
quicker and at a better pace than you -- however, he could not
accomplish what he said, so he was tortured by hanging and
dropping into the jar, as you illustrated in the drawing.  And it
was done at night.
Besides that prisoner were there any other prisoners who were
tortured the same way?
A. Your Honour, I only saw one incident of that prisoner.  I did
not see any other prisoners involved in such torture.
Q. Besides that one type of torture did you witness any other
types of torture?
A. No, I did not see it personally, however, one day a prison
guard from the interrogation unit brought a prisoner to be
interrogated.  At that time, I was mixing cement in order to
build the sculpture of Brother number 1 and the prisoner was
walked nearby to the window of the workshop, and that guard asked
me to pack some cement for him and I thought he would use it to
fix a water jar or something.  So I gave it to him and he left.
Upon returning, the person whom he walked before I handed him the
cement, I saw the cement on the head of that prisoner, so I
presumed that the cement was used on that prisoner.  However,
that was only my conclusion.
JUDGE THOU MONY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I do not have any more questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber has already asked the questions to the witness and
now I would like to give the floor to the Co-Prosecutors to put
questions to the witness, Vann Nath.  You are reminded that you
have 30 minutes to ask questions.  The floor is yours.
MR. YET CHAKRIYA:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. YET CHAKRIYA:
Q. Mr. Vann Nath, besides Brother East, did you know any other
leading cadres at S 21?
A. Mr. Co-Prosecutor, I knew Brother East, he was the biggest
person there.  Then Brother Mam Nai from the interrogation
section.  Next, as called by Brother East, it was Comrade Pon; I
saw him occasionally.  And next Hor -- Comrade Hor or Brother
Hor, as he was called at the time.  He was also a senior cadre,
although I was uncertain of his actual position.  I called him
Brother West.
Some prison guards asked me if Brother Hor came to inspect the
workshop, so I said sometimes Brother West came to visit, or if
the accused came, I would say Brother East came to visit.  Then
there was a Comrade Peng from the Special Unit; Suos Thy, Bou.
They were from a separate unit, but they used to come and go to
visit the workshop.  This is from what I can recall, Mr.
Co-Prosecutor.
Q. Thank you.  Did you see the annotation of Duch quote that,
"Keep for use temporarily"?  And if you did see this annotation,
when did you see it?
A. Mr. Co-Prosecutor, I saw that document after the liberation
day of 1979.  I think it was around 1980.  At that time, the
documentation researchers examined those documents and when they
saw my name they showed me the name, and when I saw that
annotation, I felt that I had a fever.
I was shivering that I was removed to be used because from the
list of more than 10 people, and on my name there was a red ink
crossing out my name, and in the bracket it was put, "Keep for
use" and the rest were smashed.  It was on the 16th or 17th of
February '78.  If without such an annotation, then I would be
gone.
Q. Did you think that was Duch's annotation?
A. When I first saw the annotation -- let me tell you, Mr.
Co-Prosecutor, previously I never knew the name of Duch.  I did
not know that Brother East was actually Duch because I only knew
him as Brother East.  So when I saw the name of Duch below the
annotation -- for example, the annotation "request to be smashed"
-- then I was told that Duch, that was the name of the chairman
of the prison.  So then I realized that Duch was actually Brother
East and, of course, that was the annotation of Brother East.
Q. Did you think that Duch had the most power at S-21?
A. Yes, that's what I thought.
Q. You confirmed to the Chamber this morning that when insects
like grasshoppers fall nearby, then they would grab and eat in
order to fulfil the hunger that they had.  Did you used to eat
those insects?
A. Mr. Co-Prosecutor, I tried to eat too but I was not successful
because where I was it was far from the light.  The light was
near the window and I was at the other side, so I did not catch
the insects to eat.
MR. YET CHAKRIYA:
Mr. President, I do not have any more questions.  I would like
now to give the floor to my colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you take the floor.
MR. PETIT:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. PETIT:
Q. Sir, I only have a few questions for you.
At the time of your initial arrest in your commune, you had been
living there for over two years now, had you prior knowledge of
other people being arrested and disappearing while you were
living there?  And, if so, did these people have anything in
common?  Were they part of a same group and what group was that?
A. Mr. Co-Prosecutor, in my co-operative, the arrest was made on
a regular basis, every day, every month, but the people would be
arrested from different locations.  Sometimes a few people would
be arrested from one group and the other day people would be
arrested from the other group, and normally those who were
arrested were the new people or the 17th of April 1975, so-called
people.  And they thought that we were affiliated with the former
regime; either we were the students, former soldiers or
capitalists.
In conclusion, we would be thought as the exploiting class which
would be gotten rid of.  So the revolutionary thought that
exploiting class would be the enemies of them, so I myself would
be waiting for being arrested like other.
Q. I understand that the circumstances of your first and only
interrogation at Wat Kandal was very difficult.  But can you
recall for us, or can you tell us, if you think that at that time
you confessed to anything or you simply cannot recall?
A. I can remember some of the events and in my response, if I'm
rather confused -- of course, because I was half-dead or
half-alive and I was not yet tortured that I could still tell or
confess something, but then I could not remember after I was
electrocuted.
When I was sitting on the chair, then I was asked why Angkar
arrested me and I told him that I did not know anything because
Angkar asked me to collect sheaves of rice and then I did not
know anything other than that.  Then he said that Angkar knew too
well already, they were arrested any person by mistake, so I
better answer to them.  And I still insisted that I knew nothing
wrong that I committed and I did not make any mistake at the
fields, and in my co-operative we did not have food and people
only shared the communal meal.
Like for 150 families would eat just all together when we were
offered the gruel, and the gruel with a lot of water, but less
grain.  And people were so hungry that they had to pick up leaves
to substitute their food and they would probably pick up the
collected vegetables or property.  That's why they might have the
mistake by doing so.
And then he said that I did not need to even try to hide any
mistake, but they still said that I did something against the
Party by conducting meetings with the group, and he asked me
whether I had such meeting and where the meetings were taking
place.  And I told him that, you know, I did not know anything
about it.  How could I tell you about such meetings?
So then I was electrocuted again, and then I was unconscious, and
when I woke up I was interrogated and then I could not remember
the people I wrote or confessed to them.  I was talking about
myself rather than implicating other people in my confession.
Q. Thank you.  I would now like to show you a picture, with the
Court's permission, of Tuol Sleng, an aerial photography, to help
us understand a little bit more your earlier testimony.
MR. PETIT:
That picture, Mr. President, can be found at ERN 00195373 to
00195377.  I'm not sure of the exact ERN of this particular
picture, but if we could have the A/V Section put it on the
monitors it will become clear as it is very familiar to us.
This is part of the Zoran Lesic report, expert report, that was
done for the investigation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you please confirm whether these ERN numbers are in French
or in Khmer or English?  Could you please repeat it also?
MR. PETIT:
These ERN numbers are for the Khmer version.  They are again
00195373 to 00195377, if I'm not mistaken.  And they are, as I
said, part of the report done by Mr. Lesic and show various takes
of the location.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The A/V Unit, could you please put the pictures or the
photographs as suggested by the Co-Prosecutor on the monitor.
Thank you.
MR. PETIT:
Thank you.
BY MR. PETIT:
Q. Now, sir, this is an aerial photograph.  Can you tell us first
if you recognize the location?
A. Of course, I remember the location.
Q. Thank you.  I had to ask that.
Can you tell us from your recollection if this shows the
buildings of S-21 as they were then when you were detained?
A. If we talk about the premises, the location of the buildings
in this compound is of course this exact location.  It was there.
But now things have changed a little bit in the outside.
Q. Thank you.  Can you tell us then when you first got to S-21,
in which building were you detained?  And you may use the letters
that are represented on this picture to help us understand.
A. I first was detained at Building D.
Q. Thank you.  So in the morning during your testimony, when you
were referring to the Building D, you were referring to the same
building that is identified with the letter here as the Building
D; correct?  Those are the same buildings?
A. That is correct.
Q. Thank you.  Now, could you please for us identify where the
workshop that you lived and worked in was located; again, if you
can, using the letters on the screen?
A. The building we lived and worked locates in the middle between
Building B and C.  I could not see the middle letter, that red
letter.  Yes, somewhere there.  So this line of buildings.
Q. Would I be correct in saying that this is the line of
buildings identified with the letter "E" where the pointer is now
running up and down?
A. That's correct.
Q. Thank you.  And your workshop, more precisely, where Duch
would come to visit you almost every day, will it be closer to
the entrance which we see at the bottom of this line of buildings
of closer to the back, towards Building B and C?  Where was it?
A. It was closer to the back of here, the back.  No, no, not that
far, a little bit lower.  Yes, in that location.
Q. Thank you.
So therefore, where the pointer is resting on this little blue
dot there, towards the end, between building B and C; is that
correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. So am I to understand, therefore, that when Duch came to visit
you almost every day, he had therefore to walk across pretty much
the main part of the compound to come to your workshop, either
through the building or around in the courtyard itself; correct?
A. I'm not quite sure where he came to visit me.  I only saw him
through the window next to my workplace, so I could not see
further from that.  I could see his shadow because he was
standing near that window, so I could feel like he also -- he
already coming.  I didn't know where he came from.
Q. I apologize.  Perhaps my question wasn't clear.
If Duch was coming from outside the main compound, by the main
entrance at the bottom of this picture, then he would have to
cross most of the compound to come and visit you; is that
correct?
A. I'm not quite sure, but I can conclude that he would come
through the main entrance and walk along this path and then walk
past this building -- I mean the small path to reach me without
crossing the other buildings.
Q. Thank you.
Now, during those visits, the President asked you earlier, how
did Duch appear -- but perhaps it wasn't -- perhaps it's the
translation issue, but it wasn't quite clear to me what the
answer was.  So let me perhaps rephrase the President's question.
During those visits did, at any time, Duch appear to you to be
scared or depressed or somehow anxious?  Do you understand my
question?
A. I understand your question.
At that time I had only a feeling that I had to paint the very
good portrait so that he would be happy and if he saw the good
painting he was happy, of course.  So it was part of my success
because he appreciated my painting, but when he came with less
impression -- I mean, less interest, then I was so afraid and
nervous because I was afraid that he would be angry with me.  So
when I did -- I know that he did not show good feeling in his
facial expression and I would be scared for having not done good
job, but I never -- yeah, that's all.
Q. You were scared, but did he at any time look scared to you?
Did he look like a scared, anxious man to you at any time during
that one year?
A. S-21 was his location and he was the boss and I did not know
whether he would be scared of anything because he would be in
control of everything and his subordinates had to be -- had to
respect him and fear him.  So I thought that he would be an
intelligent and smart leader and I thought at that time that he
would not -- he would be nothing but the good leader in his time.
So everyone could never imagine that people would be taken away
to be killed, and we only thought that he would be a respectful
person as a leader or boss and he never did anything that made us
scared of him.
Q. Thank you.
You've told us that some of the guards -- or that there were
concerns about possible suicide by prisoners such as taking away
possible means; things that you could use to commit suicide.  Did
you yourself at any time witness an inmate committing suicide
and, if so, could you tell us what you witnessed?
A. I never witnessed any inmate committing suicide but we were,
for example, asking for a string to tie our loose pants, for
example.  Then they would say that Angkar would not give you such
a string because they were afraid that we would use them to
commit suicide.  That's what I learned.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. President, I have a request to the Trial Chamber.  As you
know, you ruled on March 10th, 2009 that a piece of video footage
purported to be of Tuol Sleng a few days after its liberation
would be placed on the case file.  That piece of footage, as
we've presented to you through oral and written submission, came
to be known after the investigation and, indeed, right before the
commencement of this trial.
Due to observations from various parties you eventually ruled, as
I said, on March 10th, 2009 that the two segments of video
footage -- one purporting to show the location, the second
purporting to show former child inmates -- those videos would be
placed on the case file and I quote "subject to a review of the
relevance and authenticity during the substantive hearing".
And you then directed the parties who so wished to do so to file
written observations regarding those videos which, if I recall,
the defence did and I believe other parties did.   We also have,
if I'm not mistaken further, a witness who would be able to
assist us, perhaps; at least for one of those two pieces of
evidence.
Now, much has been said, much has been argued about this footage.
I would suggest, following the guidance you gave us, that we now
have before us a witness who has by his own admission seen the
location, seen the scene of the crime, so to speak, within about
seven days after its liberation and who could certainly -- given
his accurate and quite forceful testimony today -- probably help
us help you to ascertain the value of this footage to your
judgement and to this trial.
As I said, the parties have made their positions known.  You have
decided that throughout the substantive hearing you would use
whatever opportunity to evaluate this footage to eventually rule
on it and use it if need be.  I would suggest, therefore, that we
take this opportunity -- this first opportunity --  to have the
witness shown the first part of these two -- the first of these
two videos; the one purported to show the Kampong, as it was
then, so that he may give us any comments that he may have on
this footage, so that perhaps we can resolve this issue and
decide -- you decide what to do with this footage in the future.
That's my humble submission.
MR. PRESIDENT:
There are two issues with different conditions.  We already
advised the parties to the proceeding that all kinds of materials
requested by the parties have already been decided to be included
in the case file, but they are valued as the materials.  However,
regarding the observations of whether the material can be used as
evidence will be discussed in the second stage.
Regarding this matter, there has been objections from the defence
counsel concerning the video footage in which they believe that
it would be corrected or adjustment would have been made to the
video footage, that its original version would not be maintained.
So it is now about the rights to be discussed, and whether it is
to be put before the Court is another step.
I would like to also make it known to the international
Co-Prosecutor that on the morning of Friday, the Trial Chamber
had already tried to discuss the remaining issues, and among them
the Trial Chamber made the decision and we decided to delay the
discussion on some particular issues, and we are waiting for the
matter to be raised by the Co-Prosecutor and by the parties, and
then the Chamber will make a decision whether we should discuss
this matter or not.  Because we still have the matter of two
Vietnamese witnesses who have been requested by the parties to
have them removed from the witness list and that the Chamber also
needed to have this matter discussed.
I don't know whether you get my message because, in the future
proceedings, the Trial Chamber will take into account this
matter, but we are not yet in the position to say whether this
matter can be now discussed at this very session because the
defence counsel still challenge the content of the video footage,
as they argue that the video footage would be -- I mean,
adjustment would have been made, and that the video had been
produced by the Vietnamese people and the witness -- the two
witnesses involved in the video footage at the beginning were
asked to be put in the witness list and later on were asked to be
removed from the list.
That's why the Trial Chamber is not yet in the position to
discuss this matter at this moment yet.
MR. PETIT:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I gather, therefore, that the issue is
not live or at least that the Trial Chamber does not wish at this
point to entertain this issue, and we'll therefore reserve our
comments and observation at a later date.
Therefore, I have no further questions, but with your permission,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Co-Prosecution I'd like to thank
the witness for his testimony today and, indeed, for the
testimony he's been giving for the last 30 years.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the civil party
lawyers, starting from group 4 first.  We would like to inform
the civil parties that each group has 10 minutes to put questions
to the witness.  So civil party group 4, the floor is yours.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I would like to make a request.  We have now 2.30 and we expect a
break of 20 minutes.  That means we have still 100 minutes and I
think we have more time, a little bit more time, than only 40
minutes for the remaining parties and, therefore, I would like to
request to give us and finally the defence, if needed, the whole
time, and not like last Thursday that we finished already at
lunchtime and had the whole afternoon without having the
opportunity to ask questions.  Thank you.
(Deliberation between Judges)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Ms. Studzinsky, for raising the matter up regarding
the time allocations and that we might have a possible time, but
previously our proceedings were delayed due to the time taken to
question the witnesses and that's because of the time allocation
for questionings which were not strict.
And the time allocation as set out and instructed by the Chamber
is to expedite the proceedings in order to satisfy it; also the
public and the national and international opinions and for the
fair justice.
As you have noted, each party urges on the expedition of the
proceedings and the Chamber itself has its discretion and already
made its decision, and its decision will not be amended to
entertain your request.  The quicker the proceedings can go, we
will accept it, but if there is any delays, we will not take it.
The floor is now given to Hong Kimsuon.
MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Thank you, Mr. President, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MR. HONG KIMSUON:
Q. Uncle Vann Nath, let me ask you a question.  You already
informed the Chamber that when you walked to the back of the
building -- here I talk about the inner compound of S-21
Detention Centre -- and you met a female prisoner who said she
lost her female character.  What does it mean?  Can you elaborate
on this?
A. Mr. Lawyer, the Khmer language, for me, I think the phrase
used by her that she lost her nature, her female nature or her
female character due to the interrogation, was known enough and I
don't want to make any comment on this.
Q. Thank you.  You already stated to the President regarding a
painting that a female prisoner was tortured.  In that painting
it does not adequately depict the scene.  In the scene I saw a
pinch or a plier was used to pinch her nipple and that she was
stripped naked.
A. On this matter I cannot elaborate further because I, myself,
did not witness the interrogation of that female prisoner.
However, it is a depiction of what was described to me by that
female prisoner.  It's not possible to draw something that we
cannot see.
Q. Thank you.  You also said that you heard the screaming or the
crying of young children or adult prisoners.  Did you yourself
see at a later stage that some guards took the children away and
out.  How many children were taken out and what was the range of
their age?
A. I did not see the incident by myself.  I heard the screaming
and the beating -- the sounds of the beating out, the crying of
both adult and young people, and the children were taken away.
It was irregular regarding the number.  Sometimes there were five
people or sometimes eight; sometimes three.
As for the young children, or the children, it was hard to
estimate their age.  It was irregular.  Sometimes a young baby
was taken away, the baby was about six to seven months.
Sometimes a child was walked or sometimes two children were
walked together.  So the age of the children varied.
So this is my response, Mr. Lawyer.
Q. Thank you.  You also informed the Chamber that the children
were walked or a baby was handled, was carried.  Were they taken
into the room or were they taken out by the guards?
A. The guards took them out from Building C, walking, passing my
workplace to go outside.  But because I could not see further, I
did not know where they were taken out.
Q. Thank you.  Another question.
You already informed the Chamber, but I would like to confirm
that when the guards asked for someone who knows how to paint,
you already described that and you said that you saw Brother East
coming to visit your workshop almost on a daily basis.  Does it
mean from the day you started doing the painting?
A. Mr. Lawyer, it was started from I received a plan imposed by
him.  He often came to inspect the workshop.  Most of the time
usually he came in the afternoon or in the evening, sometimes at
8 or 9 p.m.  He rarely came in the morning.
Q. Thank you.  So this means he came to inspect the workshop
since you were authorized to work in the workshop.  That was,
let's say you were arrested on the 8th of January '78 and until
the day you were released and assigned to the painting, it was
like more than one month in January or February '78, so from that
day that Duch, or Brother East, came often to visit you at the
workshop?
A. Yes.  That was the time.
Q. Thank you.  On the matter that guards took you into the room
when you first arrived at the centre, that were your clothes
changed from the time you arrived?  It means your old clothes
were taken and they gave you the new set of clothes and they take
out the string to tighten the waist?
A. Mr. Lawyer, on that issue, when we entered, those who had
black clothes had to be taken off.  For the rest of other
clothes, we could keep them but what was given to those whose
black clothes were taken, they gave you coloured clothes, a
shorts, and most of those shorts had no string to tighten their
waist.  So it was why we wore the skirt.
Q. I understand that.  Thank you.  Let me continue.
In response to the Co-Investigating Judges, you described in
detail but let me summarise that you saw the guards taking people
out, but you were not sure of where they were taken.  You
presumed that they were being integrated into the cooperative,
but the question is that when you saw the people taken out of the
S-21 office, was it done during the day or the night-time?  And
how many each time?
A. Mr. Lawyer, regarding the movement of prisoners, actually it
was done almost on a daily basis.  However, the amount of
prisoners taken in or out varied.  It was the main daily
operation of the centre.  Sometimes prisoners were transferred
from one building to another, people were moved because new
prisoners come in, and some of the prisoners were taken out, so
it was a busy activity as part of the daily operation of the
centre.
And at night I did not see people were taken out.  I only saw
people were taken out usually in the afternoon.  But where they
were taken I was not sure, because I only stay in the room where
I worked.  But usually, yes, the taking out was done usually at 3
or 4 p.m. in the afternoon.  Sometimes it was done in the
morning.
Q. Thank you.  My next question is related to your response to
the Chamber.  You said you went to the workshop at the back and
you saw a person putting ants into a box full of centipedes.  Was
that location close to where you painted the painting or was it
behind Building B or C?
A. Mr. Lawyer, regarding the geographical location of S-21, it
was quite spread at the time.  Behind Building B and C there were
a barbed wire fence.  The front was built in the shape of a house
roof, and I believe the fence -- the electricity was used on the
fence to defend the building.  And if you crossed that fence
there would be a workshop, a kitchen, and a pig pen.  So it was
quite large and the length of that area was quite as wide as the
S-21.  It used to be a Tuol Sleng market.
So the ground of that high school was used as part of the
workshop, also for pig pen, kitchen, but they were in different
segments.  And for the young guards who went to see the old guard
who fed the centipedes with ants, it was not far from the place
where he works in the wood workshop.  So usually he fed the
centipedes with those ants.  The centipede was the size of an
index finger.
So that was the location which was at a different location from
the place where I worked in the workshop.  It means we had to
cross that fence with electricity before we could reach the other
side.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Lawyer, your time runs out.
And now the Chamber will take a 17-minute break until 3 p.m. when
we will resume and continue the proceedings.
Court official, could you assist the witness with some
refreshment in a resting room, in a waiting room, and bring him
back at 3 pm?
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1443H to 1459H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
Next, we would like to give the floor to the civil parties
lawyers, group 2.
Correction, please, group 3 first.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Dear Mr. President, Your Honours and the parties to the
proceeding, my name is Kim Mengkhy, representing civil party
group 3 on behalf of the victims and the civil parties.
BY KIM MENGKHY:
Q. I would like to thank you, Uncle Vann Nath, for being with us
the full day to give your testimony.
My first question is, in the name of a survivor or surviving
evidence, are your bored with the repetitious questions about
your sufferings?
A. Mr. Mengkhy, I have thought about this, but sometimes I am
bored.  However, it is about revealing the truth and telling the
younger generation about the details of the event, and by doing
so it can help me feel relaxed a little bit too.  So by doing so,
I believe that the boredom fades away.
Q. Thank you for your clarification.
My next question is, you said you would like to tell the world
about what happened during your life as a victim and a survivor
of S-21.  Can you tell us that during the times when you were
arrested and sent all the way from Battambang to S-21; and that
you did not make any mistake and that you tried to tell them that
you did not make any mistake, but they still pressed you to
answer, to confess?  So what did you feel or how did you feel
about it?
A. All prisoners during that regime of the three years, eight
months and 20 days, witnessed all the sufferings and the
difficulties and most of us did not make any wrongdoings, and
that we were made to confess to our mistakes that we never
committed.
The most painful experience is that we had to make up the stories
to cheat on us, on ourselves, in order to survive, in order to
get away from being tortured if we failed to do so.  Sometimes
this could lead to death.
Q. After you have survived the execution during the regime, and
for the last 30 years or more you said that young generations
have not believed what you have told them.  So what do you do if
people still are not convinced of your testimony?
A. This happens, but not very often.  Through my experience,
during big gatherings some children asked me about this and I
told them about the event and they just challenged me -- why they
did not hear the details of what happened from their parents --
and I just told them that maybe they were so moved and shocked
that they did not want to recall the past to only re-open the old
wounds and sufferings.
That's why the parents tend to keep quiet and not telling their
younger generations about this.  That's why children were not
convinced of what happened.  And having noticed that I tried my
best to tell them and to point them to research, some remaining
or surviving documents at almost every place, including S-21, to
understand more about the past.
I have felt that young people and intellectuals are getting
familiar with this story and they would conduct further research
to be fully informed of the regime.
Q. Thank you.  Next, if your testimony is not believed by the
accused, what would happen then?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You don't need to answer this question because such question
should be avoided.  Please ask the question that is related to
the fact and has the evidentiary evidence, so that the Chamber
can really value it in our decision so that the truth is found.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would like to rephrase it.
BY MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Q. You said that your life during the regime was more like
between animal and human being.  So in which part was your life
come between the two?
A. It is only the comparison of our life during that time because
we were entitled the status as human beings although we were
detained, then we would be treated different from animals because
even animals, domestic animals, would be fed or would be given
food and would never been kicked days and nights like that.
When human being was deprived of their movement and we were
inflicted with tortures, physically and mentally, and that's why
I could l presume that we were between animals and human beings.
That's only my presumption.
Q. Thank you, Uncle.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
The civil party lawyers group 3 have no further questions.  And
thank you very much for your response.
[15.0.05]
MR. PRESIDENT:
I would like to give the floor to the civil party lawyers, group
2.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Thank you, Mr. President and Your Honours and the parties to the
proceeding.  I would like to thank you, the witness, for his time
in this session.  I would like to put questions to Mr. Vann Nath.
BY MR. KONG PISEY:
Q. The question is, you told the Judges already that the Brother
East frequently visited your workshop.  So when he paid such a
visit, did you hear any shouts or screams from the outside?
A. The screams of the prisoners who were being tortured could be
heard sometimes.  For example, in the morning or in the
afternoons, normally during the working hours.  We worked --
people worked three shifts and sometimes there was a scream, and
I did not really care whether I expected to hear the scream of
the prisoners when he was paying me a visit.  So I did not take
any notice regarding this matter.
Q. Thank you.  So you had heard the screams during several
occasions, even during the time when Brother East paid you a
visit.  Do I understand that correctly?
A. I'm not quite sure whether when he stood there and that
simultaneously I heard the screamings from the prisoner, so I'm
not quite sure about it.
Q. Thank you.  The next question.
I would like you to tell us, when you were painting the pictures,
the paintings of the tortures, what made you write -- or paint
such portraits or such pictures?
A. Mr. Lawyer, I think, if I am not mistaken, you asked me that
Brother East did never -- did not ask me to draw or paint any
picture of tortures.  He only asked me to draw the portrait or
the portrait of Pol Pot, and I draw these latest pictures of the
tortures after 1981, after the country was liberated, and during
that regime I only painted the portraits of the leaders.
Q. Thank you.  Because I noticed in the photo -- in the pictures
you painted, the date was dated back to 1978 and I didn't realize
that they were painted after 1981.  So I would like to ask you
another question.
When you were tortured at the detention, were there any
conditions imposed on you while being tortured?  Because you made
a statement before the Co-Investigating Judges that during the
interrogation they would put the plastic bag to cover your face.
So could you please elaborate on this a little bit further?  And
that statement is D2-11/2.
A. I'm afraid that I never used the term "plastic bag" and that I
was inflicted with a plastic bag.  I did say that an electric
wire was attached to my pants and that I was electrocuted until I
went unconscious and then the water would be splashed on me until
I could recover, and then interrogation would continue.
I only told the Judges that when I entered that interrogation
room, I saw the blood stains on the floor, I saw the torturing
implements, but I was not tortured with those implements except
the electrocution.
Q. Thank you.  I just raised this matter.  D2-11/2 was about the
testimony you made before the Co-Investigating Judges about the
mask that was used to cover your face, and that I don't know why
you did not confirm this, what you have already stated before the
Co-Investigating Judges?
A. Mr. Lawyer, once again I'm afraid I never made such statement
before the Co-Investigating Judges.  Maybe the other people did
so.
Q. I would like to correct my message.  It was not before the
Co-Investigating Judges but before the Co-Prosecutors.
My next question is you said this morning that you had an
opportunity to walk past the individual cells.  Did you see
anything inside those individual cells?
A. The pathway to the place where I took a rest at night was the
corridor right in front of those opened windows, so I could
glance at the cells, but I did not have the right to inspect
inside each cell.
Q. Thank you.  So I would like now to proceed to another
question.
This morning you stated that among the 32 people, 20 of them were
stripped of their clothes and some were left without even
underwear.  My question is that, how long were people made to be
naked without the underwear before they were given such
underwear?
A. I think when we approached the location, there were not about
the 20 people.  People who wore black clothes had to remove them
and give them to the guards, and those with underwear could have
the underwear.  Those who had the pants without underwear but the
black clothes, had to remove the black clothes and left naked
until the guards would bring our new clothes.  But maybe just a
few, two or three of them, would be left without clothes on.
Q. Thank you.  In your book,  line 3, you said among the
32 people, there were 20 of them, so I just quoted from your
book.
A. Maybe in the book I would have said so, but I think -- I don't
know whether the English translation is correct.  Among the 36
people, there were only 32 left when four disappeared, so I think
the most important thing is that the black clothes would not be
left with us.  So whether we had any other clothes with us while
the black clothes would be removed, then we were left with just
those clothes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Lawyer, your time has run out.
Civil party lawyers group 1, the floor is yours now.
MR. WERNER:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. WERNER:
Q. Hello.  Please allow me to tell you that we are very much
grateful for your testimony.  That was the first thing that I
wanted to share with you.
I have a first question for you concerning Mr. Bou Meng, and you
answered this morning to Judge Lavergne concerning what had
happened with Mr. Bou Meng, and you said -- well, we don't have
the transcript here but you said that you -- when you saw Bou
Meng come back into the workshop after two weeks, he was pale, he
had long hair and he was tied -- chained by his neck and by his
legs, and in your book, which was mentioned earlier by one of my
colleagues, you also mentioned on  -- you mentioned Bou
Meng carrying bandages all over his bloody wounds all over his
emaciated body.  Can you remember this?
A. I still remember it clearly.
Q. And in the same segment on  you added that in your
presence the accused beat Bou Meng in his head with his foot and
that Bou Meng fell to the floor; that he kicked him in the head
and that Bou Meng fell to the floor.  Do you remember that?
A. Of course I do.
Q. Thank you.  I have another question concerning the centipedes.
You answered the judges about this and you said this morning that
a guard told you that he was in charge of feeding centipedes.  Do
you remember the name of this guard who was feeding centipedes?
A. It was not the guard.  It was the same prisoner.  He was a
carpenter, not the guard.
Q. Did this prisoner explain to you exactly how the centipedes
were used or were going to be used?
A. I'm not quite sure I know this but he said that there was a
guard who ordered him to feed the centipedes and that guard
belonged to the interrogation team.  So when I observed that he
raised centipedes I only learned from the guard -- from him, the
carpenter, but I knew nothing more about this.
Q. Thank you for this.  Before the Co-Investigating Judge -- and
I will refer to document D28/9, on the 8th of January, 2008.  The
Co-Investigating Judge was questioning you on other torture
methods and you said that you had learned from a prisoner called
Pha Tha Chan that Pha Tha Chan would have been placed into a
refrigerator.  Can you remember that?
A. I do remember.
Q. And what exactly did he say to you?
A. I had known him only for a short period of time.  He worked as
an interpreter and I worked in the workshop as a painter.  We met
only at night briefly.  So he told me that he was made to be
immersed into that bathtub.
He didn't say that it was ice water.  He only told me that it was
normal water in that bathtub and his legs, and hands were cuffed
and his head were plunged into the water until he absorbed water
or choked with the water, and then they would kick on his stomach
so that the water would be vomited out from inside.
And after 1979 he met me and asked me to produce or to paint a
picture to commemorate that event.  And before the drawing of the
picture, as I already told the Judges this morning, the East
Germany men asked -- who was in the process of pursuing the film
and that's why I could produce such paintings.
Q. Thank you.  And during these months you were able -- so you
painted, sculpted at S-21 was 11 months, and you said that even
if the detention conditions were better, of course, than in the
collective cell, however you were working in a constant
atmosphere of terror and of fear.  Is that so?
A. As the prisoners we lived with constant fear.  It's normal.
Q. My last question.  Were you told, were you explained why you,
the artists, were made to work in a premise within S-21, within
the cries of the people who were being tortured and not outside
of S-21 so that you would be able to create peacefully and
calmly?  Were you explained why?
A. I don't know this matter for sure and I was not explained well
about this because when we were uncuffed we were -- I was happy.
I could eat and I could move and my feeling was good at that
time.  And although I was detained, it was not a problem.  I just
tried to work hard and respected the orders of the Angkar and I
was shocked somehow when I heard the screaming.  However, I got
used to it.
Q. I no longer have any further questions.  Thank you very much
and I wish you all the best, and all the best for your health.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Next I would like to give the floor to put questions to this
survivor to the defence counsel.  If you have questions the floor
now is open for the defence counsel.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Brother Vann Nath, I would like to seek some clarification
from you.  When a sculptor boasted about his skill but in fact he
could not work, at that time Duch had him returned.  At that time
Duch did not order him to be tortured.  Is that so?  Can you
answer that?
A. Mr. Lawyer, Duch did not order it, as you said.
Q.  Thank you.  So when guards tortured him was Duch aware that
the guards tortured him without his knowledge?
A. Mr. Lawyer, I did not know the details of this matter.
However, when he walked out the guards took the prisoner out, so
they went in a separate way.  So I did not know whether Duch knew
of the torture or not.
Q. Thank you.  Another question for clarification.
Besides the sculptor who was tortured by hanging from that rope,
was that rope tied and placed there permanently or it was only
hanged there once to torture that sculptor?
A. Mr. Lawyer, if we talk about that rope, the rope was there
permanently.  It was only
a year after the liberation it was there as well.  So when I saw
it, it was there and the sculptor was tortured there on that
rope.
This is my response to you, Mr. Lawyer.
Q. Thank you.
About the 14 tombs at S-21; you confirmed today that you did not
witness personally how many dead bodies, but because you saw the
14 tombs you presumed that there were 14 dead bodies; is that so?
A. Let me tell you that at S-21 I entered twice; first time it
was on the 13th of January
1978.  So because when I fled I did not have any clothes, so the
four of us went inside the centre again to find some clothes, but
because of the bad smell from the dead bodies we did not really
go inside.  At that time we didn't pay attention to how many dead
bodies were there.
The next entry, it was in November '79 after it was already
cleaned up and there were 14 tombs there, so I concluded that
there were 14 dead bodies and, of course, I am not sure how many
dead bodies in each tomb.
Q. Thank you.
My fourth question.  Did you ever see Brother East -- that is
Duch -- torture any prisoner during the time that you were there?
A. Mr. Lawyer, for serious torture, no.  But for kicking --
because I don't want to say because I don't think it's a torture
-- but just for kicking, I saw it, but not for serious beating
up.
Q. Thank you.
At S-21, you stayed there for one year.  Did you see the 10
regulations or the disciplines displayed on the board?
A. The 10 regulations of the Santebal on the board, I only saw it
after the liberation because I had no authority to walk through
that interrogation area, so I did not know where the board was or
at which room.  However, the meanings of those regulations, yes,
were created by the interrogation unit, who made such regulations
because I used to hear some of those regulations, so I believe
the interrogation unit was the one who imposed such regulations.
Q. Thank you.
Did you ever see female prisoners jump from the upper floor to
commit suicide?
A. Mr. Lawyer, I saw one incident of such case.  It was before
me, about two metres; it happened before me.
Q. Can I ask you further?  Previously you stated, in response to
the Co-Prosecutor's questions, that you were strictly guarded and
that people who were interred would be handcuffed or shackled.
However, if the guards did not pay attention and if prisoners
were cuffed or shackled, how could a prisoner jump?
A. Mr. Lawyer, I would like to elaborate in detail on this matter
so that you are clear.
That prisoner was female prisoner and usually for female
prisoners in the common rooms, most of them were not handcuffed
or cuffed.  At that time I did not live on the ground floor.  I
lived on the upper floor, adjacent to that female prisoners' room
and interrogation team was on the ground floor.  And then a guard
was ordered by them to bring me down -- there were two of them --
and another guard was ordered to bring the female prisoner down.
So the guard on the upper floor unlocked the door and then while
she was near the door, he turned and unlocked my door.  While the
guard was unlocking my door, the female prisoner jumped.
And at that time, the fence -- the barbed wire, there was only
three or four lines; it was not so full like it is now.  So when
I reached the door, she jumped about the wire -- the wire fence
onto the ground floor and she broke her head and died.  So then
the guard pulled me back into the room and locked me -- and
locked the door.  So I did not come out of the room.  And about
one and a half or two hours later, then I was taken to the ground
floor and that was the incident that I witnessed.
Q. Thank you.  I finished my question and now I would like to
give the floor to my colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, the floor is yours.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MS. CANIZARES:
Q. Sir, you have described the conditions under which you lived
at S-21.  Could you please tell us why you did not wish to join
as a civil party?
A. Ms. Lawyer, people have different ideas, have different
purposes and objectives.  First, my main concern was my health;
that I would not be able to attend regularly during the trial
proceedings.
Secondly, I believe this is not my own personal matter.  It is a
matter for my whole Cambodian people.  So I would not be able to
want to apply to be a civil party because I think I would not be
able to come to attend the hearings regularly.  And if the Court
wishes to have me as a witness, yes, I am willing to provide
testimony.  That's why I do not write a complaint to become a
civil party.
And usually people who makes the complaint would have an
objective to seek for reparation.  I myself, personally, I do not
want to seek for any reparation.  And if the trial needs me at
any time of their convenience, then I am ready to provide my
testimony.
MR. KONG PISEY:
Mr. President, I would seek your permission to -- I would seek
your instruction to advise the defence counsel to ask questions
only related to the fact before us in the Chamber this afternoon.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Unfortunately, the objection was too late, seeing the witness
already responded to the question.  I think it is quite proper
that the question was asked because it is an exception why he did
not want to be a civil party.
Defence counsel, you may continue.
BY MS. CANIZARES:
Q. A question was put to you by Judge Lavergne this morning and
you answered that it was important for you to be in a position to
bear witness so that the younger generations may know of the
suffering experienced by the older generations, so that these
historic events would not repeat themselves.  And you also said
that what you wanted out of this trial would be justice to be
made.
Do you think that the position of the accused, who does
acknowledge the great majority -- the overwhelming majority of
crimes that are charged to him, and his regrets can help you and
the other victims believe that justice has been done, at least in
part?
MR. PETIT:
Apologies, but where are we going with this?  This question is
perhaps a form of pleading, possibly, but it is definitely
outside the scope and the expertise, let's say, and the
knowledge, the frame of knowledge, of the witness.  It may amount
to a very nice-looking statement, but it's not a question to be
put to a witness as to the facts.  I would, for myself, opine
that it is not relevant and should be denied.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for the Co-Prosecutor's observation.  The Chamber
thinks it is appropriate.
So the defence counsel, you cannot ask this question; and the
witness, you do not have to answer this question.  You might
proceed with another question and do not impose a question to ask
for personal opinion which is not the fact.  You are asked to put
questions only related to the facts which have been known and
have been heard by the witness or have been seen by the witness.
MS. CANIZARES:
Consequently, Your Honour, I have no further questions to ask.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I have a small question.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. I think you have already made clarification to the question.
First, you said you worked three sessions per day in your
painting in the workshop and often the accused came to your
workshop during the evening.  So this meant you worked three
sessions, morning, afternoon and at night in doing your painting.
Is this correct?
A. Mr. President, that is correct.
Q. So when you worked doing the painting at night, until what
time you finished?
A. Regularly I finished at 11 p.m.  Sometimes we finished at 12
a.m.
Q. Was it only you working at night or all the people working in
the workshops also worked during the night shift?
A. Mr. President, all the painters worked for all sessions.
Q. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Judges of the Bench, you have any questions -- any additional
questions to be put to the witness?
If not, I notice the presence of Ms. Studzinsky.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.  As we have still time, I noted that
there was a question that was -- or the witness answered that he
saw kicking by the accused, and I would like to elaborate a
little bit more on this, which was not considered as a serious
torture by the witness.
Or, if not, if you -- first, I want to request to grant more time
to elaborate on this question.  If you reject my request, then I
would ask the Chamber to ask the witness more on torture that was
inflicted on prisoners but, let's say, understood by the witness
as not serious ones.  Thank you.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  In fact, the time allocation was done
and strictly adhered to, and I would like each party to strictly
respect the time allocation.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber does not allow any time permission because we already
determined if you can seek any approaches to shorten the time,
then the Chamber would welcome, but any further extension or
delay, no, we will not.
Thank you, Uncle Nath, for your time, your valuable time, and
your effort to participate in our proceedings by providing your
testimony.
We notice that the proceeding today now comes to an end and the
Chamber will adjourn today's hearing now.  The Chamber will
resume its hearing tomorrow from
a.m. 
           9   Court official, can you facilitate with the Witness Unit to make
an arrangement for the return of the witness to his residence by
appropriate means.
Security officers, take the accused back to the detention
facility and bring him back before 9 a.m. tomorrow.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1549H)
