PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0902H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber continues to hear the remaining testimony of
2-TCCP-1063. And after that, we begin hearing testimony of a
witness, namely, 2-TCW-1069.
<Greffier> Ms. Se Kolvuthy, please report the attendance of the
parties and other individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all parties to this case
are present.
Mr. Pich Ang, the National Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties, is
absent for personal reasons.
Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell downstairs. He has
waived his right to be present in the courtroom. The waiver has
been delivered to the greffier. The civil party who is to
continue his testimony today, that is, 2-TCCP-1063, is present in
the courtroom.
And the upcoming witness, that is, 2-TCW-1069, confirms that, to
his best knowledge, he has no relationship, by blood or by law,
to any of the two accused, that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan,
or to any of the civil parties admitted in this case. The witness
took an oath before the Iron Club Statue this morning and is
waiting to be called by the Chamber in the waiting room.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Ms. Se Kolvuthy. The Chamber now decides on the
request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea, dated 1st
December 2016, which states that, due to his health, that is,
headache, back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long. And
in order to effectively participate in future hearings, he
requests to waive his rights to be present at the 1st December
2016 hearing.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea by the duty doctor
for the accused at the ECCC, dated 1st December 2016, which notes
that, today, Nuon Chea has a lower back pain and feels dizzy when
he sits for long and recommends that the Chamber shall grant him
his request so that he can follow the proceedings remotely from
the holding cell downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea his request to
follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via an audio-visual means.
The Chamber instructs the AV Unit personnel to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that Nuon Chea can follow.
That applies for the whole day.
The Chamber now hands the floor to the defence teams, first to
the defence team for Nuon Chea to put questions to this civil
party.
You have the floor.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning. We don't have any
questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And now, I hand the floor to the co-counsel for Khieu Samphan to
put questions to this civil party.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUISSE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning. Good morning, everyone.
Q. Good morning, Mr. Civil Party. My name is Anta Guisse. I am
International Co-Counsel for Mr. Khieu Samphan, alongside my
colleague, Kong Sam Onn.
I have a few supplementary questions to put to you regarding your
testimony.
I would like us to start with the period before 1975, and I would
like us to revisit two points.
Yesterday, at about 15.39, you stated that you had remained
combatant in the Lon Nol army for three months. However, I did
not hear when you became a soldier.
Can you specify that to the Chamber?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. Good morning, Mr. President.
I became a Lon Nol soldier in 1971.
Q. And I also believe I understood from your testimony that you
had stopped being a soldier and had returned to civilian life
after you were wounded. Did I properly understand your testimony?
A. Yes, that's what I testified yesterday.
Q. And when you state that you returned to civilian life, did you
mean to say that you returned to farming?
A. At that time, I stopped being a soldier and I became a farmer.
Q. You also talked about your father. And if I understood you
correctly, he was a militiaman in a militia. And I believe his
name, <and I'm sorry if I do not pronounce it correctly>, was
Kong Svay Try (phonetic). Is that the case?
And I also understood that in that militia, his task was to
prevent revolutionary soldiers from entering <your> territory. Is
that correct?
A. Yes, that's what I testified yesterday because people were
enlisted in the <self-defence force> in order to <support> Lon
Nol soldiers, that is, to base ourself in the rear battlefield.
Q. When you say that he was placed on the list, do you mean that
he was placed on the list by Lon Nol troops?
A. Please repeat your question.
Q. You state that he was placed on the list to collaborate with
Lon Nol troops. My question was who placed militiamen on the
list? Was it a military authority who did that?
A. The names were put on the list by the commune authority and
not by the military. It was the commune chiefs <> enlisted
<village militiamen, but in that time, they called self-defence
force>.
Q. This will be my last question on the point.
Do you know whether there were any clashes between those
militiamen and members of the revolution?
A. Yes. At the time, there were frictions between the groups, and
there were those who opposed the revolution.
Q. Another point I'd like you to clarify is that I do not quite
understand when <you said> the Khmer Rouge arrived in your area.
Was it surely at the time of the evacuation of the 17th of April
1975, or <did> the revolutionary forces arrive in your area
before then?
A. In Svay Rieng province, they entered on the 14th, that is,
before the New Year's Day. The revolutionary army entered <> Svay
Rieng provincial town on that day, and they <evicted> people <>.
And that happened before the 17 April.
Q. When you say the 14th, are you talking of the 14th of April,
that is, the 14th of April 1975?
A. Yes, I referred to the 14th of April, which was the Khmer New
Year's Day. And that was the day that the revolutionary army
entered Svay Rieng <provincial town>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The question is whether it was the 14 April 1975 because you only
referred to "14".
So please be specific whether it was the 14 of April '75.
2-TCCP-1063:
Mr. President, I refer to the 14 April 1975.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. Now we talk about the last point regarding this period.
So we agree that up to the 14th of April 1975, which means that
your area was under the influence of Lon Nol, that is, Lon Nol
troops. Is that correct?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. On the 17th, I was the victim of a revolutionary army because
there was a time that I was chased away from the Svay Rieng
provincial town. <It was the time that I felt very fearful.> And
at that time, the Vietnamese soldiers actually <shot in the air
to force> the people to leave the town. <If someone refused to
leave, he/she would be shot at.> And I was so shocked and, for
that reason, I could not bring any belongings with me.
<Another reason was that,> we were told that we would leave town
for two or three days, and that we would be allowed to return,
but since that day, none of the people was allowed to return to
the town. And we were subsequently evacuated elsewhere.
Q. Very well. My question was different.
I wanted you to confirm that up until the time of the evacuation
and before the arrival of the revolutionary army, your zone and
your commune were under the authority or <at least> the influence
of Lon Nol soldiers, that is, the Lon Nol army.
A. Before that time, I lived under the authority of Lon Nol.
Q. I would like us to revisit the various statements you gave as
part of your participation in this trial, and I would like to go
through the chronology with you. <On the case file, we have three
different forms.> The first form <you filled out> is E3/10670,
<dated> 2nd of August 2008. That is the first form you filled out
as part of your civil party statement.
We have a second form, document E3/5932a. I forgot to mention the
- a -- <in the first document from 02 August 2008> E3/10670a,
small a.
And then you have <a second> form, <a supplementary information
form,> dated 2nd of April 2010, document E3/5932a.
And lastly, we have a Supplementary Information Form, which is in
the investigation of Case 004, not 002, and it's E3/10670, which
was forwarded by your lawyer on the 5th of January 2015.
Does this refresh your memory as regards the various forms you
filled out, and do you agree with me that you filed the first
form in 2008, a Supplementary Information Form in 2010 and,
lastly, a document <in> 2014 or early 2015? Does that refresh
your memory?
A. Yes, I can recall some.
Q. I would like us to start by talking about the first form, that
is, out of the 2008 in which you <declared yourself to be> a
civil party in this case.
Regarding the circumstances under which you filled out that first
form, can you tell the Chamber whether, during that period, you
already had a lawyer? If not, who assisted you in filling out
that Civil Party Application form?
A. I cannot recall. I cannot recall about what happened during
the filling-in of the form. <I could not imagine how it turned to
this way.>
Q. Very well. Do you at least remember whether someone assisted
you or you filled it out yourself?
A. Yes, there was someone who assisted me in filling out the
form, but I cannot recall the detail.
Q. Very well. Without recalling the name of the person, do you
remember whether that person was a lawyer or a member of any
organization?
A. The person was a staff of an organization, but I cannot recall
the name of that organization.
Q. Very well. In that form, you talk about your visit to a
market, but you never make mention of Khieu Samphan in that form.
And I'm referring to document E3/10670a, and the ERN in English
is 00422204; ERN in Khmer, <00397758>. And this is what you say
regarding your visit to <a> market, and I will quote what you
state in English:
"We were asked aboard and the next morning we arrived in Phsar
Thmei and stayed there for three nights. Each of us was given a
package of cooked rice, one green scarf, and a set of clothes.
We, later on, were transported in a truck by the Khmer Rouge to
the railway station at 1 p.m. I took the train and arrived at
Prey Svay at 12 p.m. after travelling for one day and one night."
End of quote.
My first question in light of this passage is as follows:
You state that you were at Phsar Thmei, that is, the Central
Market. Yesterday, I believe I understood from the explanations
you gave to the civil party lawyer that you had mentioned that
visit to the Central Market because you did not know Phnom Penh,
and that is why you got mixed up.
But at the same time, on the second form, which we'll talk about
shortly, when the civil party lawyer asked you how you knew that
that was <Chbar Ampov (phonetic) market>, you said that people
had told you so.
My first question, therefore, is as follows: If you knew that <it
truly> was the market called <Chbar Ampov (phonetic)> because
people told you so, why didn't you say so the first time you
filled the form?
A. At that time, I was not familiar with the location and, later
on, when people said about it, then I knew that it was Phsar
Chbar Ampov. Even today, I am not so familiar with that market<>.
Q. When you say "later", what do you mean? What time are you
referring to?
A. When I said "later", I meant <> after the liberation by Hun
Sen soldiers<, I was familiar with it>.
Q. Very well. You knew that it was <not> the Central Market after
the liberation by the Hun Sen soldiers. But <that means> when you
filled out the form in 2008, you already knew that <you hadn't
been to> the Central Market, but <to> Chbar Ampov. Is that not
the case?
A. I meant to say Chbar Ampov market or Phsar Chbar Ampov.
Q. Right. But <since you already had been informed of that by>
the Hun Sen soldiers, why did you still talk about <a central
market when> filling out that first form?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil Party, please hold on.
And Civil Party Lawyer, you have the floor.
Please turn on the microphone.
MS. TY SRINNA:
Mr. President, I object to this question because the civil party
did not say it was Hun Sen soldiers who told him about Phsar
Chbar Ampov. So, if this line of questions is allowed to
continue, it's going to get the civil party <out of line of what
he previously testified>.
Thank you.
BY MS. GUISSE:
I believe it may be an interpretation problem because that is
what I heard in French.
Q. Mr. Civil Party, can you tell us who informed you that it was
Phsar Chbar Ampov and not the Central Market, and when were you
informed of that?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. When you asked me a question previously, <I could not grasp
fully>. I did not mean that I was told by Hun Sen soldiers. What
I meant is that I was told after the Hun Sen soldiers liberated
us. I was told by people, but not by Hun Sen soldiers.
And in fact, it was people, that is, after the liberation in
1979, whom I met and I spoke to them. They said about the
evacuation from Svay Rieng, and I asked whether we were
instructed to rest at Phsar Thmei or Phsar Chbar Ampov. And those
people who were evacuated when I was, said that we were evacuated
and stayed at Phsar Chbar Ampov.
<>At the time, people were evacuated from three provinces: Prey
Veng, Svay Rieng and Kampong Cham<. Since the central market or
Phsar Thmei was already full>, some of the evacuees were allowed
to rest <> at Phsar Chbar Ampov, or Chbar Ampov market.
Q. Very well. My question remains the same, therefore.
Since after the liberation by the Hun Sen troops you had received
that information, why, therefore, in 2008 do you still talk of
the Central Market?
A. I apologize. Maybe I did not pay much attention to that. And
it is probably my mix-up.
Q. In the passage I quoted, you talk of your visit, <and your
stay,> but you did not talk of the presence of Khieu Samphan. Can
you explain why?
A. Because when I spoke, maybe I did not say everything and
probably I only spoke in response to the questions that were
asked.
Q. But since you made mention of the distribution of food,
scarves and clothes and the fact that you were transported in
trucks to subsequently go to the railway station and you give
details on that day <about what they gave you. In> your statement
before the Chamber, you appear to <make a link between> the
distribution of food and supplies <with> Khieu <Samphan's
arrival>. Even though you may not have been asked specific
questions, why did you not make mention of that?
A. I cannot catch your question, counsel. Could you repeat it?
Q. At the hearing when you talked about the arrival of food <and>
supplies, etc., you say that they arrived in two vehicles in
which Khieu Samphan also <arrived>, and that it was after his
arrival <and his speech> that these goods were distributed to
you. So there was a link between the distribution and the
presence of Khieu Samphan, in what you recounted in the hearing.
So my question is: why didn't you mention it then in your first
information form even without any specific questions about it?
Because it corresponds to what you're <readily> describing in
that document then -- receiving food and supplies, etc.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. Just a brief comment.
I've made several observations throughout this trial on the
<conditions under which> the NGOs noted down <information>
regarding the civil parties to begin with, and I would like to
note again that it's not necessarily the witness who did not
mention it, but perhaps the staff of the NGO< - CHRAC, in this
case -- > did not write it down because they're the ones that
recorded the words of the civil party. It's not the civil party
who wrote it.
So once again, the Defence is, of course, authorized to <test the
civil party's statements today>, but I think that we are all very
aware of the specific circumstances under which these documents
were noted down by the NGOs <before lawyers were assigned>.
Thank you.
BY MS. GUISSE:
I do understand these arguments by my colleague, but <that is all
they are, arguments. In this instance, I'm asking the Civil Party
a question and he is free to provide me with this explanation,
but> I would like to have the explanation from the witness
himself.
Q. So I will continue with my questioning, Mr. Civil Party.
Because there was a link< -- given what you stated before this
Court -- >with the alleged arrival of Khieu Samphan and the
distribution of these supplies, <why did you not mention it, and>
why was it not mentioned in this initial document?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. Allow me to inform the Chamber at the time of the writing, I,
myself, did not fill in the information. It was the person <>
from <an organisation> who wrote about it. Questions were put to
me and I gave my answers at the time accordingly. In fact, that
was the experience that I underwent at the time. That what I
experienced.
Q. You signed this document and it was re-read to you before you
signed it; is that correct?
A. I did not recall at the time. I did not recall <whether or not
I was read that> application<.>
Q. On the same page that I referred to earlier, in the story you
recount at the time that this first information sheet was
created, there is mention of <the head of a cooperative, Preaek
Chik (sic) at> Svay Por (phonetic).
So this part of your statement, which is not of interest in the
absolute sense, but simply <mentions> the name of one of the
leaders of the cooperative that you ostensibly mentioned on that
day, so my question is as follows:
At the time that you saw Khieu Samphan, or you say that you saw
him at this market, did you know what post he held?
A. Mr. President, I testified about that yesterday. I cannot
remember his position and role at the time.
Q. Without knowing what position he held, did you think that it
was someone of importance in the state of Democratic Kampuchea,
or did you think that it was just someone who might have had the
same level as the head of a cooperative, for example?
A. Mr. President, at the time, he held a high position, one of
the senior persons <in that time>, but I do not recall his rank
and his position. What I can recall is that he held <the> highest
position in the leadership, the senior leadership at the time.
Q. And during the DK period, did it happen often that you met
people who you thought had a higher level?
A. I never met them at the time, as I was an ordinary citizen
residing in a rural area. It was only when I was evacuated to
Phnom Penh, I met him. That was the only time.
Q. In that context, are we in agreement that this meeting with
the person that was considered to be a senior leader was
exceptional?
A. I agree with what you said. People in general rarely had the
occasion to meet those senior people.
Q. All right. So my question, and this will be the last point on
this particular item in the document -- this was an exceptional
event. As far as you remember, did you mention this event to the
person who assisted you in filling out the form and who perhaps
had just simply forgotten to write down the name of Khieu
Samphan?
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honours, I believe it's only fair to the witness that
counsel indicate the section of the form where this is written
because the section of the form is entitled, in English,
"Description of crimes, what crimes occurred and how they
occurred".
So this is what the general question that's being answered by the
witness when he recounts what happened to him and to his family.
It wasn't a question about how the criminal policies were
formulated and how the leadership formulated the policies.
If you look at the beginning of the section, it says,
"Description of crimes, what crimes occurred and how they
occurred".
BY MS. GUISSE:
There again, Mr. President, that is an argument that <may> be the
Prosecution's position, <at the end, when we will be arguing
about why> Khieu Samphan's name does not appear in this form.
Nevertheless, my question was legitimate and even more so <now>
because, there is <also> the name of the head of the cooperative,
which is mentioned. So my question remains.
Q. Insofar as you remember, Mr. Civil Party --
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Can counsel indicate, where's the name of the head of the
cooperative?
MS. GUISSE:
So the document is E3/10760 <(sic)>. The ERN in English is
00422204; and in Khmer, 00397758. And as follows --
JUDGE FENZ:
You were a bit too quick for me. For the repetition of the E
number.
BY MS. GUISSE:
It's document E3/10670a <(sic)>. It's the <first civil party
application, dated> the 2nd of August 2008. So I maintain my
question.
Q. Mr. Civil Party, insofar as you remember, did you mention the
name Khieu Samphan to this person during this first interview,
and does this name not appear in the document in spite of what
you recounted because the person that was in charge of drafting
the document forgot it?
Do you remember having mentioned this incident?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. Mr. President, to my recollection, when I was interviewed, no
such questions were put to me about my meeting with Khieu
Samphan. It was later on that I was asked about my meeting with
him. It was after that time I told the information about the
meeting and I, myself, did not know if the meeting with him was
included in my application.
Q. Very well, then.
What you want to say, and I want to be sure that I understand
this correctly, since you were not asked questions about Khieu
Samphan, when you talked about what happened at the market --
whether it was at Chbar Ampov or the Central Market -- you didn't
spontaneously mention Khieu Samphan, but you mentioned the fact
that you had received rice, scarves, clothing. That you
mentioned. And you talked about your transfer to the <train
station when> you were asked about it because, a priori, that is
what <came> out.
But when recounting all of this, what happened, you didn't
mention Khieu Samphan because you weren't asked any questions
about him. Is that what I should understand?
A. I was not asked about him.
Q. And just to be sure that I understand, because you weren't
asked any questions about him, you didn't mention him. Is that
correct?
A. They did not ask me about that. Frankly speaking, the
interviewer did not ask me about my encounter with Khieu Samphan
or my meeting with Khieu Samphan<. If they did not ask me>, I did
not tell the interviewer<>.
Q. Just one last point on this document, and then I'll come back
<to Khieu Samphan in your second document. In this initial
document, just one clarification, at> the ERN in <English>
00422202, and in Khmer 00397758. In the document that we are
looking at now, it's noted, and I will quote in English:
"On 7th of May '75, the Khmer Rouge soldiers came to our village
commune and evacuated people from Svay Rieng provincial town to
live in our <birth> village commune."
Do you confirm this, meaning that there was an evacuation? I want
to make sure that I understood it. The 17th of April 1975 and
then afterwards, you returned to your birth village in May 1975.
A. I stand by that statement.
Q. And in this document, you talk about the fact that you
underwent <education> sessions at the Ta Chey pagoda, and you say
the following, and I will quote again in English:
"After spending four months there, I was released by Angkar to
return home and asked to work hard in the cooperative of Ta Chey
village." End quote.
I would like to be sure. I believe that I understood from your
testimony that you were held <for> nine months, and here it's
written that it was four months. Could you please clarify what
the exact length of your <detention> was for the Chamber?
We're talking about how long you were detained before you
returned to the cooperative.
A. Thank you, counsel.
Mr. President, I was not detained in the prison for a period of
four months. And at the time, perhaps the one who assisted <>in
filling out the information did not get clearly my answer. I was
<detained there for> nine months, not four months<>.
Q. I would now like to come back to your second form. This one is
from the 2nd of April 2010, and this is the first time that we
have a document where you mention Khieu Samphan's name. The
document number is E3/5932a, and the part that interests me in
English is at ERN 01332268, and in Khmer 00578456.
And before questioning you more specifically on this part, just a
clarification. We also have in the file another document,
document D22/19414, which is the Power of Attorney, the document
that gives permission to your lawyer to represent you. And I
believe it's only in English. The ERN is 00407825, and it's a
document dated the 25th of October 2009. And the lawyer
representing you is Counsel Chet Vanly.
So my first question is, do you remember in October 2009 that you
had a lawyer who began to represent you on this case?
A. Yes, I was assisted by a lawyer at the time.
Q. So we also have in the file, as I indicated to you, your
<second statement, your> Supplementary Information Form, which is
dated 2 April 2010; <so after> a lawyer had already been assigned
to you.
Do you remember if the Supplementary Information Form was carried
out with the assistance of your lawyer at the time?
A. She assisted me in the filling out the form.
Q. All right. So now we'll come back to the document in question
at the ERNs that I have already quoted. And here is what is
indicated at your <visit> to the market, and I will quote in
English <because there is no French version>:
"<At Phnom Penh,> in the vicinity of Chbar Ampov, they (Khieu
Samphan) distributed blue scarves to us. During the night, at 2
a.m., they took us to a rail station and we resumed our journey
by train to Prey Svay, etc., etc." End quote.
So on the 2nd of April 2010, you were assisted by a lawyer who,
if I understand your logic, when you talk about Khieu Samphan
because you're asked questions about him, and correct me if
that's not the case, but on the 2nd of April 2010, you mentioned
Khieu Samphan as simply having distributed scarves.
Do you remember this form and having said this when filling out
the form?
A. At the time, he was the one who distributed a krama scarf,
medicines, clothes and food before we departed for the railway
station.
Q. In this document of April 2010, you mentioned Mr. Khieu
Samphan for the first time, but you never mention any speech that
he gave at the time he was distributing these scarves or food
supplies.
Can you explain to the Chamber why -- although there's no doubt
that you're talking about Khieu Samphan -- why did you not
mention the speech that you spoke of afterwards in this Chamber?
A. Mr. President, the lawyer did not ask me about the speeches
made by Khieu Samphan. I was asked <only> what kind of stuff
distributed by Khieu Samphan. The question about speeches were
not asked, <so,> I did not give my answers about the speeches.
That is why such information was not included in the form.
Q. So what you're explaining to the Chamber is that when you
mention this passage about Khieu Samphan, you're not telling a
whole story of what happened at the market because you were not
asked specific questions. Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is what I want to say. Such questions were not
asked, and I did not give my answers. And at the time, <I did not
anticipate that my application would lead me to this stage.> I
was only giving my answers to the limit of the questions. <I
dared not speak much.>
Q. So what I would like to know is, since you didn't mention
Khieu Samphan's name at all when you were giving information for
your first form, how did the name of Mr. Khieu Samphan show up in
this second form? Are you the one who spontaneously mentioned
him, or was it because you were asked a question which included
Khieu Samphan's name that you mentioned him?
What I want to know is if it is you, yourself, who spontaneously
spoke about Mr. Khieu Samphan when filling out this second form,
which is not simply a second form. I really want to clarify that
it is a Supplementary Information Form <about what you
experienced under Democratic Kampuchea>.
A. Mr. President, regarding Khieu Samphan, it was in a later
interview that I was asked about him. Clarification question was
put to me. I was asked what kind of thing <> he spoke at the time
when he was distributing the stuff to the people.
Again, it was later on that I was asked about him, and I gave my
answers. At the outset, I was not asked about him. That is why
the issue of him was not included in the first form.
Q. All right. So here in the second form since we're talking
about him, you didn't think that there was a need to tell the
full story about your experience at Chbar Ampov?
A. It did not come to my mind at the time, and only when I was
asked about that, I recalled about the hardship that I
experienced at the time. At the beginning, I was not interested
in telling such event and, also, it was because I was not asked
<by> that organization and the lawyer. That is why I did not tell
them about that.
Q. And that leads me back to a previous question that I asked
you.
On the first form, you said yourself that the meeting of -- with
a senior leader, was something exceptional. So here, when you're
asked about Khieu Samphan during the filling out of this
Supplementary Information Form, do you still consider that it's
not very important, that there's no need to go into detail?
That's what I understood from your previous response.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Mr. President, just an observation. Our colleague noted earlier
that I was reading an argument, but I think she is also doing so
when she <is putting questions and> systematically interpreting
what the civil party witness did or did not do, <think or did not
think,> when he met with the NGO or the lawyer when he was
filling out the forms. So if she could please be neutral instead
of putting words into the mouth of the civil party and <making
him say whether> it was important or it was not important, etc.
JUDGE FENZ:
And perhaps additionally, things that are clearly important to
the Defence, like a speech might not necessarily have seemed
important for a legally non-trained witness or civil party. Just
a general remark.
BY MS. GUISSE:
I do not know whether after the pleadings by the various parties,
we are already in closing arguments on this subject, but I think
that as counsel for Khieu Samphan, I have good reason to ask
these <types of> questions, to ask why <it> was only some time in
2015 that the civil party <voiced> inculpatory <testimony against
my client>, whereas he had been interviewed by various persons
<since> 2008. It appears to be normal to me.
When the civil party lawyer says that I am putting words in the
witness' mouth, that is not the case. <It is not me who put words
in the witnesses mouth,> it is the witness himself who said that
he did not deem it necessary to provide this information.
It is normal that I should try to obtain information before
making my own interpretations. I am putting questions to him to
<inquire as towards his state of mind and> ask why he did not
talk about this earlier, and < it is normal to put> questions on
this matter.
So I think that <in that> sense, these are only remarks, are not
objections. <So> I can proceed.
Q. So to be very specific, my question is as follows:
At this time, you talked about Khieu Samphan in that
Supplementary Information Form even though specific questions
were not put to you on what he said, you did not consider it
important to talk about all of the events that occurred at the
market, all of what you saw and all of what you heard from Khieu
Samphan during that distribution?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. Frankly speaking, at that time, I did not pay much attention
to that. And only later when I was called by the Court staff, I
could recall the event. Previously, I did not think of that.
As <simple> people, we do not pay much attention to that. The
main focus of us, the farmers, were to <increase high yield> in
the field and not to pay much attention to that. And that is the
reason I did not respond or speak about that, nor was I asked by
the organization staff on this issue.
Q. I would like us to now talk of the last Supplementary
Information Form that you submitted as part of the investigations
of Case 004, <so another case,> document E3/10670, forwarded on
the 5th of January 2015 by your counsel. And this document, if I
fully understand the explanations you gave before on the way the
interviews unfolded in order for you to provide the information,
precisely, in 2014 or in 2015, your counsel put specific
questions to you on Khieu Samphan. And that is why you went into
much detail.
So am I right in providing this explanation of the way things
unfolded on that occasion?
A. My lawyer did not ask me about that, but after I recalled it,
I told the lawyer <subsequently>. And that's why this information
was included in the later form. As I said, it happened so long
ago, and only later on, I recalled it and I reported it to the
lawyer. And subsequently, the lawyer included that information on
the <application> form.
Q. Very well. If I understand correctly, therefore, you forgot
that part of those events because you remembered it only when you
mentioned it to the lawyer. My question to you, therefore, is as
follows:
Are you sure that your memories are very reliable? Because you
have said that those events occurred a long time ago, and yet
whether it is before this Court or in form E3/10670, you are very
specific in providing certain details citing practically word for
word the topics and the issues that Khieu Samphan addressed. And
I quote: The ERN in English is 01190623, ERN in Khmer 01118429
and it continues on the following page. And this is what you
state, and I will raise questions on this part. I'm quoting in
English:
"<While we were resting,> Angkar provided steamed rice and
steamed mackerel for people to eat. On the third morning before
we continued on our journey, the Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu
Samphan, and his team, most of whom I did not know, came in
vehicles to distribute food, clothes, scarves, balm oil and
packages of medicine to us. After providing the items, Khieu
Samphan and the leader of the Democratic Kampuchea regime said
'We carried out the revolution to topple the Lon Nol regime and
to eliminate capitalism, feudalism and intellectualism. We
forbade the capitalists from oppressing the poor people. We want
to eliminate the classes of rich and poor. We want to promote
equality amongst old people.
Angkar brought our brothers and sisters here to protect you from
the Vietnamese imperialists and invaders, who will kill our
brothers, sisters, fathers and mothers. You are going to live in
the southwest. Please follow the Democratic Kampuchea's policy.
Please be loyal to the Party forever. If anyone betrays the
Party, that person will be killed and the saying goes 'to keep
you is of no benefit, to kill you is of no loss'.'" End of quote.
I'll press on. Sorry.
"After Khieu Samphan distributed the items and delivered the
speech, people got in vehicles to go to the train station at 9
a.m." End of quote.
Here you therefore provide an account with details on the
contents of the speech that Khieu Samphan is alleged to have
delivered.
Insofar as you've told the Chamber that you forgot this part and
only remembered it subsequently, my question to you is whether
you are sure that these were, indeed, the specific words that
Khieu Samphan uttered or <did> your memory fail you?
A. These words were from Khieu Samphan because, at the time he
did make his speech, he spoke at length, but I cannot recall
everything and I can only remember portions of it. He spoke for
nearly an hour, and I could only recall what I stated.
Q. Yesterday, you stated that he did not speak for an hour, but
for about 30 minutes because you thought he was in a hurry and it
was urgent for you to be taken to the railway station.
Do you remember whether it was for 30 minutes or an hour that he
spoke?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Civil Party, please hold on.
And lawyer for civil parties, you have the floor.
MS. TY SRINNA:
I'd like to make an observation. A while ago, in the Khmer
language, the civil party stated that Khieu Samphan spoke for
"almost an hour", and not "over an hour", so there may be a
problem with the interpretation.
BY MS. GUISSE:
Q. I will rephrase the question in order to align myself with the
Khmer.
So it was rather close to an hour as opposed to 30 minutes <as>
you stated yesterday?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. I did not say that he spoke for over an hour. I said that he
spoke for almost an hour. But maybe you did not get it right and
it says that it was over an hour.
Q. My question was whether it was close to an hour or
approximately an hour, <that's not a problem>. I <understand you
said that in Khmer> but <yesterday,> you rather talked of 30
minutes.
My question is, <which version> is <closest to> the truth, <from>
what you can remember today --
JUDGE FENZ:
Just to be clear, can you give us the reference for the 30
minutes but because perhaps there was a mistranslation there,
too, just to avoid further confusion.
MS. GUISSE:
I've asked my team to look for the reference in the transcript. I
am just speaking by memory <based on my notes>.
MS. GUIRAUD:
<I have it Co-Counsel.>
<MS. GUISSE:>
I believe it's 11.53, and it is Judge Fenz who is asking for
this.
<MS. GUIRAUD:>
<I have 15.52 in which he says "more than 30 minutes", actually.>
The ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Mr. President, could counsel repeat what he said because we were
still translating what the other counsel was saying?
JUDGE FENZ:
Could you please repeat this? Translation didn't get it.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Of course. I have the transcript in French. Yesterday at
15.52.43, answer by the civil party:
"Khieu Samphan delivered a speech for more than 30 minutes.
Perhaps he was in a hurry to go somewhere else."
MS. GUISSE:
Indeed, I did not have the time to look up the transcript in
<French>, but in <English>, that is exactly it.
So my question to the civil party was as follows: Was it closer
to an hour or closer to half an hour?
I see Judge Fenz holding her head somewhat overwhelmed. Perhaps I
can assist you.
JUDGE FENZ:
What's the difference between more than an hour -- more than half
an hour and less than an hour? Where's the contradiction? Or
perhaps I'm missing something.
BY MS. GUISSE:
I'm trying to obtain information. I believe that, once more, we
are dealing with a civil party who recounts that Khieu Samphan
delivered a speech for the first time in 2015. It is normal that,
as Khieu Samphan's counsel, I should be seeking details <and
contradictions> on what he said<, for you to consider>. <I
understand we are already upstream when it comes to potential
conclusions the Chamber may reach, but in any case,> as a lawyer,
I should seek to elicit details on the manner in which the civil
party is presenting his account.
I'm almost done, Mr. President. I do not know whether you want us
to take the break now, but I believe I still need about five
minutes, so as you wish.
I see you indicating that I can continue.
Q. Mr. Civil Party, do you remember -- perhaps I should rephrase
the question.
Yesterday, I understood from your testimony that you said Khieu
Samphan spoke in what is referred to in French as a megaphone,
that is, a <large> portable microphone. Can you specify that it
was, indeed, for half an hour, slightly more than half, <or> an
hour that Mr. Khieu Samphan spoke into that megaphone? <Can you
be more precise?>
2-TCCP-1063:
A. I stated that he used a microphone yesterday. And the
microphone was battery operated. That's what I stated.
Q. You also stated that when he <allegedly> delivered that
speech, you were in a market. And I do not understand exactly how
many people were around you. I believe you said that you were
asked to line up.
And were you on your feet as you lined up, or there was a place
where you were seated?
A. At that time, we were not sitting. We were standing in rows.
All the people were standing in rows in the market.
Q. And once more, according to my notes and what I remember from
what you said yesterday, you said you were at a distance of about
20 metres. When he delivered that speech, were you also 20 metres
away from him?
JUDGE FENZ:
Given the problems we have had with references, could you kindly
give us the reference of the transcript as opposed to a reference
to your notes? Obviously, we have interpretation problems.
BY MS. GUISSE:
I have also asked my team to look that up. My colleague says in
Khmer it was, indeed, 20 metres that the civil party said
yesterday, but <no problem,> we'll give you the reference
subsequently.
In any case, if it wasn't the distance of 20 metres, can you
specify at what distance you were at the time when that speech
was delivered?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. Yesterday, I already stated that I was about 20 metres away
from him. That's what I said.
Q. And in front of you, were there also people on their feet
since I understand that you were not on the first row?
For Judge Fenz, the time was 15.19.
Excuse me. The question wasn't very clear. Let me ask it again.
When you heard that speech, Mr. Khieu Samphan was using a
microphone as he delivered the speech, <he spoke> and there were
people between you and Mr. Khieu Samphan. You were not on the
first row. Is that not the case?
A. No, I was not at the first row. And there were people who were
standing in front of me.
Q. One last clarification.
I understood from what you said yesterday that there were many
people at that market at the time the speech was delivered. Can
you assess the number of persons?
I <thought I understood that you said> that many people were
evacuated, but what I want to know is whether you can give an
estimate of the number of people who were present at the market
at that particular time?
A. At that time, I did not do any <> counting. I knew that there
were many, many people.
For that reason, I cannot give you a proper estimate.
Q. One clarification I forgot to ask of you regarding your form
E3/10670, the ERN in English 01190623, in Khmer 01118429. When
you talk about people who came at the same time with Khieu
Samphan, it is stated in that statement:
"The Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu Samphan, and his team, most of
whom I did not know, came in vehicles", etc., etc. End of quote.
When you say that "I did not know most of them", does it mean
that you knew some of the people in the team that came on that
day?
A. No, I did not know those people. I only knew Khieu Samphan
because other people also saw him, too. And in addition to that,
I saw him in a film. And when I saw him in person, then I
recognized him. And besides him, I did not recognize anyone else.
Q. And do you remember in what year you saw that film?
A. I saw the film in 1975, that is, after I returned <> from
Pursat. At the time, Samdech Hun Sen's troops <liberated and>
showed the film to the villagers in other villages.
Q. Do you, therefore, mean that you saw the film featuring Khieu
Samphan after the events, after the period of Democratic
Kampuchea?
A. I apologize. I got mixed up <at the last moment>.
In fact, I saw him earlier, and not after the liberation in 1979.
<My apology.>  I just got mixed up as in the previous case, that
is, in term of the issue of whether it was almost an hour or
<half> an hour.
Q. Just one question.
Who showed that, and on what occasion was that?
A. Allow me to be clear. I saw that film during the times that
Democratic Kampuchea controlled the country. At that time, the
front troops showed the film in cooperatives, and that's when I
saw the film. But I made a mistake earlier that I said I watched
it after 1979. But in fact, I watched the film during the Pol Pot
regime.
The film showed about farmers who worked in the rice fields, <>
digging canals, etc. And the film was also <shown senior> leaders
<participating in the event>. So I recall that what I said
earlier was a mistake.
Q. And when you say that that film was about the leaders, were
the <roles> of the different leaders specified?
A. Sometimes I could hear a voice from the film. Sometimes it was
silent. And for that reason, I cannot recall that point <because>
leaders of the regime kept changing. For that reason, I cannot
recall their respective positions during the regime.
We, the people, we did not pay attention to that. We were afraid
<of being killed and becoming> victimised <of food deprivation.
We were concerned about the prospect of being killed>, so we did
not pay attention to such matter.
Q. Mr. President, this will be my last question. I'm sorry that I
went on for much longer than I thought.
My last question, therefore, <to make sure that I've understood
correctly>: you spontaneously decided to contact your lawyer to
provide supplementary information on Mr. Khieu Samphan sometime
in 2014 or 2015. Did I properly understand your testimony?
A. There was a staff from organization asking me to obtain a
lawyer. Then I contacted the lawyer so that I could file my
supplementary information.
MS. GUISSE:
I am done with my examination of the civil party, Mr. President,
and my colleague, Kong Sam Onn, says he has a few more questions
to put to the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Kong Sam Onn, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, Your Honours and
everyone.
Q. And good morning, Mr. Civil Party. I'd like to ask you about
your presence at the Chbar Ampov market when you said that you
received some items from Khieu Samphan.
While you were standing in rows, can you tell the Chamber how
many rows there were?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. I did not count the number of rows because there were many
rows.
Q. Can you give an estimate whether there were more than 100 rows
or less than 100?
A. From my <estimation>, the rows were less than 100.
Q. Was this a bit lower than 100 or was it half of 100?
A. It was a bit lower <> than 100 <but it was not half of 100>.
Q. Yesterday, you testified that you were in a row that there
were about 20 people who were in front of you since you were not
in the front row. Am I correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
I estimated at the time. I did not count the exact number, but
what I could say is that there were around 20 people in front of
me. At the time, no one had time to count those people who were
standing in front of us.
Q. Thank you.
Could you clarify for the Chamber while you were standing, were
you in the middle row or were you at the corner? Where was your
position of your standing?
A. Mr. President, <it is hard to answer your question.> I cannot
tell you exactly how far I was from the front. If I say it was 15
metres away from the front row, <it could be wrong and it becomes
controversial just like the question of "half an hour, almost an
hour, and over an hour."> I could not say that, or how long I was
standing. I cannot also inform you, Mr. President.
Q. If you compare to those who were standing to the right and to
your left, could you tell the Chamber, were you in the middle row
or were you close to the right side or to the left side <in
comparison to those estimated 100 rows>?
A. I was standing to the right, to the far right side<>.
Q. So if you talk about those who are standing to your right, how
many of them were standing to your right?
A. There were 10 rows <to my row, from left to right side.>
Q. Thank you. Yesterday, you indicated that Khieu Samphan
distributed stuff to the people <as a symbolised gesture.> He was
distributing stuff to 10 or 20 people at the time, then he left;
do you recall that you testified this point to the Chamber?
A. Yes, I did tell the Chamber about that <yesterday>.
Q. Thank you. You also indicated that among the 20 people who
received stuff from Khieu Samphan, including you, as well; do you
recall that?
A. Mr. President, yes, I, personally, received stuff from him.
Q. Thank you. Were you in your row, at the time, while he was
distributing the stuff to people?
A. We were called out to go <forward, out of the queue.
Accidentally,>my name was called and I went to receive, directly,
the items from him.
Q. <How> were names called out, at the time, or was there a list
of names?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please observe the microphone. You have to wait until the
activation of the microphone before you can speak.
2-TCCP-1063:
A. My apology, Mr. President. While the stuff was distributed
<from row to row>, names were called out. One or two people
assisted him in distributing the stuff. My name was called out
and I went to receive the stuff. I, at the time, did not recall
all the detail and what really happened, at the time, and I did
not recall how many people received the stuff from him. I was not
so interested in all the detail.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. My doubt comes from the fact that Khieu Samphan<, through your
testimony,> had distributed the stuff to 10 or 20 people and you
stated that you were standing in the <> 20th row, <and there were
many more rows.> So how could the stuff be distributed to you
<among 10 or 20 people> since you were standing in the <back>
row? There were people in front of you, in fact, at the time. You
stated that there was a working group; one or two people coming
to call you to receive the stuff; so how could you explain this
point?
2-TCCP-1063:
A. I did not know what happened at the time. <I did not pay
attention.> They came to call me out of the row and to receive
the stuff. <I did not know how the arrangement be made.>
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President. I am done with my questionings, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
At the end, you are entitled to express your Victim Impact
Statement as a civil party. You indicate that you underwent the
sufferings and injury under the Democratic Kampuchea in the
period between 17 April 1975 up to 6 January 1979; you can now
express your sufferings, if any.
2-TCCP-1063:
Mr. President, I wish to inform the Chamber the suffering
inflicted on me<.>  In  17 April 1975 <,> I was evacuated from
Svay Rieng. At the time, the Khmer Rouge troops entered Svay
Rieng, they <chased and> forced people to go out of Svay Rieng.
They shouted at us, <brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, to> go
out of the town; otherwise, you are all shot to death.
After I had left my birthplace and reached a main road, I saw an
old man who could not walk. That old man <was very old> could
hardly walk and they shouted at him, "Why you do like that? Why
you walk like that? You will be shot to death." <Shortly after
this threat, that old man was shot to death and fell to the
ground in front of me.> I was so scared at the time. I was so
frightened <so I continued my journey forwards>.
All people, including me, were in the same situation. They were
being evacuated. <We did not bring much> belongings with us, but
only some clothes and some rice, since we were forced to leave.
We were told that we would leave only for two or three days, then
we would be allowed to return home. <We> were told that we did
not need to bring with us <> our belongings. We were so scared
and we had to leave. Then we arrived at Ta Chey village where <we
were> allowed to take a rest for one month. <Shortly>, they
learned that my elder brother used to be a former Lon Nol
soldier. My elder brother was then taken for <re-education> at
Wat Krous (phonetic)<or> Krou (phonetic) pagoda. In fact, he was
not sent for <re-education>; he was instead sent for execution.
He disappeared ever since.
Half a month later, my father was taken away. He was taken for
also <re- education> at Wat Ta Chey. They said that my father was
part of the <self-defence force>. My father, in fact, was an
ordinary <peasant>, but he was <merely> given a rifle to protect
villagers <at the rear>.
Half a month later, they found out that I was once a former Lon
Nol soldier, but for only three months. After I got injured while
being a soldier, I was sent to the hospital and then I was
released out of the hospital and came back home and I, later on,
became a part of <the self-defence force>.
After they found out that I was a former Lon Nol soldier, I was
also sent for <re-education> at Ta Chey pagoda or Wat Ta Chey.
<In the period of the re-education, it was even harder. I was not
given enough to eat.> I was forced to work to carry dirt to build
dams <and dikes.> and on some occasions, <we were assigned to
work in some villages. Two people, including me,> were made to
become the ox so that <we> could pull the oxcart which carried
the woods from the forest. <> I underwent a very bad experience
and ordeal. Later on, in 1976 --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Civil Party, we need to change the new DVD
because the old DVD runs out of space.
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may now resume your suffering statement starting from the
period of 1976.
2-TCCP-1063:
Thank you, Mr. President.
In June 1976, Angkar initiated a plan to evacuate people out of
the province, again, <in the evacuation, there were also> my
family, included  my elder brother, sister <> my father, my
mother, one of my sister and brother <, together, 5 people> were
evacuated from <Ta Chey village, Khpos> Chamlang (phonetic)
<commune>, Svay Chrum district, Svay Rieng province. My wife and
I were not allowed to go with my siblings and parents. Angkar
told me and my wife that I did not need to go because I was
married. My father and mother were sent <before others> to Peam
Chor <district>, Prey Veng province to reside in that location.
My mother-in-law was also among the evacuees.
From the information that I learned from the survivor; I did not
learn it myself, after two months there, they <investigated and
found> that <> my elder sister's husband, was once a former
soldier, so she was taken to Koh Dach to be executed. My <sister>
disappeared ever since.
Later on, in 1977, I was evacuated for the second time. <In each
commune,> seventy people -- 70 families were evacuated<. Among
these,> 20 families were from Ta Chey. <We> were evacuated to
<Pursat and> Battambang. I left my house and I went on foot with
my bare soles; <in that time, no one> had no shoes to wear. I
left my village and arrived at Kraol Kou; <we walked> about 25
kilometres per day>. I took one <night there>. <We were> allowed
to rest there and the rain came down all day and night. <We could
not sleep because we> had no shelter to stay in. I had to take
shelter at the milling warehouse.
The next morning I was made to leave and take rest at Phum
Trabaek <village>. I was in a very bad situation. <> I had very
little rice <from a cooperative> and some clothes. When we
arrived at Kampong Trabaek, we were allowed to spend the night
there and the next morning, we were made to leave for Neak
Loeang. We spent seven days and nights <> at Neak Loeang. <We>
then left Neak Loeang <in the morning>; we went on foot.
We were allowed to take a rest at one location in order to wait
for the motorboats <or ships> to transport us to Phnom Penh. On
the sixth night, names were called to board a ferry <in mid night
at 12.00>. We left on a ferry and reached Chbar Ampov at around 9
or 10 <o'clock>. It is my estimate that we arrived at 9 or 10, or
1 or 2 <o'clock>, because we did not have clock to time.
We boarded the ferry at Neak Loeang's pier and we arrived at
Chbar Ampov at around 9 p.m. We were told to take rest for <>
three days, and it was <on the third day of our rest,> that I met
with senior leaders -- Khieu Samphan and others -- who came to
distribute stuff to us. And speeches were made, at the time, as I
indicated for the Chamber <yesterday>. We were informed and
advised about some specific situation. I did not have time to
inform everything, Mr. President.
Then I boarded the train. I left by train at 1 p.m. and we
arrived at Prey Svay at around 12 a.m. or 1 a.m. the next day. We
were told to disembark the train when we arrived and we had to
walk with our bare foot. We had to walk five kilometres from that
train station.
There was a hill, when we arrived at a location, and the hill had
no trees on it. <At that day, it rained a lot.> It was a rainy
season. There was rain all day long and all night. We had no
shelter to stay in, but we used our mats to prevent us from
soaking <and sat down>. We had to wait until the morning came and
at around 5 a.m. in the morning, there were cooperative <chiefs>
from <various> cooperatives coming to receive us.
It was at that location that we separated from one another<, the
evacuees from Svay Rieng province>. Although, we were from the
same village, two families or three families were put in one
cooperative; for example, I was put in Preaek Chik cooperative,
<Snay Sampor (phonetic) commune.>  I was received by the head of
a cooperative in the morning and I was told to pack my
belongings. I was told to leave for my cooperative at night time.
It was so dark. I went on foot <along the railroads>. I went
without shoes. <I stumbled on rubbles making my foot blistered.>
Young children were crying at the time. We were walked on stones.
We were walking at night time. In fact, there was a clean and
good dirt road, but we were made to walk on the railroad full of
rocks. We had our belongings with us: cooking pot, rice, and some
other belongings were put on the oxcarts. The oxcart had left
before us.
For me, I left at around 6 a.m. and I arrived at Preaek Chik
cooperative at around 7 p.m. in the evening. I had no rice to eat
along the way <the whole day> since cooking pot and rice and
other belongings were already put on the ox cart and the ox carts
had already left before us. It was my ordeal at the time. I was
exhausted and when I arrived, I was starved. I had no food to
eat. <We were led by a head of the cooperative.>
When we arrived at Preaek Chik, we were given rice to eat and we
had two full spoons of rice to eat. That is the truth that I am
telling you, Mr. President. We ate cooked red rice and, later on,
we were given a full <ladle> of rice, not two full <ladles> of
rice. <A half month later, we were given just only one ladle of
cooked rice.>
I worked at <Preaek Chik Cooperative or> Preaek Chik worksite.
There were only five families. There had already -- five families
had already been at that worksite and five more families were
added. <Together, there were 10 families.> I asked other why
there were few people working in the worksite. I was told that
some of them died because of starvation; they had no rice to eat.
I became even more frightened and I thought that I would die one
day because other people< who came before me> had passed away
already because they were starved.
I was made to work at that worksite. I was made to uproot the
tree and clear the land and also farm the field. I was told to
farm a rice close to Veal <Srae Muoyroy> (phonetic); <> that was
the location close to a reservoir, but I do not know the names of
that reservoir. I was trying my best to work until I fell ill.
I would like to pause here about my experience and now, I'm
telling you about my parents. My parents were also evacuated out
of Prey Veng later on. They were further evacuated. In fact, we
were evacuated on the same occasion, but we were separated from
one another.
Information was cut off; we were not allowed to know. They were
evacuated to a cooperative; <Bak Chenhchien> Cooperative in
Pursat province. From the <survivor's account>, they, my parents,
<> stayed there for two or three months. Then my father had been
called out for execution. My siblings -- my <two> younger
<sisters were called from the children unit> called for execution
as well. My father, my mother, my younger brother, and my younger
sister, four of them, were executed <at Bak Chenhchien>. <I felt
shocked soon I learned about this.>
It was my suffering that I have lost my parents and my siblings.
I was so terrified. My elder brother, one of <among> them, <> was
also killed in Prey Veng.
When I arrived at Preaek Chik, I fell ill and I was hospitalized,
Kochdei (phonetic) hospital. I <> stayed <at> Kochdei (phonetic)
hospital for a half a month, then I was better and I was
<discharged and returned to> my cooperative. From that time
onwards, since I was fatigued, I was made to take care of a
plantation or a farm.
I was there for <over> one month and the Vietnamese troop were
approaching from Kaoh Kralor (phonetic). They were afraid that
Vietnamese could seize us. We, together with the elder people --
elderly and the sick people <and pregnant women>, were sent to
Tracheak Chet (phonetic) forest. We were walked and we walked on
the road, which were full of sharp woods. We were walking from
<9 in> the morning and we arrived at the cooperative of the
forest at around 4 p.m. The fatigue people were evacuated first,
and only those who were with strength were allowed to stay at the
worksite. <At later stage, all were evacuated.>
I underwent another hardship because I was still ill<>. I arrived
at Prey Tracheak Chet (phonetic), but I did not recall <the date>
when I arrived there. <We were> allowed to stay at Prey Tracheak
Chet (phonetic) for one or two months.
There were aeroplanes at the time, <with loudspeakers and>
leaflets, telling us to get out of Prey Tracheak Chet (phonetic);
otherwise, bombs will be dropped on the forest. The militiamen of
the Khmer Rouge got the messages and they <immediately> forced us
to leave Prey Tracheak Chet (phonetic) for Phnum Koun Khla
(phonetic).
I, at the time, did not know all the location of Phnum Koun Khla
(phonetic), but I heard from other that we were being evacuated
to Phnum Koun Khla (phonetic). Some people were from the east.
Twenty families were from the east. They were with me. We were
all together, at the time, from different cooperatives and also
from the east.
We were further moved, at the time; we were further transferred,
but at the time, we did not dare to leave and we did not want to
go because we knew, at the time, that the Vietnamese troop were
approaching and we would die. We thought that we would die if the
Vietnamese troop were coming to our area. <Militiamen and
cooperative chiefs said, "you all have> wings <now, and you all
want> to fly <away from us>. <It appeared they understood the
situation and they did not force us to stay with them as well.>
So we <escaped from them and> returned to the <south> area at
Damnak Ron (phonetic).
MR. PRESIDENT:
I believe that is sufficient. In fact, our instruction to you was
to make a statement of harm and suffering and not about the
entire life experience through the regime.
And Mr. Civil Party, the Chamber is grateful of your presence and
the hearing of your testimony and your impact statement as a
civil party that you claim that you went through during the
Democratic Kampuchea is now concluded and your testimony may
contribute to the ascertainment of the truth in this case.
You are no longer required to be present in this courtroom and
you may return to your residence or wherever you wish to go to
and we wish you all the very best.
Court officer, please work with WESU to arrange for Mr. Civil
Party to return to his residence or wherever he wishes to go to.
And next, the Chamber will hear a witness, 2-TCW-1069.
I notice that Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties is on her feet.
You have the floor.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. Yesterday, we sent to the Chamber the
question that the civil party wanted to put to Khieu Samphan
through you, <the Chamber should have received an email> <with a
question --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, then, I allow the civil party to put the questions through
the Bench.
And Mr. Civil Party, do you have any questions to put to the
accused?
2-TCCP-1063:
Mr. President, I'd like to put the questions through you, the
President of the Chamber, to Mr. Khieu Samphan. Mr. Khieu Samphan
said that he did not know, nor did he see the killing or the
evacuation of people. That <was> his previous statement from what
I heard and I knew. So he denies about the evacuation and the
killing; is that true; is that what he denies?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And the Chamber wishes to inform Mr. Civil Party that
in the substantive hearings in Case 002/02, from the beginning,
the two accused, that is, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan confirm
that they exercise their rights to remain silent and not to
answer any questions by the parties or the Bench.
<The hearing> on 8 January 2015 <>, in response to the question,
Mr. Khieu Samphan reaffirmed his position to exercise the rights
to remain silent. And so far, the Chamber has not been informed
of any change in their status, that is, their exercise to remain
silent. And, according to the existing national and international
laws, the Chamber cannot compel the accused to answer questions.
Next, the Chamber will hear testimony of witness 2-TCW-1069;
however, it is now time for a short break. We'll take a break now
and resume at a quarter past 11.00.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1104H to 1118H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
The Chamber now proceeds to hear testimony of 2-TCW-1069 and the
latest information that the Chamber received, this witness has
Mr. Chan Sambo as his duty counsel.
Court officer, please usher the witness and his duty counsel into
the courtroom.
(The witness enters the courtroom)
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, if -- if I may take the opportunity to raise the
following issue with regard to this witness: During my
preparation, yesterday, of this witness and, as a matter of fact,
also of TCW-1070, I came to realize that the breadth of knowledge
of this particular witness in relation to events in the East Zone
is quite extensive.
In the light of your earlier decision to plan two days for
TCW-1065 (sic), who testified a few weeks ago, I feel it is
important that we hear this witness longer than the projected one
day. So, my request would be, both, in relation to this witness,
but also in relation to TCW-1070 to plan at least one day and a
half, maybe even two days.
JUDGE FENZ:
Short comments by the parties and then we can make a decision
during the lunch break.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honours, my guess is that the one day is sufficient.
Perhaps, we could see how it goes this morning, but I don't see a
particular need. On the other hand, we don't have an objection;
it doesn't hurt us other than slightly prolonging the trial.
MS. GUISSE:
No objection from the Khieu Samphan defence.
MR. PRESIDENT:
And Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties?
MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. I do admit not to have heard the
beginning of my colleague's submission as I was <searching for
the French channel>. <So> I haven't understood the reasons for
the request for additional time and we will defer to the
discretion of the Chamber.
We have seen the decision of the Supreme Court Chamber in which a
number of theories of the Defence regarding the rebellion <,and
the rift, I apologize that those words came to me in English,
were> largely set aside by the Supreme Court Chamber. I believe
that, of course, the Chamber will be able to consider that when
it considers whether to grant the Nuon Chea defence's request or
not.
<From what we understood from this decision, the request> of the
Nuon Chea team <is very much>adversely affected by that decision,
but we will defer to the Chamber's discretion.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you and the Chamber will consider all the opinions
addressed by the parties before we make our decision on <times>
allotted to this witness and we will deliberate this matter after
the lunch break.
QUESTIONING BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Witness, what is your name?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. My name is Sin Oeng.
Q. Thank you, Mr.Sin Oeng. And when were you born?
A. I was born on the 8th of probably March of 1957.
Q. Thank you. And where you born?
A. I was born in Sangkom village, Kokir Saom commune, current
Svay Teab district, Svay Rieng province.
Q. And where is your present address?
A. I still live in the same native village, that is, Sangkom
village in Svay Rieng province.
Q. What is your current occupation?
A. I am a rice farmer.
Q. What are the names of your parents?
A. My father is Yos Sari; he is deceased and my mother is alive
and her name is Sin Pen.
Q. Is your mother's name Sin Pen or Sin Pet?
A. Her name is Sin Pen -- Sin Pen.
Q. What is the name of your wife and how many children do you
have?
And please observe the microphone before you speak; you should
only speak after you see a red light on the tip of the microphone
so your voice would go through the interpretation system and to
the parties. Your response will be interpreted into English and
French, respectively, since the three languages are the official
languages of the Court.
A. My wife is Long Samath and we have five children.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Sin Oeng. The greffier made an oral report this
morning, that to your best knowledge, you have no relationship by
blood or by law to any of the two accused, Nuon Chea and Khieu
Samphan or any other civil parties admitted in this case; is the
report accurate?
A. Yes, the report is accurate. I am not related to any of the
two accused.
Q. Have you taken an oath before the Iron Club Statue located to
the east of this courtroom before your appearance?
A. I have already taken an oath.
Q. Thank you. And the Chamber now would like to inform you of
your rights and obligations as a witness.  Mr. Sin Oeng,
regarding your rights, as a witness in the proceedings before the
Chamber, you may refuse to respond to any question or to make any
comments which may incriminate you. That is your right against
self-incrimination.
Your obligations: Mr. Sin Oeng, as a witness in the proceedings
before the Chamber, you must respond to any questions by the
Bench or relevant parties except where your response or comments
to those questions might incriminate you as the Chamber has just
informed you of your right as a witness. <As a witness,> you must
tell the truth that you have known, heard, seen, remember,
experienced, or observed directly about an event or occurrence
relevant to the questions that the Bench or parties pose to you.
Mr. Witness, have you been interviewed by investigators of the
Office of the Co-Investigating Judges of this Court?
A. I have never been here. There were people who came to
interview me at my house, but I have never been in this place.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. And you are now assisted by a duty counsel through
WESU, that is, Mr. Chan Sambo, and he is now sitting beside you
to provide you consultation if you think that the questions put
to you may incriminate you.
Due to a short period of time, that is, we only have a few
minutes left before the lunch break, let we have a break now and
resume at 1.30 this afternoon.
Court officer, please assist the witness at the waiting room
reserved for witnesses during the break time and invite him, as
well as his duty counsel, back into the courtroom at 1.30 this
afternoon.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and have him returned to attend the
proceedings this afternoon before 1.30.
The Court stands in recess.
(Court recesses from 1129H to 1331]
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Before the Chamber gives the floor to the defence team for Mr.
Nuon Chea to put questions to the witness, the Chamber is now
issue an oral ruling in relation to 2-TCW-920.
The Chamber notes that the Co-Prosecutors informed it of the
existent of a prior DC-Cam statement of 2-TCW-920 on case file
004. Considering that this is a public document and in order to
avoid multiple requests to the International Co-Investigating
Judge for disclosure, the Chamber obtained the document directly
from DC-Cam and provided it to the parties in advance of the
testimony of the witness. Recalling the practice of the Chamber
to admit prior statements of testifying witnesses, the Chamber
now admits the DC-Cam statement of 2-TCW-920 and accords it
document number <E3/10762>.
And the defence team for Mr. Koppe<, in the morning,> requested
the additional time to put question to this witness and now, the
Chamber decides the combined time for the concerned parties. So
the total time for all parties is one day and a half, three
sessions <> are given to the defence teams <> and three sessions
are given to the Co-Prosecutor and Lead Co-Lawyers for civil
parties.
And now the floor is given to the defence team for Mr. Nuon Chea
to put questions before the parties. You may now proceed.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Witness. I'm the international counsel for
Nuon Chea and I will be asking you some questions this afternoon.
Let me start by asking you a few questions about what you did
between 1975 and 1979. Can you describe that to the Chamber?
Where were you as of 17 April '75 and what did you do?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. From 1975 to 1979, I believe that this is the question -- I
was part of a mobile unit carrying dirt and after 1975 I remained
working in that mobile unit up until 1976.
Following <>  1976, I was taken by So Phim's group to a zone.
When I was placed in a zone, first I was made to plant vegetables
and I was <trained in military rules.>  I was tasked with
planting the rice as well.
At night time, I was told to be a guard and when the older guards
were removed and sent away, I was assigned to be a guard for So
Phim and I would accompany him wherever he went and at night time
I took <one-hour> shifts with others securing the protection for
him, So Phim.
Q. Thank you for that comprehensive answer, Mr. Witness.
Just one or two follow-up questions: Is it correct that in
respect of your position working for So Phim, you received
military training and you were trained for several months; is
that correct?
A. Yes, I was <> trained for a few months, but the training did
not happen on a regular basis. Sometimes I missed the training
sessions.
Q. And one other follow-up question, Mr. Witness. You gave a
lengthy statement to interviewers from an organization called
DC-Cam and your statement is laid down in document E3/10716 and
on English ERN 01353342 and Khmer 01340556.
Mr. President, because of time issues, we were not able to do the
French ERN, so my apologies for this.
Mr. Witness, you said you were working at a defence office. Is
that correct?
A. That is correct. I worked at a defence office of the zone.
Q. And how many colleagues did you have in that Defence office?
A. All of them were around, 60, including male and female, <young
and old> but we did not work together. In the morning, we would
be divided and assigned to work in various locations.
Q. Can you tell us who it was that at the time was the defence
unit chairperson?
A. It was Prak <Choeuk> (phonetic). He was the chief of the guard
unit.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness.
Now, let me turn to the person that you just mentioned already,
So Phim. Is it correct that you were related to So Phim and, if
yes, can you tell us please how you were related?
A. My deceased grandmother was related to him. My deceased
grandmother <may have been> his cousin, so I was a distant
relative. I <therefore> did not know clearly about the family
relation with him, but my mother told me that my deceased
grandmother was related to him.
Q. And at the time in 1976 when So Phim asked you to become a
member of his defence unit, did So Phim know that you were
related to him?
A. He knew that I was the child of someone related to him. I was
quite young at the time. <So,> I was not sure at the time how I
was related to him. The elder people would know clearly.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness.
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, I would like to show one of three photos that I
have assembled to the witness. With your leave, I would Iike to
start with showing the witness photograph E3/3259. There is one
ERN only at P, as in "P" from photo, 004166559.
I have a copy for the witness and I can also, with your leave,
put it on the screen.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you can proceed.
(Short pause)
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Mr. Witness, do you recognize anyone in this photo?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I recognize one individual. He is So Phim. He looked young in
this photo and when I was <not> assigned to work with him <yet.
When I was with him>, he already had grey hair and was older
compared to this picture. <That photo was taken before I went to
live with him.>
As for others, I could not see  <their faces clearly>, and I do
not recognize them.
Q. Mr. Witness, are you referring to the third person on the
left?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please look at the photo on the screen and there is a red circle
around one face.
MR. SIN OENG:
A. From the left, the third, the man standing-- the third man is
So Phim, the one in the red circle.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Mr. Witness, do you recognize the person who is immediately
standing on the left of him, the second person on the left, a
person who is smiling?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. It is not clear to me, the picture. I do not recognize him. I
do not know who he is.
Q. Well, you do know him and we will be speaking quite
extensively about him later today. That is Nuon Chea. Do you
recognize Nuon Chea?
A. When <Nuon Chea> made a visit to the place where I was, I, at
the time, did not recognize him well and did not know him well.
<When I was assigned to guard,> I asked elder people about the
delegation to that location and I was told that they were senior
people; namely, Nuon Chea and Pol Pot. I did not know them well
at the time. I was told by others who they were.
I was an outsider guard so I, at the time, did not know
specifically who they were but I was told and I tried to
recognize their faces.
Q. Well, let me follow up, Mr. Witness. Let me follow up about
Nuon Chea.
In your DC-Cam interview, E3/10716 on English, ERN 01353347; and
Khmer, 01340559; you said the following about Nuon Chea. Let me
read it back to you:
"Back then, did you know Ta Nuon Chea well?"
And then you answer: "Nuon Chea came to sleep at my office
location three to four times. Of course I knew him."
"At which office did he sleep?"
"He slept in Suong, the defence office."
"He slept at the defence office in Suong three to four times?"
"Yes. Nuon Chea came pretty often. Nuon Chea, Son Sen and Thiounn
Thioeunn and the like came pretty often."
Is that something you remember saying one year ago, one year and
a half ago to the interviewers of DC-Cam?
A. I may forget some information. I, at the time, did not know
them clearly. I could not recognize them well since I was told by
others. <> I can <hardly> recognize <them, but I cannot
constantly recognise them like what I see their faces daily>.
It happened 30, 40 years ago. I may forget some information <,>
all I knew back then was that individual was Nuon Chea and that
the other individual was Son Sen, for example. And, I, from that
time onwards, tried to recognize their faces but when I look at a
photo it appears that they don't look very similar to those I saw
back then.
Q. Well, let me move then to a second photo that I would like to
show you, Mr. Witness. Maybe that photo is more clear to you.
There is also another person I would like you to identify, if
possible, at all.
Mr. President, E3/3250 I will be referring to; that is ERN
P00416551. And with your leave, we can also put this photo on the
screen.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, please.
JUDGE FENZ:
Just one general remark because I think it happened a bit early
the last time. The red circle should only come when after an open
question has been asked. It came a bit early the last time.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Yes. No problem.
Q. Mr. Witness, I will assist you a little bit here. This is a
group of high-ranking CPK leaders; it's at Pochentong Airport.
And let me go from right to left. The person on the right with a
krama on, that's Pol Pot. Right next to him is Nuon Chea. Right
next to him is So Phim. Then we see Ieng Sary. Then we see Vorn
Vet. Then we see Koy Thuon. And then we come to a little man, a
relatively little man on the left.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on.
And Judge Lavergne, you may have the floor now.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Counsel Koppe, I don't understand very well the good in
indicating all of the identities of the people who are in this
photo. Are you testifying yourself or would you like for the
witness to testify?
It seems to me that if you want the witness to testify it would
be good to let him take the floor and to ask him who <these
people are>. We are <not> here to listen to you.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I will only be seeking his evidence in relation to the person on
the left. The rest, that is very obvious to us. So, I don't need
him to identify those people. I'm just assisting him a bit.
Q. So Mr. Witness, my interest is on -- is about the little,
relatively little person on the left with a krama on. Is that
someone that you recognize?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I seem not to recognize him seeing this photo. Perhaps I may
recognize him if I can see him directly, physically.
Q. Well, that won't be possible anymore, I'm afraid.
Do you know someone named Phuong P-H-U-O-N-G, chief of the rubber
plantations, member of the Central Committee and also the number
two of the East Zone, Phuong?
A. I do not know Phuong. I have never seen this person, although
I encounter him now. I do not know him because no one told me at
the time about him.
Q. That's no problem. Thank you, Mr. Witness.
Mr. President, with your leave, I would like to show my last
photo, third and last photo to the witness and ask him whether he
is in a position to recognize this person.
I will show on the screen and a copy of a still from a
documentary, a documentary that I have shown earlier to other
East Zone witnesses. It's film E3/3015R and it's the person that
one can see at 1.53.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you may proceed.
JUDGE FENZ:
Do we get it on the screen?
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, it's going to be on the screen.
(Short pause)
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Mr. Witness, do you know him?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. It appears that I do not know him. I seem not to know this
person. That is the photo back then and the person looked very
different from the time. <> I may recognize his face but I do not
know where he <lived> and what he did back then. I never stayed
with him and I may have met him for a brief moment so I could not
recognize who he was.
Q. Could it be that this person is someone that you testified
about extensively in your DC-Cam statement, a person named Heng
Samrin?
A. <On the other hand,> he looks very young in this photo. He is
now old compared to the time. He was<rather> young in the past
when I met him. He looked quite older than this person in the
picture. Since I happened to see him once in a while, I could not
identify who he is in this photo.
I saw him a long time ago. I cannot recognize and I could not
have a clear memory of him.
If you do not tell me the name, I cannot say who he is.
JUDGE FENZ:
May I just ask a question for clarification?
Are you saying this is not him or are you saying "I don't know if
this is him", him being Heng Samrin?
MR. SIN OENG:
In this photo, I do not know who he is, and if I am told that
that is he, the name the counsel mentioned a while ago, I can say
that, yes, he is <Heng Samrin>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The question is different, Mr. Witness. Regarding the photo, you
see it now. Is that individual Heng Samrin? You stated already
that you did not know who he is in the photo and then the
question was put to you one more time whether or not he is Heng
Samrin. And now is he Heng Samrin or not?
You cannot <>give an unclear answer like this. You can say
whether if this individual is Heng Samrin or not. That is the
short answer from you.
MR. SIN OENG:
My apology. I am not sure about the person in this photo whether
he is Heng Samrin or not, since I cannot recognize the person
clearly <in that photo>. It could be Heng Samrin or it could be
somebody else.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. That's fine, Mr. Witness. But now we're on the subject, in
your DC-Cam statement you talked of several different places
about Heng Samrin. And you said that he was the Division 4
commander, that his division was stationed at Memot and that he
was a member of the East Zone general staff.
Is that correct? Did you say that to DC-Cam?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. Yes, I can recall that they asked me those questions and I
made those responses about him that he was in charge of a
division in Memot. That is all I can say.
Q. I will come back to him, Mr. Witness, a bit later.
Let me now move to So Phim. You mentioned a few family members of
So Phim and I'm interested in what you said to DC-Cam about them.
Let's start with So Phim's wife, Yeay Kirou. What can you tell us
about So Phim's wife, Yeay Kirou?
A. I can recall Yeay Kirou because I was there for over 10 days.
So I can recognize his wife. <She often came to take a rest.>
Q. Mr. Witness, in your DC-Cam interview, English, ERN 01353324;
Khmer, 01340545; you said that, Yeay Kirou and So Phim had
different offices. Yeay Kirou was at an agricultural worksite and
Ta So Phim was at the zone office. There was a separate defence
office and he was at the defence office.
Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And is it also correct that she was the chairperson of the
agricultural worksite in the East Zone?
A. I saw Yeay Kirou at the agricultural office. She was always
there so I could make my conclusion that she was in charge of the
agricultural worksite, and it seems that everybody respected her
<in that period>. And it was her who ordered people to do this
thing or that thing, so she <must have been> the chief.
Q. Is it correct that Yeay Kirou was related to Ta Chea Sim?
A. Whether she was related to Ta Chea Sim or not, I am not sure.
What I knew is that they were from the same village but I am not
sure whether they were related or not. I heard people <said> that
Chea Sim and her came from the same village. When the journalists
asked me about that, I said the same thing that they came from
the same location.
Q. Following up on Ta Chea Sim, did you see Chea Sim often in the
period between '75 and 25 May 1978?
A. Yes. I met him three times. I went to Stoung as a guard of Ta
So Phim and at Stoung, there was a newly-built house. It was
quite small. That is all.
Q. You said three times. That's something you also said in your
DC-Cam statement. You also said that you went very often to Ta
Chea Sim's house.
In your DC-Cam statement you also refer to So Phim's visits to Ta
Chea Sim. You said that -- that is on ERN 01353319 in English and
Khmer 01340542 -- that So Phim went often to visit Ta Chea Sim
very often. Is that correct?
A. Yes, that is the statement that I made.
Q. Can you tell us how often So Phim and Chea Sim met and if --
and where did they meet?
A. They met at the house that I just described at Stoung.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on. I could not hear the interpretation.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please respond to the last question if you still recall
it.
MR. SIN OENG:
A. He went to that house and sometime Ta <Chea Sim> also came to
the guard office, but I did not know much about the nature of his
visit and sometimes they discussed among themselves in that
office, although I did not know the content of their discussions
because I was outside.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. You answered my follow-up question, Mr. Witness, but one last
question about Chea Sim.
You told the DC-Cam investigators that he was the district
governor of Ponhea Kraek; is that correct?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. Yes, that is correct. He was <the governor of> Ponhea Kraek
<district>.
Q. Did you ever have any affairs to deal with Chea Sim or was it
only that you saw Chea Sim when you were with your boss, So Phim?
A. I was not that close to Chea Sim and the reason I saw him,
because I was with Ta So Phim because the two met. And sometimes
So Phim visited him and I would escort Ta So Phim to go there.
That's how I met him.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness. Now, let me move to the children of So
Phim.
Do you remember the names of So Phim's children?
A. I can recall the names. I recall their names but I think they
are all dead. One was Nat. The second was Si. The third was
Kadev. Fourth was Khuch (phonetic) and at the time <Khuch
(phonetic)> was about my age. And I recalled that he had two sons
and two daughters.
Q. Very briefly about the children, is it correct that Nat was
the chairperson of the P-2 hospital?
A. Yes, at the time he was the chairman of the P-2 hospital at Ou
Reang Ov.
Q. You mentioned Si. Do you know to whom Si was married?
A. I did not see the person but their siblings <such as Khuch
(phonetic)> spoke about Si to me. Because Si got married before I
arrived, that is, for up to 10 days before I arrived and Si left.
Si, after the marriage, <> went to live with her husband so I
did not see her, but her siblings spoke of her.
Q. Was she married to the son of the Northwest Zone chief, Ros
Nhim?
A. Si got married <to> the son of <> the Northwest Zone
Committee. Other people in the office said that Ros Nhim was the
chief of the Northwest Zone who came to visit his in-law. <This
was what the people in the office told me>.
Q. You didn't remember during the interview the name of Ros
Nhim's son, but does the name Cheal ring a bell?
A. The name Cheal does not sound familiar to me.
Q. You said in the DC-Cam interview that Si and Ros Nhim's son,
who is called Cheal, or Chhnang, that they got married in 1976.
Is that something that you recall saying?
A. They got married that year because people who came to attend
the meetings, <came from my village,> including some of my
relatives, my cousin. And that's all I can recall.
And she is still living although her husband passed away. That is
Prak Choeuk (phonetic) who was the chief of the guard unit and
his wife is still living today.
Q. Are you saying that Si is still living or are you may be
confused with another daughter of So Phim, who is indeed still
living and is named Kadev or Kadeu (phonetic), the person that
you just mentioned?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on.
And International Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
I just suggest that counsel ask questions rather than testifying.
He is testifying to facts about who is alive or not.
JUDGE FENZ:
Or at least give us the reference for the names you are putting
to her.
MR. KOPPE:
I am never testifying. I am just merely repeating what I read in
the case file.
I have a reference for Kadev being still alive in the DC-Cam
statement of 2-TCW-1070.
I only have the English ERN so far and, Mr. President, that is
01354173 (sic).
Question: "What is the child's name?"
"The name is Kadev."
"Is Kadev still alive?"
"Yes, still alive."
"Where?"
"Over in Phnum Srok."
In addition, we requested a while ago in one of our requests to
have admitted into evidence an interview she gave to a Khmer
newspaper called "Rasmei Kampuchea", I say it by heart. That
request was refused. So, very recently, she gave an interview,
which is, of course, also a sign that she is still alive.
Would you like me to continue?
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. So Mr. Witness, are you maybe mixing up Si with Kadev who is
still alive?
A. I do not know about that. I only heard of the name Kadev, but
Kadev disappeared <up to now>. <> I do not know whether she is
still alive today. But Si <was> a different person. She <was> the
daughter-in-law of Ros Nhim.
But Kadev lived with her parents in Tuol Samraong, but later on,
we separated and I did not know about her fate, whether she is
still living or not. But just be sure that she and Ta Dev
(phonetic) are two separate persons although they lived in Tuol
Samraong but I did not know what happened to them later on.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please pronounce the name properly. Is it Kadev or Kadeu
(phonetic) because when you do not pronounce it correctly, it is
a bit crude.
What is the actual name, per your recollection?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. At the time the people spoke of Ta Dev (phonetic), Ta Dev
(phonetic). Even the mother also called her Ta Dev (phonetic)
because Yeay Kirou, the mother of Ta Dev (phonetic) referred to
her as Ta Dev (phonetic) too. Maybe that is an alias. I do not
know the native name of Ta Dev (phonetic).
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
And International Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honour, my understanding of the witness' answer, which, I
think, has caused a lot of confusion is he is being asked about
the wedding. He said he heard about it from others. He said "she
is still alive" and then he explained who's speaking of the wife
of the head of the defence office, Ta Dev (phonetic), not Si. He
was not talking about Si but Ta Dev (phonetic).
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. That's perfectly possible. Maybe it's my mistake, Mr. Witness.
But I am mostly interested in Si, who was married to Cheal. You
said in your DC-Cam statement that she got married in '76, and
you said that it was raining. Is that something that you
observed? Were you there or is it something that was told to you
that it was raining?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. As I stated from the outset about the marriage.< The marriage
happened before my arrival>, I only came 10 days after the
marriage. However, at the time <> the sheds that they built for
the marriage was not yet removed, but I did not attend the
wedding. As for her, I only heard of her name and I did not see
her in person.
Q. For reasons I think beyond your knowledge, it's quite
important for us to establish the moment that Si and Cheal or
Chhnang got married.
Mr. President, I will be referring to a document E3/10665, which
is a transcript of an interview that Robert Lemkin had with the
witness called Toat Toeun; English, ERN 01151760; and Khmer, ERN
01168447.
Toat, who was an adopted son of Ros Nhim, said that, "The
marriage was in August 1975."
Could that be, Mr. Witness?
A. As for the date of the marriage, I <did not know>. As I said,
I came only after the marriage. <I only knew Ros Nhim was their
in-law.> So, I can only tell you what I know and I can't tell you
what I do not know. And when I arrived, I heard people talking
about the in-law relationship.
Q. Another witness who is coming to testify, 2-TCW-1070, told in
an interview that -- and I will be referring to the ERN, Mr.
President -- the marriage between Si and Cheal took place at
Rokar Khnaor. Is that something that you can recall?
That is E3/10717, English ERN 01354165 (sic).
Mr. Witness, the wedding was --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel, please repeat the document number and the ERN again.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Yes, that's E3/10717 and I only have English ERN so far. That's
the document that became available in English yesterday. It's
English ERN 01354165 (sic).
Q. The wedding was held at Rokar Khnaor; is that something you
recall?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I did not know the location of the wedding since I did not
arrive on time. However, there was a big shed for wedding at
<Tuol Samraong.> I arrived but I did not know <> how many couples
there were. <That time, if there was a wedding, there had to be
several couples. 10 days after my arrival,> actually I stayed at
that shed<>.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you locate the area that you saw that wedding shed?
MR. SIN OENG:
Your Honour, I am not sure where Tuol Samraong was located
geographically, whether it belongs to Ponhea Kraek <district> or
Kamchay Meas (phonetic) <district>, because, probably, it was in
the junction of these two districts. In fact, it was a former
forest and I did not know which village or commune it <was>
located in.
MR. PRESIDENT:
<It appears confusing> because one person may refer that <>
wedding took place in this village while others spoke about the
wedding that took place in the commune. That's why you should be
more specific.
JUDGE FENZ:
It appears he said he doesn't know.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Yes, that's -- I will move on.
Q. Mr. Witness, you weren't at the wedding. You don't know
exactly where it was. However, is it correct that Si's
father-in-law, Ros Nhim, came often to the East Zone to visit So
Phim?
A. I saw him come three times and he came by himself to the guard
office. That's how I saw him in person.
Q. Can you describe the times that Ros Nhim came to visit the
father-in-law of his son and East Zone chief So Phim? Can you
tell us about where exactly Ros Nhim would meet with So Phim?
A. When he came, I was working outside and I knew that the in-law
came to visit. So he parked his car and he entered the house and
nobody went near him. For that reason, I did not know the content
of their discussion because I was working outside. <> That's
because I am not sure about the content that's why I said that I
did not know.
Q. Were Ros Nhim and So Phim by themselves when they spoke to
each other?
A. I did not know what they discussed because I was outside. What
I can say is that he came with his car and I knew that's the car
of So Phim's in-law. He parked his car at a location about 50
metres away. Then he walked into the house of his in-law, and
from then onward, I did not know what they discussed. That's all
I know.
Q. And did Ros Nhim and So Phim always meet in the same house?
A. Yes, they met in the same house.
Q. Can you give us an exact description of that house; where is
it, how did it look like; what did it look like?
A. The house was a traditional Khmer-type house. It was roof with
tiles and the floor and walls were made from wood. And all the
houses, as the guard office, were wooden houses. There was no
concrete house.
Q. And was this house in Suong or was this somewhere else?
A. It was in Suong and located to the north of the national road,
300 or 200 metres away from the national road. I may say it was
300 metres away from the national road. It was not right in the
centre <to Suong market>. In fact, the house was located on the
northwest side of the village. <Back then, there were a few
houses. But now, there are several houses situated there.>
Q. And I think I asked you before but just to be certain, Ros
Nhim was always by himself? He was never accompanied by any of
his commanders when he visited So Phim or any of his -- or any of
Northwest Zone cadres?
A. When I saw him, he was by himself. Sometimes he would come
with just a small boy. No guards were with him whenever he came.
Perhaps that young and small boy was his grandchild. He  went to
the location for a visit. I can only tell you what I saw at the
time.
Q. And for how long would Ros Nhim stay in Suong? Was it just for
the day or was it for more than one day? Is that something that
you remember?
A. He did not spend time there for many hours. He was there for
<over> one hour or two hours the most because <he concerned it
would be dark and the <> roads <were long and difficult for his
return>. He <arrived in the afternoon and he> would <spent> one
hour or two hours the most.
Q. The witness who will be testifying in person, I believe that
you know quite well, Mr. Witness, but I will refer to him as
2-TCW-1070, confirmed indeed that Ta Nhim, "often came to visit".
But this particular witness also said that So Phim in his turn
went quite often to visit Ros Nhim in the Northwest Zone in
Battambang. Is that something that you know?
JUDGE FENZ:
The reference, please.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Yes, E3/10716, 01353350 -- or let me see. I am reading from the
wrong document. Sorry. It's E3/10717, English, ERN 01354165.
Q. Rather a lot of times he says that So Phim went to visit Ros
Nhim in Battambang.
Mr. Witness, is that something that you knew that So Phim in his
turn often went to Battambang to meet with Ros Nhim?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I never went with him to the northwest since the time I
started to be a guard for him. <He may have gone before my
arrival, but> I never went with him to the northwest.
Q. Let me read to you what this other witness told DC-Cam,
E3/10717, English, ERN 01354168:
The question is: "Did Ta Ros Nhim come to visit Ta So Phim more
often than the latter went to visit in Battambang? Which was more
often than the other?
And then he says: "Our side went more often."
And then a bit further, "Both Yeay Kirou and Ta So Phim went."
Yes, he confirms.
Do you know or do you remember whether it was correct that So
Phim went to the Northwest Zone more often than Ros Nhim came
privately to the East Zone?
A. When I became his guard, I never accompanied him to the
northwest <or I was not asked to do so>. It was perhaps when that
grandfather or Ta came and I was not at the office <because> I
was assigned to farm in the field <at Roka Khmuoch>. Perhaps he
came to make a visit.
As I said, we had a rotation duty. One guard would accompany our
supervisor for one week and then the other would come to replace
us. Perhaps it was not within my shift.
And I, myself, never accompanied him to the northwest.
Q. That other witness --
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Just a brief comment on that point: We don't -- we can be more
precise than just that he went there often because the witness
2-TCW-1070 on  quantified it as "one or two times
per year".
And just while I am on my feet, I understood counsel to make a
reference to test -- the notes of Lemkin from an interview that
Lemkin says or the note say counsel says were Toat Toeun about
the date of the wedding, and I thought I heard counsel say it was
1975. But, actually, the witness that Lemkin interviews -- again
it's on the document counsel cited, E3/106665 at .
He was asked, "Was he married in 1975?" The witness answered
"'75".
"What month?" "May, the month of -- no, it was January 1976."
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, but I read what Toat said and he talks about the marriage in
1975, August 1975.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Let's get the citation for that, please.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Well, I just mentioned that. That's English, ERN 01151760; and
Khmer is 01168447; and it is document E3/10665.
Q. One other question, Mr. Witness, in relation to the visits
that So Phim and Ros Nhim brought each other: The witness who
will be testifying said to DC-Cam that they -- that So Phim and
Ros Nhim, whenever they would meet each other made a joke when
they were introducing themselves. Is that something that you
recall?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. When in the meeting between So Phim and Ros Nhim, I was not
<near them, I just saw them>, I did not hear their conversation.
In fact, I was guarding at the outer compound. I was not close to
them.
Q. This upcoming witness says the following in E3/10717 at
English, ERN 01354177: "So Phim would call Ros Nhim "A Siem", "A"
as in contemptible and "Siem" as the equivalent for Thailand. And
Ros Nhim in his turn would call So Phim jokingly, "A Yuon",
Vietnamese.
Is that something that you ever witnessed yourself?
A. No. I never heard such words.
Q. It's just a detail; It's not terribly important. But what is
important, Mr. Witness, is the following and that's why I have
been talking about these meetings for quite a while now. That
same person who said that the marriage took place in August '75,
Toeun Toat, Ros Nhim's adopted son, said in E3/10665 on page -
English, ERN 01151766; and Khmer, 01168457 -- that when they were
meeting each other and they were discussing they were, and I
quote, "preparing armed forces".
And from the rest of his testimony it is clear -- and I'll be
happy to read other quotes -- but that they were in fact planning
a rebellion against Pol Pot.
Is that something that you ever heard later that that was the
real content of the conversations between So Phim and Ros Nhim?
A. I will not tell the Court of what I have never heard in
relation to their discussion. <I learned about the rebellious
movement in times we were chased and arrested for execution.> In
fact, leaflets were dropped from the airplane <and the message
was that So Phim betrayed. He conspired with the Vietnamese>. I
was so scared at the time. I was afraid that I would be arrested.
Regarding the internal <discussion>, I did not know.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
It is now break time and we will resume our hearing at 3 p.m.
Court officer, please assist the witness in the waiting room
during the break time and please invite him back together with
the duty counsel at 3 p.m.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1445H to 1503H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
Again, the floor is given to the defence counsel for Nuon Chea to
put questions to the witness.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Just one brief follow-up question, Mr. Witness, in respect of
Si. Maybe an English translation wasn't completely understood by
me, but is it correct that you were -- that you said that Prak
Choeuk's (phonetic) wife is still alive and that she was married
at the same time as Si, the daughter of So Phim?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I do not know when she got married because I didn't see it.
Q. That's fine, Mr. Witness.
Talking about Prak Choeuk who was the chairperson of your defence
unit, was he So Phim's nephew?
A. Prak Choeuk was a distant nephew, not a direct line nephew.
Q. Do you know when Prak Choeuk was arrested and where he was
arrested?
A. I do not recall when he was arrested, however, he was arrested
in Suong and, in fact, staff of our office was arrested there and
Prak Choeuk went there in order to resolve the matter. However,
it turned out that he, himself, was arrested, but I cannot recall
the date of his arrest. It happened a long time ago.
Q. If the Chamber's interested, document E3/2014 says that Prak
Choeuk was arrested on 26 May 1978; English, ERN 01305698.
Mr. Witness, one last question about Prak Choeuk. Is it correct
that So Phim trusted Prak Choeuk? Is that something that you said
to DC-Cam?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. A question about the name "Prak". Was So Phim at one point in
time also called Prak but then not Prak Choeun but then Prak
Cham, C-H-A-M?
A. I heard other people say that initially So Phim's name was
Prak Cham.
Q. Did So Phim have a sister who was called Prak Chhun,
C-H-H-U-N?
A. I am not sure about that name because she was old and only
elder people would know about their native names. In the village,
there were his elder siblings and one younger sibling and I only
know these three people. Prak Chhun was chief of a cooperative in
the district and another person was Prak Tith. I only know these
two.
Q. The reason I'm asking about Prak Chhun is because you talked
about her to the interviewers at DC-Cam on English, ERN 01353378
and 79; and Khmer, 01340578 and 9. You said:
"So Phim's elder sister was very strict. The people were very
much mistreated by her." And you said that: "Even the district
governor was afraid of that old woman."
Is that something you said about So Phim's sister?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And that she was in charge of a cooperative called Kokir Saom
cooperative, K-O-K-I-R S-A-O-M?
A. Yes, that is correct. The person was the chief of the Kokir
Saom Cooperative.
Q. Before I go to another brother of So Phim, the younger
brother, Prak Tith, one question about, again, another brother of
So Phim who was the district chief of Chhloung, Dul, D-U-L. Is
that someone you knew?
A. I know Dul. Dul <was>, in fact, Prak Tith. His previous name
was Dul or Ta Dul.
Q. Then that mystery is solved. Thank you very much for the
clarification.
And let me ask you some questions about Dul or Prak Tith. Is it
correct -- no, let me rephrase.
Did you say that Prak Tith was the chief of the district police
of Krouch Chhmar?
A. He was not chief <>of police, but he went to become chief of
Krouch Chhmar district and he was chief of that district.
Q. I might have confused that. Indeed, your DC-Cam statement --
let me refer to the particular page -- document E3/10716;
English, ERN 01353315; in Khmer, 01340539, where you speak about
So Phim's younger brother, Prak Tith alias Dul.
Indeed, you're saying that he was in charge of the Krouch Chhmar
district, but was he, after 1979, chairperson of the Svay Teab
district police?
A. Yes, he was chief of Svay Teab district police.
Q. So is it correct then that he managed to escape to Vietnam at
one point in time in May '78?
A. I did not know about what happened in 1978 because, at that
time, <we got separated, and> I was sent to S'ang Kaoh Thum
(phonetic), so everybody was separated.
Q. Do you know from when until when Prak Tith or Dul was the
Krouch Chhmar district chief? When did he become that and when
did he stop being the chief of Krouch Chhmar district?
A. I know that he stopped it when the East Zone people were
arrested.
Q. So, to be precise, was he district chief all the way up until
May '78?
A. I cannot recall that detail because people fled and separated
when they started the arrests and I did not know <whereabouts he
was.>
Q. I understand. As you might know, Krouch Chhmar was liberated
already, I believe, in 1970. Was Dul or Prak Tith Krouch Chhmar
district chief from the very beginning, from 1970, or did he
become district chief later?
A. I did not know when he started doing that work because I
arrived there in 1976 and I did not know as from when he began
that work.
Q. I understand, but when you arrived in '76, was he already
Krouch Chhmar district chief?
A. Yes, <he already did>.
Q. Do you know anything about events that took place in 1974,
September-October 1974, and also in 1975, events about a
rebellion of Cham forces and the subsequent crushing of the Cham
rebellion in places like Trea village? Do you know anything about
the crushing of the Cham rebellion in Krouch Chhmar?
A. No, I was not aware of that because I was not there in 1974.
Q. Let me read something to you from a book of an Australian
scholar and then I will ask you whether there's something that
you heard as well.
Mr. President, that is, Ben Kiernan's book, E3/1593; English, ERN
01150139; French, 00639033; and Khmer, 00637771.
A high-ranking post-'79 communist cadre, Hem Samin, H-E-M
S-A-M-I-N, is being interviewed by Kiernan and this what this
Australian scholar writes, and let me quote:
"Hem Samin, a Hanoi-trained communist, blames the Zone CPK
Secretary So Phim for the first repression of local Chams. It was
he who signed the orders for Phuong, P-H-U-O-N-G, to kill the
Chams in Trea in 1974. He was nasty." End of quote.
Phuong, we just discussed, the little person on that photo I
showed you. Do you know anything about this, maybe something that
you heard after 1979, that So Phim signed the orders for Phuong
to crush the East Zone Cham rebellion?
A. I did not hear or know about that because nobody told me
anything about that.
Q. That's no problem. Thank you, Mr. Witness.
One or two additional questions in relation to So Phim's brother,
younger brother, Dul or Prak Tith, when you mention him in your
DC-Cam statement, you mention him in connection with a person
name Mao Phok -- the English, ERN 01353315; Khmer, 01340539 --
Mao Phok, who was Mao Pok?
A. As for Mao Phok, I am not familiar but there is one person Mao
Pou (phonetic) who was at the staff office. I do not know about
this Mao Phok.
Q. It's absolutely my mispronunciation, I apologize, Mr. Witness.
Maybe I can ask my colleague from the Khieu Samphan team,
national colleague, to read this, to read that name just to make
sure that we pronounce it correctly.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you. And the name is Mao Phok. Thank you.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. You refer to him in your DC-Cam statement and this is what you
said when you talk about Dul or -- you said: "He was also
arrested but he fled into the forest. He fled into the forest
with Mao Phok."
Can you expand a little bit on that?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I did not know when he fled because we were separated from one
another and we did not know which direction everyone went, so
nobody knew the details of that matter <because I did not see>.
<We minded only our own survival.>
Q. Do you know whether Mao Phok was somehow in charge of
Battalion 09?
A. Yes, I knew that he was at that 09 <>. He was there <>.
Q. Do you know whether there were battles or armed clashes
between the forces from the Centre and Battalion 09?
A. I only heard about it after I fled. I heard people saying that
there were <lengthy> clashes between the 09 <> and the Centre
forces, but as I said at the time I also fled.
Q. Were you, yourself, involved in the armed clashes between the
East Zone forces and the Centre forces?
A. At the time, I was not involved, but I was arrested, then I
managed to flee <because I was also armed>.<>
Q. I will come back to that a bit later, Mr. Witness.
Let me finish my questions in relation to East Zone people,
people who were in charge of the East Zone.
We spoke briefly already about Heng Samrin who was a high-ranking
member of the East Zone military. Did you ever see any meetings
between So Phim and Heng Samrin?
A. I cannot recall the specific date but, yes, there was a
meeting in <Prey Veng provincial town>. That's all I can say, but
I did not know the content of that discussion.
Q. Let me ask a general question. You, as a guard of So Phim, saw
many meetings between So Phim and other people. Were you ever at
any point in time present during the meetings that So Phim had
with any ranking East Zone cadre or any ranking leader from the
Centre? Were you ever present in the room? Were you ever able to
listen to the conversations that So Phim had?
A. When he attended any meeting, I, myself, was never present in
the meeting because I would stand outside to guard.
Q. And never in time did you accidentally hear what was being
said in the room? You were always outside, never hearing ever
what was discussed inside?
A. I never did because I was not inside and I always stayed
outside, so I could not hear anything.
Q. Heng Samrin had brothers at the time and I believe, Mr.
Witness, you often visited one of his brothers. Is that correct,
did you often visit the house of the Zone courier chairperson,
Heng Samkai?
A. Yes, I visited his house because his house and my office was
not far from each other. So I went to visit him and to visit <>
staff there and sometimes I went there because <near his house,
some grandfathers played >musical instruments <so I could listen.
I therefore frequently visited that house>.
Q. Do you remember ever having had any conversations with Heng
Samkai?
A. No, I did not, but I chit-chatted with his bodyguards. I don't
think I ever spoke to him in person but only chit-chatted with
the bodyguards of Heng Samkai .
Q. Is it correct that you also delivered letters from So Phim to
Heng Samkai?
A. Yes, but it was <delivered to> the office staff, not <directly
to> the chairperson.
Q. Do you know whether it is -- do you know what position Heng
Samkai had after 1979?
A. After 1979, he became the provincial governor of Svay Rieng.
Q. Do you know whether he was also a member of the Central
Committee of the People's Revolutionary Party of Kampuchea?
<A>. I did not know his function and position at the time. All I
knew is that he was the chief of zone messenger unit.
Q. Heng Samkai gave an interview to an American journalist who
was -- who has testified in another case as an expert, an
interview in 1981 referred to in his book, "Brother Enemy",
E3/2376, English, ERN 00192440 -- and I will provide the other
ERNs shortly, Mr. President -- and in this interview Heng Samkai
said or told Chanda -- and I quote -- that: "It was impossible to
overthrow Pol Pot on our own. We had to seek Vietnamese help."
End of quote
Is that something that you ever heard, something similar that
Heng Samkai said, that there was a plan to overthrow Pol Pot, a
plan in the East Zone, and if that didn't work and Vietnamese
help was needed to effectuate that plan?
A. I have never heard of that.
Q. That's no problem, Mr. Witness. I'm just finishing the various
divisions or the military structure that you saw.
Heng Samrin was Division
Commander. His younger brother, Thal,  
          4   T-H-A-L, was Commander of Division 2. Is that correct?
A. I do not know clearly. All I know is that Samdech Heng Samrin
was part of the Division 4. Regarding his younger brother, I do
not know in detail what he did because he was in the front and I
was at the rear.
Q. The upcoming witness identifies him as Thal. You refer to
Division 2 commander as Ta Tat. That's what you say at ERN
01353341, in Khmer 01340556. Does that refresh your memory, Ta
Tat, or maybe you meant Ta Thal?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The name is Khmer is Thal, not Tat<. It is> Thal.
MR. SIN OENG:
I, at the time, did not hear of that name. I will not tell the
Court, testify before the Court what I do not know.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Of course, Mr. Witness. One other question about another East
Zone division, Division 5.
You told the DC-Cam interviewer that chairperson of Division 5
was someone named Heng Kim. The upcoming witness is saying that
Heng Kim (phonetic) was not the family of Heng Samrin. Do you
know whether Heng Kim (phonetic) is also family of Heng Samrin or
is that something that you don't know?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I do not know about the relation of that individual with
others.
Q. That's no problem.
Mr. Witness. Is it correct that there were four divisions in the
East Zone in 1978, Division 2, 3, 4 and 5?
A. There were five divisions in the east, but I do not know all
the divisional <commanders>, their names, I mean.
Q. I understand.
Heng Samrin gave an interview to Ben Kiernan, E3/1568 and on
English, ERN 06 - 00651894; Khmer, 00713971; and French,
00743368; he talks about the various East Zone divisions. He says
zone forces, three divisions of 8,000, 6,000 and 5,000, total
20,000, region up to two regiments, 15,000, District 2 companies
6,000 men.
Is that something that you are in a position to somehow confirm,
that the strength of the East Zone forces was at least 40,000
troops?
A. I have no idea how many soldiers there were in the army. I was
not so interested about the number of soldiers at the time.
<Since I didn't know, I cannot answer.>
Q. I understand.
Are you in a position to say what part of these East Zone forces
or how many East Zone troops were in armed conflict with Centre
forces at any point in time after 25 May 1978?
A. I do not know that very clearly. <I quit at that time.>
Q. One last question about the military structure in respect --
relating to two names. Have you ever heard of someone called Keo
Samnang, K-E-O Samnang, S-A-M-N-A-N-G?
A. I did not hear of that name. What is not true will not be
testified here.
Q. That's correct, Mr. Witness. One last name, Pol Saroeun, who
is presently a two- or three-star, or maybe even a four-star
general in the Cambodian Armed Forces, Pol Saroeun, have you
heard of that name?
A. Again, I will tell the Court what I know, but not what I don't
know. Regarding the name, I did not hear of it and perhaps <in
that regime, names were often changed>.
Q. Let me move onto my next subject, Mr. Witness.
On a few occasions in your DC-Cam statement, you use the word
"coup d'tat". Let me be specific and read the English, ERN
01353339; Khmer, 01340554. You're talking about Prak Choeuk, the
chairperson of the defence unit, and you say:
"Choeuk must have died with him, So Phim. As of dawn, he had not
yet come. On that day, they made something like a coup d'tat.
They had been arresting for several days already, those arrested
being taken unaware."
JUDGE FENZ:
I guess your questions will hinge on the word "coup d'tat". So
if this is the case, perhaps one should tell him the Khmer word
he used just in case there are various ways to interpret.
MR. KOPPE:
My national colleague is sick so he left.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
I believe it's the same word according to my colleague; French.
MR. KOPPE:
Same word?
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Yes.
BY MR. KOPPE:
That's easy.
Q. Let me just for completeness sake refer you to something that
you said about a coup d'tat on page - English, ERN 01353376; in
Khmer, 01340577. You were speaking about drinking habits of So
Phim.
The question is: "What kind of alcohol did So Phim like?"
And then you say: "Whenever that -- one time when things were
difficult, the coup d'tat was being made and there had been a
number of arrests, I saw him [So Phim] drink for a number of
days, almost a month, downing alcohol by himself, drinking
whatever there was to drink, finishing off a whole bottle by
himself as if he was in such difficulty he couldn't think
straight."
That's a very detailed statement in relation to So Phim in the
days of the coup d'tat.
What exactly did you mean when you talked about coup d'tat?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I meant that there was only one party at the time, the
Communist Party of Democratic Kampuchea, and later on<, there
were some changes. The Centre went to> arrest <people in other
zones>  because of that I said there was a coup d'tat and people
were killed arbitrarily.
I, myself, did not know the clear definition of coup d'tat. As
long as there was a conflict within the unified government, it
was considered by me a coup d'tat. <Actually,> I did not know
clearly the definition of <this word>.
Q. I understand, but who was it that attempted a coup d'tat? Was
it the East Zone forces or was it, what many others from the East
Zone say, Pol Pot or Son Sen who staged a coup d'tat?
A. Regarding the coup d'tat, the Centre went to conduct the
arrests against the East. The Centre, <the people from the
Southwest,> went to make the arrests <>the East. That is all I
know.
JUDGE FENZ:
Can I just ask a question?
Witness, in your opinion, who makes the coup d'tat, the Centre
or somebody against the Centre?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I was working there and the Centre went to make the arrest in
the east and the east at the time, people in the east at the
time, were not aware of the plan to arrest. <People disappeared
from various places.>
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Let me move away from people like Heng Samrin or Chea Sim, who
were saying that it was Pol Pot indeed who made -- who staged the
coup d'tat. Let me more go to your level in the hierarchy, Mr.
Witness, and let me refer to what the upcoming witness,
2-TCW-1070, told DC-Cam, English ERN -- that's E3/10717; English,
ERN 01354198. He said, and I quote:
"A Pot, the contemptible Pol Pot, made a coup d'tat and was
killing people."
So he's saying that it was Pol Pot who staged the coup d'tat.
Is this something that you thought was happening as well?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. I think that I do not know very clearly who initiated the coup
d'tat. All I know is that the Centre <and> the Southwest <waged>
the arrests. <I did not know the exact reason of the arrests.
But> those who were arrested later on disappeared.
Q. Well, let me be a bit more specific, Mr. Witness. You gave a
very long statement about the events between Thursday 25 May '78
and Saturday 3 June '78, the day that So Phim committed suicide.
I don't have the time to go in all the details, but you said to
DC-Cam something interesting in relation to this collusion
between the east and the Centre; English, ERN 01353387; and
Khmer, 01340584.
It seems that you witnessed something that So Phim told Heng
Samrin and this is what happened according to you, and let me
read it to you:
"He [So Phim] met Ta Heng Samrin. Having met him, he stayed there
for several nights upon which he asked 'Ta Rin, however many you
have got left, gather them up and go into the forest to struggle.
We are to fight again, fighting Khmer again, the Pol Pot Khmer.'"
End of quote.
Mr. Witness, is that something you told DC-Cam and can you
explain the circumstances during which So Phim said this to Heng
Samrin?
A. It was almost to the end when we were separating from one
another. I heard about it, and we <said goodbye before we> left
to different places.
Q. But is it something that you heard personally being So Phim's
guard? Or was it something that you heard from someone else? Can
you tell us, please?
A. I heard about it. I heard with my own ears at the time, so I'm
testifying about it now.
Q. And do you know what So Phim meant when he said to Ta Rin,
"Gather them up and go into the forest to struggle. We are to
fight again, fighting Khmer again, the Pol Pot Khmer."
What did So Phim, for instance, mean with "them"; "Gather them
up"? Who are "them"?
A. It is my understanding that divisional chiefs and the deputy
chiefs, <some of them> remained at the location. He told me about
that when he went to Phnom Penh.
<He told that> soldiers were gathered up in order to go into the
forest to initiate the resistance movement. This is what I heard
at the time. <He may have talked more but I can remember that
particular phrase.> I went into the location to <collect water
bottles and glasses, so> I heard clearly what he said.
Q. What did you mean, "getting the glasses"?
A. He was sitting at a table and there were drinking glasses and
I had to clear -- clean the table at the time, clean his desk
before he left. <I would collect these glasses and put them in a
car for his trip.>
Q. And it was only So Phim and Heng Samrin in the room or were
there also others?
A. There were only two of them, he and Heng Samrin.
Q. Heng Samrin -- sorry, So Phim, as I said, committed suicide on
3 June '78. How many days before So Phim died did So Phim tell
Heng Samrin to gather forces and fight Pol Pot?
A. It was 10 days before he died or a bit more than that. He left
for Akreiy Ksatr at on one point in time. <There, they began the
arrest, so we fled.>  I remained at one specific location for
three days and seven days later I heard the news that he
committed suicide. I cannot recall the exact date when that
happened.
Q. Was it during the time that you described in your DC-Cam
statement that I just read to you, the time that he, So Phim, was
continuously drunk? Was that the time that he told Heng Samrin to
gather up forces?
A. Yes, he drank wine. They had a gathering and also they drank
wine while talking.
Q. Do you know whether Heng Samrin followed So Phim's order? And,
if yes, do you know how Heng Samrin implemented that order?
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Mr. President, I think just to be fair to the witness before he
answers, the order, the full quote of the witness should be given
to him. On that page, the witness said to DC-Cam, he said he was
going to Phnom Penh to sort things out. He said: "I'm going to
Phnom Penh. If I disappear for just one week, you Rin, go into
the forest, gather however many there are left and go into the
forest to struggle."
So he indicated if he disappeared in one week.
BY MR. KOPPE:
I have no problem with that addition. It was just a shortcut
because of time, Mr. President.
Q. My question is, do you know whether Heng Samrin followed So
Phim's order to gather forces and to fight against Pol Pot?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. He was discussing that with Heng Samrin<, but> how the plan
was implemented by Heng Samrin was not really known by me.
BY MR. KOPPE:
One last question, Mr. President, if you would allow me, please?
Q. Mr. Witness, in discussing a coup d'etat in your DC-Cam
statement, English, ERN 01353348; and Khmer, 01340560; you said:
"I did not know about a coup d'etat. I only knew that when they
arrested him, they said So Phim was in cahoots with the 'Yuon',
that he was in league with the 'Yuon'."
Who said -- or how did you hear that So Phim was in league or in
cahoots with the "Yuon"?
MR. SIN OENG:
A. During the time of the <so-called> cooperation with the
Vietnamese, it was almost to the end, and during the time,
leaflets were also dropped from the aeroplane <from Phnom Penh to
various places in the East Zone>. The leaflets were thrown from
the aeroplane and people and I got also the leaflets. The
leaflets <was written that> that So Phim<, the traitor,> had
cooperated with the "Yuon".
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, I think it's 4 o'clock.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
It is now time for the adjournment.
And the Chamber will resume its hearing on Monday, 5 December
2016 at 9 a.m.
And next week, the Chamber will resume the testimony of Sin Oeng
and the Chamber has also a reserve witness, <2-TCW-1060>.
The Chamber is grateful to you, Mr. Sin Oeng. The hearing of your
testimony as a witness has not come to a conclusion yet. You are
therefore invited to come and testify to the conclusion on <next>
Monday <, starting> at 9 a.m.
And the duty counsel is also invited to be here on Monday next
week as well.
Court officer, please work with the WESU unit to send this
witness back to his residence and please invite him back into the
courtroom on Monday next week.
Security personnel are instructed to bring Nuon Chea and Khieu
Samphan back to the detention facility of the ECCC and have them
returned into the courtroom on Monday,
December 2016 before 9 
           5   a.m.
The Court is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1603H)
