PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0904H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today, the Chamber will continue to hear the testimony of the
witness, Mr. Neang Ouch. And the Greffier, could you report the
attendance of the Parties and individuals to today's proceedings?
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings, all Parties to this case
are present. As for Nuon Chea, he is present in the holding cell
downstairs, as he requests to waive his right to be present in
the courtroom. His waiver has been delivered to the Greffier. The
witness who is to continue his testimony today -- that is, Mr.
Neang Ouch, is present with Mr. Moeurn Sovann, his duty counsel.
There is a reserve witness, 2-TCW-948. Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Ms. Chea Sivhoang. And before I hand the floor to the
Parties to put questions to this witness, the Chamber now decides
on the request by Nuon Chea. The Chamber has received a waiver
from Nuon Chea, dated 10 March 2015. He confirms that, due to his
poor health condition -- that is, headache, back pain, and that
he cannot sit for long, and in order to effectively participate
in the future hearings, he requests to waive his right to
participate in and be present at the 10 March 2015, hearing. He
has been informed by his counsel about the consequences of this
waiver, that in no way it can be construed as a waiver of his
rights to be tried fairly, or to challenge evidence presented or
admitted to this Court at any time during this trial.
Having seen the medical report by the duty doctor for the Accused
Nuon Chea, at the ECCC, dated 10 March 2015, the doctor notes
that the health condition of Nuon Chea is that he has chronic
back pain and that he cannot sit for long, and recommends that
the Chamber shall grant him his request, so that he can follow
the proceedings remotely from a holding cell downstairs. Based on
the above information, and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the ECCC
Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea's request to follow
the proceedings remotely from a holding cell downstairs by an
audio-visual means for today's proceedings, as he waives his
direct presence in the courtroom.
The AV unit is instructed to link the proceedings to the room
downstairs, so that Nuon Chea can participate in and follow
today's proceedings remotely.
I'd like now to hand the floor to the Parties to put the
questions to the witness. Yesterday, the witness did not respond
to the last question posed by the International Co-Prosecutor.
And Mr. Witness, do you recall the question that you were asked
yesterday? Because yesterday, you did not respond, as you
requested to take consultation with your duty counsel. You may
speak now, Mr. Witness.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
Mr. Co-Prosecutor, could you please ask me the last question that
you asked yesterday?
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
Q. Certainly. When you asked to speak to your counsel, I had
asked you about this document we were discussing, document
E3/4093, where it indicates that children that cannot be
separated from their mothers, bring them in and then when
finished, sweep them all clean. And the widows, sweep them all
clean. I'd asked you about that expression, 'sweep them all
clean'. During the DK period, did that mean executions?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. The document that you referred to is E3/4093. Is that correct,
Mr. Co-Prosecutor?
Q. That is correct, Mr. Witness.
And again, just so there's no question, I'll read to you again
the two references to 'sweeping them all clean'. In the first
paragraph, it ends: "But if children cannot be separated from
their mothers, bring them in for interrogation, and after
everything is finished, to sweep them all clean." And the next
paragraph: "As for the widows from Trapeang Thum Khang Cheung,
who are currently staying at the place of comrade Meng, request
to sweep them all clean." 'Sweep them all clean' meant 'to
execute'. Is that correct?
A. I'd like to clarify that, to clarify the following. First of
all, as an assistant to the district committee, and Ta Ran, who
was at the central level, and who supervised Tram Kak district,
before I carried out any task, I had to seek approval from Ta Ran
first. So, all the decisions were the decisions of Ta Ran, and
what I did was merely to write the decisions made by Ta Ran. And
yes, 'to sweep somebody clean', it means to execute that person.
So, once again, I reiterate that all the decisions were made by
Ta Ran, who was chairman of Sector 13, and Tram Kak district was
one of the districts under the supervision of this sector.
Q. Was it the policy during the DK period that any order to
execute had to be approved at the sector level?
A. The sector actually made a further request to the zone. But it
was at the zone level. Once there was a decision from the zone
and the sector, then in my capacity as an assistant at the
district level, I wrote down that decision.
Q. Thank you. So, in the DK period, who set the policies that
defined who the enemies were? Who defined enemies?
A. In the study sessions at the zone level, the zone would make
presentations about this policy.
Q. When you were in Tram Kak, do you remember Chim or Kit or both
of them, attending study sessions in Phnom Penh?
A. I recall the name Chim. As for Kit, and Keut (phonetic), can
you specify which name you refer to? The name Kit does not ring a
bell. But there was Keut (phonetic). And this person, Keut
(phonetic), actually attended study sessions in Phnom Penh.
Q. Thank you. That's who I meant, Keut (phonetic), who you had
told us earlier had been on the District 105 committee. Correct?
The same person, Keut (phonetic)? The one who went to study in
Phnom Penh was Keut (phonetic), who was on the District 105
committee? Is that correct? Do I understand you?
A. Keut (phonetic), who attended study sessions in Phnom Penh,
was a district secretary of District 105.
Q. Now, when you were working in District 105, did anyone ever,
from the Party, from the sector, from the zone, criticize your
work or tell you that you were not following the policies of the
Party?
A. There was a criticism rise during meetings held at the zone
level. And that happened during the self-criticism meetings and I
was criticized during that meeting.
Q. What were you criticized for? Can you explain that a bit? Were
you criticized for not being tough enough on the enemies? For
being too easy on enemies?
A. That is correct. I was criticized for the matter that you just
mentioned.
Q. Well, I don't want to use my words. Use your words. Please
explain. What were you criticized for?
A. I cannot recall the details, but in your question whether I
was criticized or not, in fact I was criticized for not being
tough enough with the enemy. However, I must tell you I cannot
recall the details of that criticism.
Q. Thank you. Related to this document that we just looked at,
you also talked about, you were mistrusted, partly because your
family was in Phnom Penh during the Lon Nol period. Have you ever
heard this expression during the DK period, something like 'Weed
out the enemies, roots and all'?
A. No, I did not hear that expression.
Q. Were people -- sorry--
A. I was also a victim of the regime, as my elder brother
disappeared. My brother, my younger sister and my elder brother
and his family only left Phnom Penh on
April 1975. 
          17
Q. Thank you. That's the point I'm asking you about. Were people
suspected simply because of their family? For example, were
children targeted because their parents were suspected of not
being loyal to the regime?
A. I cannot say for certainty about the understanding of the
Party. However, personally, that was my understanding. It's
because of my relatives who lived in Phnom Penh, and who had to
leave Phnom Penh on that day.
Q. Did you ever hear an expression during the DK period,
something like, 'Better to kill by mistake than release by
mistake'?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Mr. Witness, my time is almost - is up, but I would like just
to ask you to look at one photograph. It was something that the
Chamber put us on notice of using. It's E3/2415. 00504237. And
perhaps it could be shown on the screen, if that's possible. If I
could, Mr. President, if I could have the witness get a copy of
that photograph. Again, it's ERN 00504237. Mr. President, may I
have the witness be given a hard copy?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you can do that. And Mr. Co-Prosecutor, can you tell the
Chamber, the ERN that you just read out, is it for the French,
the English or the Khmer document?
BY MR. KOUMJIAN:
It's - I believe it's only in English. This is the book about the
Swedish journalist's visit. Bergstrom book. There's no text. The
only text says, "Leaders of Cooperative".
Q. So, I'm just asking. Can you help us? Do you recognize anyone
in the photograph?
(Short pause)
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. I recognize some people in the photo. The one that was
standing, just in front of - with the house at the background,
that's myself, and the foreigner was the Swedish journalist.
Q. Thank you. Do you recognize the tall man on the left of the
photograph? Is that the former North Korean ambassador? The DK
ambassador to North Korea?
MR. KOPPE:
Well, that's a very leading question, isn't it? Could you just
ask the question who it is?
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honour, I'm happy to end right now. Your Honours, I turn the
questioning over to the civil parties. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Co-Lawyers for the civil parties, you have the
floor.
QUESTIONING BY MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, everyone. Good morning,
Witness. Ordinarily, Mr. President, we should have an entire
session. I'll try to be brief, but may I request the Chamber to
be flexible in the event of my not being able to complete my
questions in the time allowed. Witness, good morning. I am Marie
Guiraud. I am Counsel for the consolidated group of civil
parties. I have a few questions for you.
Q. I would like to start with your role in Tram Kak cooperative
from the time when you arrived there. Yesterday you told the
Chamber that you played a technical role, and that you were in
the rice fields. You worked on rivers in building canals. I would
like to ask you to explain to us working conditions and living
conditions of workers you encountered, on the rivers and in the
canal construction sites. My first question to you is as follows,
Witness. When you arrived in Tram Kak and you visited those work
sites, what were the living conditions and working conditions of
those workers?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. As for the working conditions for the mobile units, is that
they started working in the morning, from 8.00 to 11.00, and in
the afternoon it was from 1.00 to 5.00. As for the food, they had
a meal in the morning, and a lunch, that is, cooked rice at lunch
time, and then a dinner. And if they fell ill, we actually had a
medic stationed at the worksite to assist in the treatment.
Q. Thank you, Witness. You made mention of mobile units. Tell us
how many mobile units were under your jurisdiction? Can you give
us the number of workers on those sites?
A. As to the number of workers in the mobile units, I cannot
recall that. However, each commune under Tram Kak district had a
male youth mobile unit and a female youth mobile unit. And each
unit was headed by a chief, for both, for the male youth unit and
the female youth mobile unit. As for me, I usually discuss about
the work arrangements with the units of the chief, and also with
the those chiefs at the commune level. We usually held meetings
to discuss the work plan and progress.
Q. Thank you. Were workers able to refuse to go to work? Did they
have the possibility of refusing to go to work?
A. I never heard that anyone refused to go to work. However, if
one fell ill, that person would be allowed to rest at a shelter
or at a building adjacent to the work site.
Q. Thank you, Witness. When you were on those worksites, did you
see any workers who appeared to be malnourished?
A. No, I did not see that. Workers in the mobile units who were
selected from the communes, they received food supplied from
their respective communes. And if they ran out of food, then they
would send people to go and fetch those food supplies from the
communes.
Q. Thank you. Last month we heard a witness who appeared before
the Chamber to testify. His name was Sao Han. He worked at Tram
Kak cooperative. And I would like to read out to you what he said
regarding Tram Kak. That testimony was  at about 9.40.26
seconds in the morning. He was being questioned by the
Prosecutor, who asked this question: "Witness, how were people's
health affected by the food rations? What was the situation, the
health situation, of workers?" And he answered by saying: "We did
not receive enough food and meals, and then our health became
weak. Some - some of their bodies were swollen, and they go to
the hospital, and some disappeared." How would you react to this
testimony, Witness, in which we gather that workers at Tram Kak
cooperative did not have enough to eat?
A. I do not know about the statement that this witness said, or
the period that there was a shortage of food in Tram Kak
district. I could say that, by '77, when I was there, the food
supply or the food ration for people was sufficient.
Q. Thank you. We also heard the testimony of another person who
was working on the worksites in Tram Kak cooperative when you
were there as well. This is Ms. Chou Koemlan. She was heard on
the 26th of January, by the Chamber, and I would like to read to
you what she said regarding access to food in Tram Kak
cooperative. I will read an excerpt from the transcript E1/252.
This is at 11.52 in the morning. The question was put to the
civil party with regard to the food, and with regard to the
collective meals. And this is what Chou Koemlan said to the
Chamber. "With regard to common meals, we would work tooth and
nail in the rice paddies. The fields were green, very green.
Sometimes they became kind of golden. We were entitled to a
spoonful of rice, soup and corn soup, but we could say nothing.
If we were still hungry, we could not say so. If, unfortunately,
we said that we were still hungry, we could be executed for that,
or we could be invited to a study session."
So, I wanted to know, Witness, you who were present at the work
sites and in the rice paddies in Tram Kak cooperative, if you
have seen or heard workers complain about the lack of food. And
if yes, what would happen to them?
A. As for food rations, actually the chief of the commune
arranged the food supply, and also food rations in the halls that
we were eating. Actually, the chiefs perhaps, they did not
coordinate well. That is - so for this reason, there was not
enough food for some people to eat.
Q. Thank you. I'm going to rephrase what was said to me in
French. So, you said that the coordination between the chiefs was
not optimal. That is why there wasn't enough food. So, can you
explain to the Chamber what you mean by 'the coordination among
leaders was not optimal'? Can you tell the Chamber how the food
was distributed in the commune, or how the food was distributed
in the district?
A. Actually, there was no distribution of food supplies in the
commune or in the districts. In the commune and in the district,
they grew their own rice, they raised their own livestock to
support their respective communes and districts. In some
cooperatives, as I said, the head of the cooperative could have
enough food for workers to eat, but some heads of cooperatives
could not cope with the food supply, food rations, so as I
claimed, food ration was not 100 percent provided to workers in
all cooperatives.
Q. And when the food rations were not provided to all
cooperatives, was there a system at the higher level to allow the
cooperatives to feed the workers?
A. Yes. The district - the district committee could get some food
rations from some cooperatives to help and provide to other
cooperatives which did not have enough food for workers.
Q. How did you obtain that information? Did you attend district
meetings during which this issue of distributing food was
discussed?
A. I was an assistant, so I was in the meetings, and there was
such discussion as I said.
Q. Thank you. During these meetings, which you attended as an
assistant, as you said, would people discuss the rice production
quotas?
A. There was a report on rice production. And the report was
about how many tonnes one village could produce. So, there was a
report on rice production.
Q. Was there an objective, an objective that people had to meet?
That is to say, an objective in terms of numbers of tonnes per
hectare and per year?
A. There was propaganda for workers, for people to produce three
tonnes per hectare. Some areas could achieve such a quota, and
some area was not able to achieve such a quota.
Q. Thank you. You said yesterday that you were a rice farmer, a
dry season rice farmer. So, according to you, and given your
expertise as a farmer, do you believe that this goal was
realistic at Tram Kak cooperative?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You may proceed, Victor Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I object again to this line of
questioning. The fact that the witness has said that he has a
background as a rice farmer doesn't necessarily make him an
expert or able to give an opinion as to the possibility that this
is a realistic goal, yes or no. There's many -- there are many
factors to take into consideration whether such a thing --
whether such a quota is in fact reasonable or not. So, asking him
on the basis of him being a rice farmer will not be helpful, and
is basically asking an opinion of expertise which he doesn't
have, despite the fact that he was himself a rice farmer.
MS. GUIRAUD:
May I please answer, Mr. President? Since our colleague Koppe
already made this objection a few weeks ago when Sao Han was
present here, and the Prosecutor had put to him a question, and
our colleague made the same objection. It was overruled, and you
considered that since Sao Han back then had been a farmer, that
that was enough for him to provide an opinion with regard to the
fact that the quota was realistic or not. So, I would simply like
to continue with the - to stand by what you had decided before,
and to allow the witness to answer, based on his experience as a
farmer.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection of the defence team for Mr. Nuon Chea is overruled
in relation to the last question put by International Lead
Co-Lawyer. Mr. Witness, you are instructed to give your response
to the last question put by the International Lead Co-Lawyer. The
Chamber needs to hear your testimony.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. In Tram Kak district, there was a goal in relation to dry
season rice farming, in Boeng Angkor Borei. And there was also a
plan in relation to rice farming in the upper parts of Tram Kak
district. So, the goal was achieved at Veal Boeng Kampong Ampil,
Angkor Borei (phonetic). And as for the Tram Kak district, some
areas could achieve three tonnes per hectare, for example at
Boeng Srae Ronoung (phonetic) at the intersection of Bai Kus
(phonetic) streets. As for Cheang Tong commune, from Angk Ta Saom
to Trapeang Andaek (phonetic), three tonnes were achieved.
However, in some other areas, the plan or goal was not achieved
in relation to the three tonnes per hectare. In Leay Bour we
could achieve a three tonnes goal. The area from the west of
Takeo provincial town to Angk Ta Saom -- that is, the irrigation
68 area, could achieve three tonnes per hectare.
BY MS. GUIRAUD:
Q. What would happen when the communes or cooperatives would not
reach the goal that was set?
A. There was nothing happening.
Q. So, why would people set goals, if nothing would happen when
these goals were not met?
A. In some areas, goal was reached. The -- but in some
cooperatives or in some commune, because the soil was not so
fertile, we could not achieve the goal. We need to use the
fertilizer. But if the goal was not reached or achieved, there
was not any punishment. If we could not achieve 100% objective,
then there was no punishment.
Q. Thank you. And you said earlier on today that at times food
would be lacking, and I wanted to know if you had experienced
this personally when you were at Tram Kak, if you saw people who
stole food in order to feed themselves?
A. I never encountered such incidents.
Q. Thank you. I would like you to react to the interview of a
lady you said you knew and with whom you worked at the district,
Madame Boeun (phonetic). And I would like to read out what she
stated with regard to the theft of food in the interview she gave
to the investigating judge. And this is document .2.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Counsel for Mr. Khieu Samphan.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
I do not have any objection. However, I would like to draw the
Chamber's attention concerning the reference of names concerning
some witnesses, because some witnesses, the request for
protective measure are granted. We need to be mindful of this.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Well, it doesn't seem to me that this person made any specific
protection requests. This person's name was brought up in an open
way by the prosecution. So, if the Chamber, of course, would like
me to silence this person's name, that's not a problem. I'm
simply going to refer to the number .2. And I am going
to refer to question and answer 147 to 149.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Mr. Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Excuse me. Just briefly, Mr. President, now I'm getting confused.
Are we now allowed to use the names of future witnesses or aren't
we? I mean, I'm very happy to do so, but I thought, with my
colleague, that we weren't allowed to do so. Could you please
give us a clear ruling on this?
MS. GUIRAUD:
Well, just to react. Mr. President, may I respond? Apparently
this person had been chosen by the prosecution to testify, but
that the Chamber had not yet given an answer with regard to this
point. So I would like the Chamber to decide on this.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
To clarify this matter in our proceedings, as for the individuals
to appear before this Chamber to testify, the Chamber would like
to request all Parties to use pseudonyms. And in case such
individuals do not have any pseudonyms, I request all Parties to
refer to specific documents and I also remind parties to comply
with the confidentiality.
You may proceed, Judge Lavergne.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
There might be a translation issue here, what the Chamber would
like is when a Party is in the list of witnesses and when this
Party has not yet been heard publicly, then we have to refer to
this person's pseudonym. If a witness has already been proposed
as a new witness, which is the case here, then you should say
that I am referring to the person who was heard in document so
and so and then provide the references of that document.
BY MS. GUIRAUD:
That's very clear. Thank you, Mr. President. Thank you, Your
Honour. So, I will not use any pseudonym, because this person
does not have any and I will simply refer to the document whose
index I already provided -- that is to say, .2, and I am
referring here to question and answers 147 to 149. This person,
Witness, you told us you knew this person and that you would work
with this person at the district level. And this person is
questioned about the crimes committed during the Democratic
Kampuchea period and this person says, and I'm going to have to
quote in English, because this document has not been translated:
"Theft of supplies or small amounts to eat was a minor crime."
Q. So, can you please react to this? Were you aware of the fact
that back then, the fact of stealing food was considered a crime?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. This individual and I were living in different places. She was
living in Cheang Tong and I was leaving in Leay Bour. And if
there was an incident concerning stealing food, the individual
concerned would be reprimanded in the commune or in their areas
for a few times. I was not fully aware concerning the incident of
stealing food. And as I said, if there was a minor case
concerning stealing food, the person was reprimanded. There was
no serious punishment.
Q. And were these issues -- these issues of stealing food brought
up during the district meetings which you attended as an
assistant, as you've been saying to us since yesterday?
A. I heard the discussion of this issue in the meeting of
district committee and commune committees.
Q. And what kind of discussions would you have with regard to
this issue at the district level?
A. There was a meeting between the district committee and
villages to discuss the issue of stealing food, and they also
discussed about the measure to be taken against those offenders.
And they were reprimanded. There was no serious punishment for
those who stole food.
Q. And at the district level, in the meetings you attended, was
this issue of thieving of food tied to the lack of food that you
described to us a little earlier on? To make things clear, do you
think workers stole food because they were hungry?
MR. KOPPE:
I object Mr.--
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Victor Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I object. This is a very speculative
question. If we're talking about a very concrete case, maybe, but
what the potential thieves were thinking is beyond the realm of
the capacity of this witness.
MS. GUIRAUD:
We're not asking the witness what he thinks about what the
thieves thought back then; we're asking him about what he thought
about the situation and if he made a connection between the lack
of food, which he described a bit earlier on, and the fact that
people would steal food. I think that this is a legitimate
question that might shed light.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection by the defence team to the last question posed by
the International Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties is sustained,
because this question relates to a presumption by the witness.
And the Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties, if you wish to ask that
question, please rephrase it or put it in another form. Judge
Lavergne, if you wish to make further comment on this issue, you
have the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
It may well be a problem of interpretation. The questions -- the
question asked, at least the way we understand it in French, is
aimed at finding out from the witness whether during meetings he
attended at the level of the district he heard explanations given
regarding reasons for which certain persons stole food, and these
reasons included the fact that some workers were hungry. Counsel
Guiraud, have I properly understood your question? Is that the
question you wanted to ask the witness?
BY MS. GUIRAUD:
Absolutely, Mr. President. I can rephrase it or repeat it.
Q. Witness, during meetings held at the level of the district,
which you attended at the time or during which, as you told us a
while ago, the question of theft of food came up, among the
reasons given to explain such theft, do you have the fact that
the workers were hungry? Was that one of the reasons given?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. There was an explanation to the fact that this event could
rise in the cooperative or the commune where the produce was not
sufficient. They also provided the reasons for stealing. For
instance, some of them stole food because they were hungry.
Q. Thank you. When people attending these district meetings heard
those explanations, notably that some people stole food because
they were hungry, what were the discussions you held and what
solutions did you propose to resolve such issues?
A. I already stated that for the area that did not have
sufficient food or produce, then the area with the surplus of
food would share the surplus with those, with the areas that did
not have sufficient food. However, this could not go on forever.
Q. So, if I understand what you're saying correctly, to remedy
that situation, decisions were taken at the level of the
district, with a view to sharing food in such a manner that some
quotas or rations were respected, whereas others weren't. That
is, some people received proper rations and others didn't.
A. Yes, that is correct. However, even with the food given by
other communes to the area with insufficient food, it was not -
it was still not sufficient. But at least it would help those
areas.
Q. Thank you. It therefore transpires from your testimony that in
some zones, in any case, in Tram Kak, there were sometimes a
shortage of food. Was such information communicated to foreign
delegations that visited you in Leay Bour commune and over which
you had responsibility?
A. I met with the delegations and I did not speak on this matter
with them -- that is, to the Swedish delegation and to the
Chinese delegation. And neither one of the two delegations asked
me about this issue. Mainly they asked me on other issues, and
one issue that I recall is that whether it's Cambodian culture
that women would go to ask for the men to get married. And I said
no, it's the other way around. And that's what happened in
Cambodia.
And I already spoke about the meeting with the Chinese
delegation, and I think I mentioned it rather in details in my
written record of interview with the OCIJ investigator and also
in my responses to the International Co-Prosecutor yesterday.
Q. Absolutely, Witness, and we thank you for the clarifications
you made yesterday. You told us that you were in charge of
foreign delegations, including the Swedish and Chinese
delegations that visited your sites. I would also like to know
whether you received delegations of high-ranking personalities
who were members of the Democratic Kampuchea regime.
A. As for senior leaders of Democratic Kampuchea, they did not
come to visit Tram Kak district, and I never received them there.
Q. I would like you to react to a testimony we heard earlier in
this hearing on the 26th of January, 2015. A civil party
testified. That civil party was at Tram Kak cooperative and
worked at Leay Bour, that is Ms. Chou Koemlan. That civil party
gave a testimony, which I would like to read out to you so that
you may react to it. It is transcript number , and it is
at 11.59. That civil party recounted a visit by Pol Pot, Nuon
Chea, Khieu Samphan and Ta Mok at Leay Bour. And she said at
11.59:
"I saw them in 1977. I do not remember the exact month. It is
possible that it was in February, March, April or May, but that
was a long time ago. Those leaders were in a car. They stopped at
Koul Chambak (phonetic) region. They looked at us carrying earth.
The commune committees and head of the unit were with them."
Witness, may I know whether this testimony by Chou Koemlan
reminds you of anything?
A. Chou Koemlan stated that this event took place in March or
April, but let me clarify that, as I stated yesterday, I arrived
in Tram Kak district probably in June or July of 1977. So if this
statement was true, it means it happened prior to my arrival in
the district.
Q. Thank you. I would like us to talk about another subject now.
I would like you to explain the role of the militias.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Lead Co-Lawyer for civil parties. It is now convenient
to have a short break. We will take a break and return at 10.30.
Court officer, please assist the witness during the break time
and invite him, including his duty counsel, back into the
courtroom at 10.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1012H to 1031H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is now back in session. You may proceed, Mr. Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. I would like to ask for a clarification
in respect of a document that was shown to the witness by the
International Co-Prosecutor yesterday at 9.50, we received a
notification of a request for correction on document, E3/4093,
that's the document that was extensively shown to the witness and
when I had a look at this request for correction, it says, at
least in the English version that the word "Sang" (phonetic) is
deleted from the English translation, we only see a signature. So
I'm not quite sure whether the witness has been -- obviously the
witness has been shown the Khmer version of the document but I'm
not quite sure how to understand the English translation. Are we
now saying - maybe I should say also the request was made by
certain, Reath Panhean. I don't know who he is and it was done on
Friday 6th March. But the only thing I can say now is that the
English translation of this document now has deleted officially
the name "Sang" (phonetic) and I was just wondering what the
background of this request is.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, International Co-Prosecutor.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Your Honour, obviously I'm not a translator, I am at a
disadvantage, but I understand that Counsel is referring to the
page in English, excuse me, in Khmer ERN 00270787, and on that
page in the box that writing that appears horizontally, in the
middle of the page, the name below it, I understand and perhaps
the Khmer members of the defence teams can verify, is "Sang"
(phonetic) and then the date 7/8.
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, that's my correction but - understanding but in the
correction it now says deleted "Sang" (phonetic) so if you look
at this apparently in the document which is called E3/4093
correction, and it says "signature" but it says literally
"deleted 'Sang'" (phonetic). So it seems that the translators are
now saying that the word "Sang" (phonetic) cannot be recognised
on the original Khmer version. That's how I understand it but if
I'm wrong I stand to be corrected.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, National -- Deputy National Co-Prosecutor.
MS. SONG CHORVOIN:
The Defence was referring to E3/4091 sent by Co-Prosecutor and
this is the document with the handwriting with the signature and
this document date is 7 August and the signature look like a name
of a person.
MR. KOPPE:
No, Mr. President, I have it in front of me and the email
actually says it itself, the notification by the Greffier, it
says E3/4093 that's the document that we've been discussing
extensively. My understanding is that the word "Sang" (phonetic)
from that original Khmer document is now been deleted in the
translation which I don't know seems to imply that whoever
translated this document now is of the opinion that the word
"Sang" (phonetic) is not recognisable.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Judge Fenz.
JUDGE FENZ:
Apparently the whole issue has been further complicated because
there has been a translation problem in translating the ERN
numbers you mentioned. So may I ask you again to give us the ERN
number of the document that has been corrected and please,
Interpreters, pay specific attention, there was a problem in into
French.
MR. KOPPE:
Judge Fenz, the ERN number that I have on the left bottom is
01072346 and on the right page up it says E3/4093/ -- I believe,
correction.
JUDGE FENZ:
And it was filed on?
MR. KOPPE:
It was filed this Friday and notified to the Parties at 9.50 in
the morning yesterday.
JUDGE FENZ:
Thank you. We, the Chamber, obviously recognises that that has to
be clarified. We will do that during the lunch break. Should it
be necessary to use this document in the meanwhile please use the
Khmer version, the Khmer original.
MR. KOUMJIAN:
Can I just clarify because the number that Counsel gave for the
Khmer original is completely different from the number that we
have. I perhaps better leave it for now.
JUDGE FENZ:
Perhaps easiest could you give a copy to one of our legal
officers, he can make a copy, so know what you are talking about.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
I would like to know how much time you need, Lead Co-Lawyer.
MS. GUIRAUD:
I think I can be done by 11.00 o'clock if that's necessary but I
will rely on the Chamber's wisdom with regard to that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed.
BY MS. GUIRAUD:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Before the break, Witness, I put a question to you about the
militia and I would like you to explain to us how the militia
would operate in Tram Kak cooperative.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. In Tram Kak District, there were militia in communes and in
districts. These two types of militia is to protect the security
for the commune and for the districts.
Q. Can you be a bit more specific regarding the different tasks
that were accomplished by the commune militia and the district
militia?
A. I mentioned already that commune and district militias were to
provide security to respective communes and districts. That's
all.
Q. What do you mean by "security"?
A. As for the term "security", for instance if there was any
issue or if there was any incident, the militia was to be
deployed to provide security.
Q. And were the militiamen armed?
A. During that time they were lightly armed. For instance in one
commune there would be ten militiamen and they had only two or
three rifles or weapons. So in the platoon, there was a platoon
as well, and one platoon had 13 members. And in Noreay, near
National Road Number 3, there was a unit and in other areas near
the mountain and in that area there was also unit. As I said,
they were not heavily armed.
Q. Thank you. And how were the militiamen recruited, how old were
they?
A. Upon my arrival I could see that the structure was already
organised. As for the age of militiamen, the age range was
between 18 to 35 -- rather 30.
Q. Thank you. So the commune militia -- were the commune
militiamen in charge of supervising the couples that had just got
married?
A. No.
Q. Thank you. I would like you to react on a testimony we heard a
little earlier on in this Trial on 17 February 2015 and a witness
came, he was a Base Person, and he came to testify. And I would
like to read out an excerpt from the transcript, . And
this person stated at around 10.55 while he was questioned about
the role of the secret agents and he said, "After the wedding the
unit chief sent chlop spies to listen at night. In reality there
were two chlop spies per house to listen to the couple." A little
bit further on he says, "they wanted to know if the couple would
consummate the wedding and if that was not the case, the couple
was summoned and would be reprimanded. If a couple got along well
and consummated the marriage, there was no problem. The couple
could go work as normal." I wanted to know, Witness, when you
were at Tram Kak, if you saw militiamen listen to couples below
their houses after they had got married.
A. No.
Q. Thank you. More generally speaking, how would couples get
married at Tram Kak during the period you were posted there? Can
you tell us how couples would marry at Tram Kak?
A. Actually as for marriage, four couples would marry in one time
and the four couples would get married and after that there was
dinner party and first the male would be asked to make a
resolution and after that it was the time for the female. After
making resolutions, these speeches or wishes were expressed by
the head of the commune and there were wishes from the commune
chief for the newly-wed and after that there was dinner time. And
there was no music performed, there were no achar in attendance.
This marriage would last only -- the marriage ceremony would last
only two hours.
Q. Thank you, Witness. Were the men and women free to choose
their partners?
A. Yes, there were some. In some places the head of the commune
or the head of the cooperative would decide the partner for those
people.
Q. What would happen if the men and women would refuse marrying
the person who was proposed by the commune chief?
A. I never encountered such refusal. After they were matched,
they would get married and for some couples they made their own
decision and as I said the head of the commune and cooperatives
on some occasions would decide which couples to be matched and
after marriage I could see the newlyweds got along well with each
other.
Q. Thank you. Did the district have a role to play in the way the
weddings were organised?
A. Actually there was -- I did not see any involvement of the
district. However the request would be made by the commune head
to the district that the commune head would like to arrange a
marriage for certain couples and request was made by the commune
chief to the district for consideration and after that the
marriage would be held. And most of time I did not see any
attendance from the district.
Q. Thank you. I would like you to react to the answers that were
provided by the person we spoke about since this morning and this
person whose name we cannot disclose and who was interviewed by
the Co-Investigating Judges. This is PV, .2, and this
lady, whom you knew back then and with whom you attended district
meetings, indicated to the Investigating Judge during her
interview and in her answer 111 in particular, I'm going the read
the excerpt in English because there is no French translation,
"The commune level listed the names of the couples to be married
and sent the names to the sector level to decide how many couples
were to be married each time."
Witness, does this description correspond to what you experienced
back then -- that is to say, the fact that the commune would send
the names of the couples to the sector level and then the sector
would decide who would marry whom.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please hold on, Mr. Witness. You may proceed, Mr. Koppe.
MR. KOPPE:
I suppose I object to this question. In itself I understand the
practice of reading only one sentence from an answer. However,
the standing practice now is to read the complete answer so, I
would invite the Lead Co-Lawyer to also read the second part of
the answer 111.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Mr. President, I do not believe that my colleague should order me
to do so. If you ask me to do so I will do so but my colleague
can do that during his examination, I have no problem with it but
I simply wanted to gain time.
MR. KOPPE:
Then I request you to instruct Counsel to read the whole answer.
JUDGE FENZ:
Can I just ask a question, Counsel, are you alleging that only
reading one sentence is misleading and if so, why?
MR. KOPPE:
No, not necessarily. But the practice is, I'm sometimes reading
one sentence and then I get objected to so the answer is much
more - much more detailed than the one sentence that is being
read now. So, because of this practice I'm now objecting and I
think the whole answer should be read to the witness.
MS. GUIRAUD:
Mr. President, may I answer? I don't believe that this is an
established practice. I think that's at the Chamber's discretion
to consider if this appropriate or not. All Parties have access
to the documents as well as the Chamber so of course I will rely
on your wisdom regarding this issue.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The objection of the Defence Counsel for Mr. Nuon Chea is
overruled in relation to the last question put by the
International Lead Co-Lawyer. And I inform the Counsel for Mr.
Nuon Chea that you can quote the whole part of the answer during
the time of your questioning.
Mr. Witness, you are instructed to provide your answer to the
question.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
Please repeat your question, I do not recall it.
BY MS. GUIRAUD:
Q. I will try to sum up my question in French under the
supervision of the Chamber and the Parties. Witness, do you agree
with the witness whose testimony I have just cited and who said
that the list of names of couples to be married were sent to the
commune at the level of the sector, who decided how many couples
were to be married on each occasion, was that the practice to the
best of your recollection?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. People who were supposed to get married were sent to the upper
level for approval and sometimes the approval could be made at
the commune or at the district level so the situation varied.
It's a case by case basis.
Q. Thank you. Did it sometimes happen that the higher level would
refuse giving the authorisation for such marriages to proceed and
if yes, what happened in that case?
A. I would like to clarify this issue again. Some couples,
involved with - or some men or some women who were supposed to
get married were forces from the sector level and if that is case
then there has to be an authorisation from the district up to the
sector level. However for those to be grooms not at the sector
level then the authorisation could be only be made only up to the
district level -- that is, from the commune up to the district.
And to my knowledge, I never saw any disagreement or disapproval
by the sector level in this case.
Q. Thank you. I have one last question, Mr. President, if you
would allow me. It's a very short question and it is a follow up
to the last question in the same transcript of that witness's
testimony particularly on this subject, answer 117. I will read
three lines of the witness's entire answer in English in order
that there may not be any difficulty. "Nothing like that happened
at my site, they all had known one another because my site was
not large, we arranged their marriage and the couples agreed but
if the upper level did not approve, they could not marry."
Can you express an opinion on this? And this would be my last
question, particularly to the fact that if the higher level did
not approve of the marriage, those persons could not be married.
A. I never came across such an issue and if it happened probably
it is out of my recollection. We made a request to the upper
level and most of the time, they approved and I never saw a case
where they disapproved such a request.
Q. Thank you, Witness, for answering my questions. Thank you, Mr.
President, for granting me additional time for examining the
witness. I have no further questions for the witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench do you questions to be put to this witness if
so, you can proceed. Judge Fenz, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE FENZ:
Q. I have couple of general follow up questions. First, Witness,
can you remind us, did you ever in life meet Pol Pot, Nuon Chea
or Khieu Samphan and if I say, meet, I also mean, see.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. During the period from 1975 to 6th January 1979, I met Om Nuon
Chea during a yearly study session and I met him once. As for
Khieu Samphan or Pol Pot, I never met them during the three-year
period.
Q. And this study session was when? The study session when you
met Nuon Chea.
A. I cannot recall the date. However it happened around September
or October.
Q. Thank you. My next question goes to your relation to Ta Mok.
Now, I understand you won't be able to give me a number of times
you've had contact with him but give me an idea. In the time
between '75 and end of '78, how often did you have contact of any
kind, private or professional, direct or per phone or message
with Ta Mok? Is this once a year, once a month, once a week,
something in between?
A. I met Ta Mok in 1975, after Kampuchea was liberated. I met him
when Ta Mok set a plan to build a historical dam at Angkor Borei
Lake, stretching from Kampong Pou along Canal 99 and it stretched
for four kilometres, then it turned to the north. I met him at
the time that we were at the work site and he came to inspect the
dam work site and while I led the workers to build that dam. That
was the time that I was an assistant to Kaoh Andaet district. And
from then on I met him on various other occasions, sometimes I
saw him from a distance or sometimes I met him briefly. And
during the two months that the dam was built, I met him rather
frequently there when he went to inspect the work site. And after
that period, I did not meet him or see him frequently.
I again saw him when I was called by him from Kaoh Andaet to
Takeo and that when he assigned me to work as an assistant to
Tram Kak District. And after that he left Takeo and went to the
Northwest Zone  -- that is, to Battambang province and that is
the fact.
Q. So can you give us an idea how often you met him in 1976, if
at all?
A. I did not meet him that often in 1976.
Q. Can you be a bit more precise? That often is very vague,
again, once a week, once a month, once every two months or what
else?
A. In 1976, Ta Mok was still at the Southwest Zone and I met him
probably once a month or once every two months when he came to
Takeo.
Q. Were these private or professional meetings?
A. I met him during study sessions or during meetings -- that is,
when communes or chiefs of communes were called for meetings at
the districts and he also called me to attend those meetings or
sometimes he called me to attend study sessions.
Q. What about 1977?
A. I did not meet him that frequently in 1977, because after he
removed me from Kaoh Andeat to be an assistant in Tram Kak
district, I did not meet him that often and subsequently he left
Takeo for Battambang province in the Northwest Zone.
Q. Were there any private meetings, family things, weddings,
funerals?
A. No.
Q. And to finish this, 1978, how often did you meet him then, if
at all?
A. I already stated that after he transferred me to work at Tram
Kak district, he went to Battambang district and I did not meet
him since.
Q. Now, I have a couple questions about the wider Ta Mok family
involvement in politics in the DK period. The Prosecutor started
this line of questioning yesterday but used a document which
hasn't been admitted so I'll ask you open questions. The
questions will go to who of the Ta Mok family had which position?
In order to structure this a bit, how many siblings did Ta Mok
have and what positions did they have?
A. Ta Mok only had daughters and there were five of them. As for
the positions, only the eldest daughter held a position, her name
was Khom. Initially -- that is, after the 1970 coup, Khom, was
the Tram Kak District Chief.
Q. What did her husband do, provided she had one?
A. Meas Muth was Khom's husband. In 1970, after the coup, he was
in charge of the Sector 13 army -- that is, for Takeo sector. The
sector army's main duty was to fight against the Lon Nol forces
at that time. Later on, I cannot recall the year, but it was
circa 1973 or '74, he was promoted to the zone level and further,
later on he was promoted to the centre and he was in charge of
the Navy of Division 164.
Q. I understand you married the youngest daughter, so we know
about you. What about the husbands of the other daughters? I
think there are three left.
A. There are four more. The next daughter after Khom, named Ho,
and her husband was a former soldier who died in the battle field
during 1979.
Q. Next one?
A. For the next daughter, her husband was named Ren and to my
recollection Ren died after 1979 though I cannot recall the exact
year.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, can you tell the name again of that daughter.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. Her name was Krou.
JUDGE FENZ:
Q. And what did he do before he died?
A. He was a soldier, although I did not know which position or
rank he held and he went to live in Anlong Veaeng area after
1979.
Q. I believe that leaves us with one daughter and her husband?
A. The next daughter Heanh and her husband was Boran and the
husband also died after 1979, probably died around 1990s.
Q. What did he do between 1975 and '79?
A. He was in the logistic transportation unit between the border
to the Southwest Zone in particular to Takeo province.
Q. Do you know of any other relatives of Ta Mok, cousins, etc.,
who were in senior positions, positions of authority?
A. As for his cousins or other relatives, I do not know many of
them. Originally I am from Kandal province while he was from
Takeo province and as I did not stay much longer in Takeo
province I did not know much about his distant relatives. I mean
I refer to his cousins or his other relatives.
Q. My last question, did you ever hear the words "Brother Number
One or Two" in connection with Democratic Kampuchea?
A. I heard the word "Brother Number One".
Q. When did you hear it?
A. That was during the three year period -- that is, after the
war ended.
Q. So you never heard it between '75 and beginning of '79?
A. I already stated I heard that word used after the war ended so
I refer to the period of 1975 to 1979.
Q. Sorry my mistake. Who was Brother Number One?
A. Om Pol Pot or Uncle Pol Pot was Brother Number One.
Q. Are you aware of any other brothers with numbers and who they
were?
A. That's all I heard about brother with number.
Q. Thank you.
A. In addition, I also heard Brother Number Two but I did not
know whom it refers to.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you have the floor.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr. Witness, I have a number of
questions for you and it is likely to take more than the five
minutes remaining this morning.
Q. I would like to start by asking you to clarify something. In
response to a question put to you by Judge Fenz, you said that
you met Nuon Chea during a meeting that was held in September or
in October. But in any case, in French, I did not hear the year
in which that meeting was held. Can you tell us where and in what
year that meeting took place?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. The meetings were held in September or October. It was one of
these two months although I am not 100 percent sure. It was held
in the year 1977 in Borei Keila compound located to the north of
Preah Puth pagoda in Phnom Penh.
Q. How often did you have the opportunity to go to Phnom Penh to
meet leaders? How many times did you have the opportunity to go
to Phnom Penh to meet leaders or for any other reasons?
A. I came to Phnom Penh once a year for a yearly study session
and it happened in 1977 and then in 1978 and in addition when my
knee was injured I came for the treatment at the Soviet hospital
and I was hospitalised for three months at the time.
Q. Who could attend those training sessions and who conducted
those training sessions, apart from Nuon Chea?
A. The provincial level would select people to attend the study
sessions and I observed that there were people from the District
levels and some assistants also from the district levels and they
were sent to study -- that study session and for the study
sessions that I attended the only trainer was Nuon Chea.
Q. So when you say that you met with Nuon Chea only once that is
false because you said that you went to Phnom Penh several times
and that on each occasion, the training was conducted by Nuon
Chea or did I not properly understand your testimony?
A. I think you misunderstood my statement. I attended a study
session once in 1977 when I met Nuon Chea and again I attended a
study session in 1978 and that was a second occasion that I met
Nuon Chea and besides that I came to the Soviet hospital for my
treatment.
Q. What was the content of this training? What was being
discussed during this training?
A. It is very difficult to recall the contents of the study
sessions as the period has passed for more than 30 years. There
were documents -- several documents provided for the study
sessions and I cannot recall the details of the contents of those
documents nor the titles of those documents. Usually at the
conclusion of the study session, they would hold a criticism and
self-criticism meeting to evaluate our study session and what we
learned. And then we would hold a joint meeting and after that a
group meeting for the criticism but let me repeat again, I cannot
recall the contents of the documents provided during the study
sessions.
Q. Was the aim of these meetings to define the political line of
the CPK?
A. I already stated that it is very difficult for me to recall
exactly what were taught or discussed during the study sessions
as it has been for almost 40 years now.
Q. So you went to Phnom Penh several times. So I suppose that
meeting Nuon Chea is something that did not leave you
indifferent. So please make some efforts, please tell us what you
heard during these meetings.
A. I will try to recall it but if I force myself not to recall it
I cannot do it. I may need more time to recall the contents of
the study sessions.
Q. Fine. Do you have any memory issues? Do you manage to remember
things that happened recently or maybe longer ago?
A. I have problems with memory as my recollection is not that
good. Usually for example when I worked in my farm I will write
down what I need to do in my notebook. For example, at what time
I have to water the vegetables. So just to summarise, I do have
problem with my memory.
Q. So regarding these meetings with Nuon Chea, you have no idea
of what was discussed during these meetings, not even in very
broad terms you have no idea, absolutely no idea?
A. I can recall some -- that is, on the building of a class,
peasant class and about the class struggle and to get rid of the
capitalist class from within ourselves, for instance. These are
some of the contents of the study sessions that I can recall.
Q. Did Nuon Chea ever speak to you about the enemies, the enemies
of the CPK?
A. I do not have anything to hide, Your Honour, but I simply
cannot recall it. Even for my daily work with my family, I have
difficulty with it and I remember about class struggle and we had
to get rid of this capitalist class because it happened to me
personally so I had to train myself or to refresh myself to
become one of the people in the peasant class.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The time is now convenient for a short break for lunch. We will
take break now and return at 1.30 this afternoon. Court officer,
please assist the witness during the lunch break and invite him
back into the courtroom with his duty council at 1.30.
Security guard, please bring Khieu Samphan to the waiting room
downstairs and have him back to the courtroom prior to 1.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1136H to 1336H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is now back in session. And Judge Lavergne, you have
the floor.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President. Witness, I would like to get back
to the documents that were provided to you yesterday by the
Co-Prosecutor. You remember, yesterday evening, you were given
document E3/4093, and you asked to speak to your lawyer. And this
morning, you were questioned again regarding this document. So,
I'm going to read again the answer as it was noted down this
morning. "I would like to provide the following clarification.
First of all, as a deputy of the committee, I must say that it
was Ta Ran who was in charge of the district. So he was he was
above me. Before I would to complete a task, whatever it was, I
had to ask for Ta Ran's leave. So, all of the decisions were
taken by Ta Ran. And as far as I'm concerned, I would simply
write down the decisions taken by Ta Ran. And I can tell you that
'sweeping everything clean' meant to execute". So Witness, I
would like you to tell us clearly if today you acknowledge being
the person who signed this document E3/4093. Would you like me to
provide this document to you again so that you could have it at
hand and so that you can check that it is really your signature?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. As I already stated and Your Honour, already read out my
script, all the tasks had to be decided by Ta Ran who was chief
of Sector 13 and Tram Kak district was one of the districts under
that sector. So I had to have the authorisation or approval from
him, and based on his decision, then I would write down. On the
issue of the signature in document E3/4093 dated the 7 August, I
acknowledge it is my signature. However, in another document,
that is, document D157.101, with the date of 7 of March and with
my - and with the name San, I must say the handwriting in this
particular document is not my handwriting. And that document also
bears an E3 number -- that is, E3/2785. And once again, I'd like
to clarify that the handwriting in this particular document is
not mine.
Q. Thank you, Witness, for this clarification. So I must
therefore understand that document E3/4093 is a document in which
you recognise your signature as well as your handwriting. That is
what you're telling us; correct?
A. Yes, that is correct. However, as I stated, I only followed
the instructions laid down by Ta Ran.
Q. And in document E3/2585, you tell us that this is neither your
handwriting neither your signature, so I would like to specify
that document E3/2785, the relevant ERNs in Khmer are 00079115;
English 00322193; and French 00753636. So, I understood well,
with regard to document E3/2795, this is neither your handwriting
nor your signature? Yes, do you confirm what I just said or?
A. Yes, that is correct. The handwriting is not mine and the
signature is also not mine. That's why it is very difficult for
me and that's why it confuse me.
Q. Okay, we will get back to those issues later but now, I would
like to cover all of the documents that were presented yesterday.
So, I would like you to see again document E3/2422 (sic). If you
could -- if the court officer could please provide this document
to the witness. I have it here at hand. I -- the ERNs are; in
Khmer, 00079127; and in French, 00611732; and English, 00322210.
And the document reads as follows:
"First, correct - interrogate the despicable Hul Muoy who is a
second lieutenant and ask him to disclose the branch he belongs
to. Did he flee to Chruos Chrey mountain and does he have any
networks in Chamkar Sang (phonetic) or not? And who belongs to
his networks? Second, regarding a man named Seak (phonetic) who
was sent to you yesterday, I would like you to interrogate him to
identify his command network. You have to ask him how many people
were appointed by him. What are his activities. Please
interrogate him in-depth".
So, Witness, can you tell us if you recognise your signature and
if you recognise your handwriting?
A. The handwriting is not my handwriting. Also the signature is
not mine.
Q. Well, fine. I'm also going to show you another document that
was also presented to you yesterday. This is document E3/2453,
Khmer, ERN 00270774; English, ERN 00388577; French, ERN 00611769.
And the relevant part reads as follows: "To the attention of
comrade Nit (phonetic). For information purposes, regarding
Phuong Phalla and Pen Aun, I gave the order to comrade Naom
(phonetic) to send them to the police of District 105". This is
18 October, the date. So is this your signature again and your
handwriting?
A. Both the handwriting and the signature are mine. And I wrote
that after I got the approval from Ran. I'm -- it is very hard
for me to read here whether it's Brother Kit or Brother Nit
(phonetic).
Q. We'll get back to that later. Now I'd like to present to you a
last document. This is document E3/2444. The Khmer ERN is,
00271029. The copy is very poor and we are going to focus on the
right hand side of this page. And the English ERN that concerns
us is, 00322149; and French, 00623342. So do you recognise this
signature on this document as being yours? And do you recognise
your handwriting?
A. I cannot read this document clearly.
Q. Well, fine. So, we are going to note down that you were not
able to read it. No problem. So, I would like now to return to
Document E3/2453. This is a document in which you say you
recognise your signature. This document is dated 18 October. So
what you're telling us is that you wrote this document after
having received orders from Ta Ran. So how would you liaise with
Ta Ran who was at the sector level? Would you send messengers?
A. My house was located in Leay Bour, and the location from my
house to Ta Ran's place was six kilometres. And in fact, I used a
motorbike to go to his place. I would report to him and then he
would make a decision and then I would write down his decision.
Q. Well this message is addressed to comrade Nit or comrade Kit
or Ket (phonetic), I don't really know exactly. So to whom would
you write?
A. I wrote this to Brother Kit.
Q. Who was comrade Kit?
A. In fact, I already responded as to who was Kit. Kit was the
secretary of Tram Kak district. And this information concerns
Angk Ta Saom. And I sent this letter - in fact I reported about
this event to Ta Ran, the sector committee.
Q. This answer follows a report that was addressed by a so-named
Saom. Saom, maybe I'm not pronouncing it right but -- but the
signature just above reads as 'Saom' in French. Which signature
can you read right above? And to whom does this signature
correspond? Who wrote to you?
A. The signature and the name is Saom. However, about that it is
a Khmer abbreviation for the area known as Angk Ta Saom. So after
Chhaom, from Angk Ta Saom, brought that information to me, I
reported it to Ta Ran. And after Ta Ran made his decision, then I
wrote down that decision for brother comrade Kit.
Q. So in this particular case, do you remember who specifically
wrote to you? Do you remember the person who wrote to you? And do
you remember what his duties were?
A. It was Ta Chhaom who brought me that information that he
wanted to send it to the district but because I was closer to
him, that's why I brought that information to Ta Ran so that he
could make his decision. And after Ta Ran made that decision, I
wrote it down and then I relayed it to brother comrade Kit.
Q. What were Ta Chhaom's duties? Was he heading a cooperative, a
commune? What exactly was his position?
A. Ta Chhaom was commune chief.
Q. Commune chief of which commune - which commune?
A. It was Angk Ta Saom commune.
Q. Fine. In your answer, you say, "I ordered comrade Naom
(phonetic) to complete this". Who is comrade Naom (phonetic)?
A. In my - in the documents that I have in my hand, there is no
such name.
Q. It is possible that it is 'Nom', 'Nium' or 'Nuon'. Can you
read anything that looks like 'Nom'?
A. The name is Chhaom.
Q. Very well. Who is that person? Is that the same person who
wrote to you? Is the person called Chhaom, the person who sent
you the report?
A. It was the same person. The person named Chhaom who signed
above that information from Angk Ta Saom was the same person that
I wrote in that brief letter.
Q. Very well. I have another question for you. You wrote and
issued orders to comrade Chhaom to send them to the police of
District 105. Who are you referring to when you talk of the
police of District 105?
A. District 105 Police, it was a place where they examined and
they interrogated people who were sent to that place.
Q. Where was that police station situated?
A. As far as I know, there was a place where the police stayed.
It was to the west of the district office and also to the west of
Angk Roka. It was in a small house. Two or three, four houses --
small houses which is - which is to the west of Angk Roka at the
current time. And those houses were roofed with sugar palm
leaves.
Q. Who was in charge of that police office?
A. I don't remember any name until today. It was not that I am
reluctant but I don't remember. I don't recall any name now.
Q. Very well. I will backtrack a little and read out a passage
from the record which appears to be relevant. This is what it
says regarding the situation of the youth attached to the youth
assembly unit. "The head of that unit instigated little children
to steal. He was called Phoung Phalla. When he was in Phnom Penh,
he committed crimes and theft and stole. We arrested him and sent
him to prison. He orchestrated a plan ordering Pen Aun to
continue stealing. There was a plan to punch holes in bags of
rice and plant the rice to eat but he has been arrested and
brought to the re-education site. Request that Angkar be
informed. Whatever Angkar decides, request additional news". Let
me point out that in the report you received, Pen Aun, who stole
rice, was sent to the re-education site in the commune. Where was
that re-education site located? Is that centre for re-education
the same thing as the District 105 police station?
A. So, your reference seems to be unclear to me. Were you
referring to Angk Ta Saom? Which place are you talking about?
Q. Mr. Witness, I have read out to you the report that was sent
to you. In that report, it is said that Phoung Phalla was sent to
the re-education centre of the commune. That is indeed what I
read in French. In English, it is referred to as a re-education
site. Now, what is this commune re-education site they are
referring to? Where was it situated?
A. It is -- it was in Angk Ta Saom. I don't know the place. I
don' t know where the Angk Ta Saom re-education centre was but it
was for minor offences, including stealing and theft. And the
matter was discussed with Ta Ran. And Ta Ran decided to send them
to the district police centre which is to -- next to Angk Roka.
It was for re-education of the light offenders. And after
discussion with comrade Ran, I wrote to inform Brother Kit in the
sentences and phrase that you have just read to me.
Q. So there was a re-education centre or office at Angk Ta Saom.
There was a police office of District 105 next to the Angk Roka
pagoda. What became of people who were sent to the District 105
police station? Were they detainees or they worked outside of
that office?
A. Those light offenders were re-educated while they were made to
do labour every day and they were interrogated. That's all I knew
about the centre.
Q. Mr. Witness, what you are telling us therefore is that when
someone was the subject of a report or if that person committed a
light offence, you yourself went and took stock of that fact in
the sector office and then you took instructions from Ta Ran and
the person concerned was sent to the 105 district office for
re-education; is that what you're saying? All offences, even
light offences, had to be the subject of a report. That report
was sent to the sector office and that sector office would then
decide what to do with those persons or where to send them. Have
I properly understood your testimony?
A. Yes, you are correct. I would simply follow Ta Ran's order.
Q. Did you often go to report to Ta Ran?
A. It didn't happen every day. It was happening from time to
time.
Q. And what happened if they found out that the person concerned
hadn't committed a light offence but a serious offence, where
would such a person be sent to?
A. I don't know the detail about that. But the place to the west
of Angk Roka market, it was the District 105 police centre. I
don't know the decision made by that office to further send the
person to another place. It is beyond my knowledge. I don't know.
Q. What was the difference between a light offence and a serious
offence? What was a light offence and what was a serious offence?
A. I would like to consult with my duty counsel, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Witness.
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, you may respond to this question because this is a
kind of question that will not incriminate you when you respond.
So you testify to some extent as regards light offence and
serious offence; you can give an example before the Chamber to
make the distinction between light offender and serious
offenders. Your consultation with your duty counsel is only for
those question that may lead to incriminate yourself when you
respond or you make any assertion, so you may give the answer to
this question.
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. Light offence including stealing of rice or cassava and moral
misconduct or laziness were considered as light offence. And when
the person committed an activity in form of CIA agent or KGB
agent, they will be considered as serious offenders.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
And when someone was accused of a serious offence, where would
that person be sent to and who decided where he would be sent?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. The district security office who would send them at the
request -- and they also request the sector office and then they
send the people to the security or to the re-education centre for
serious offenders but I don't know where it was. So, it fell
under the district security office.
Q . You did not know the district - the location of the district
security office but do you at least know the name of that office?
A. I heard people saying that, An.
Q. So, An was the person in charge of that centre; correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you hear the name Krang Ta Chan?
A. To be honest, Krang Ta Chan -- I did not know where Krang Ta
Chan was when -- during the regime. It was until the warring with
the government and then there was -- there were radio broadcasts
and it later became the museum of Krang Ta Chan. And then I heard
- I heard after that. So -- but during the regime, I don't know
where it was. When I was working at Leay Bour, I would travel
only up to Angk Roka area. That's all I can remember.
Q. I'll try to sum up what you have said this afternoon. You have
stated that when you received reports from commune chiefs, you
yourself relayed the reports to the sector office and the sector
decided what would be the outcome of such reports. And the
outcome of such a report could have been to send the people
concerned to the re-education centre or to the 105 police station
or to the security centre at Krang Ta Chan. Is that indeed what
you have stated?
A. All answers were decided by Ta Ran who was Sector secretary. I
was the only one - the only person who report to him and I did
everything at his order. This is my short answer for you. So,
when he order me to send anything or anyone to any place, I will
ask the district militia to implement that order.
Q. Did it sometimes happen that you were ordered to clean up --
to sweep clean prisoners?
A. No, I was not ordered to sweep clean any prisoner.
Q. Now sir, I would like you to read document E3/4093. Unless I
am mistaken, you have just acknowledged that you signed that
document and that that document was written in your own hand. I
will therefore read it out to you.
"Dear Brother Chhoeun, beloved, regarding prisoners of Cheang
Tong commune, I seek your authorisation to take children who are
still with their mothers. Any bigger children that have already
gone to the mobile units or children's units request that you let
them stay there and take just the mothers. But if those children
cannot be separated from their mothers, bring them in for
interrogation and after everything is finished to sweep them all
clean. As for the widows from Trapeang Thum Khang Cheung, who are
currently staying at the place of comrade Meng, request to sweep
them all clean."
That, in my view, contradicts what you have just told us. So tell
us, yes or no, did you receive instructions from the sector to
sweep clean certain prisoners?
A. I receive order from Ta Ran. Ta Ran discussed with Sam Bit and
he ordered me to write -- to write it like this. So I wrote based
on his dictation but I did not do anything like sweep them all
clean in my own discussion or my own decision. No, I never did
that. If I refused to follow the order from Ta Ran and Ta Bit, I
would be in danger. If I did not write following his dictation of
these words, I would be in trouble at the time.
Q. So what you're telling us is that you forwarded the
instructions that mothers be killed, that very young children who
could not be separated from their mothers be killed. You are
saying that you did not kill those children yourself but you
forwarded the instructions in order that those orders be carried
out; is that indeed what you're saying?
A. I was the one who convey the order or I convey the words at
the order Sam Bit and Ta Ran who already made the decisions. So,
I was writing but I wrote as dictated by Ta Ran and Sam Bit. I
did not do it on my own volition or willingness.
Q. So all those people committed serious offences. Children and
toddlers who were still in their mothers' arms had committed
serious offences?
A. I had to do -- to follow the order from Ta Ran and Sam Bit.
But to any further details, I don't remember them all now.
Q. Did you obey those orders out of loyalty because you were a
good and faithful member of the Kampuchea Communist Party? Or you
obeyed those orders because you were afraid of suffering the
perilous consequences yourself?
A. I did this for fear of my life because my brother who
disappeared was my example during the regime.
Q. Why did Ta Ran not sign the reports you handed to him,
himself? Why did Ta Ran, to whom you gave reports, not sign them
himself? Why would he ask you to sign his instructions?
A. He made an oral order to me and ordered me to dictate his
order because he was not the one who was good at writing.
Q. So, it is because he did not know how to write well that he
would allow you as an intellectual at Tram Kak to write the
instructions to kill the mothers and children? Is that really the
reason; because he did not know how to write well? And because he
did not know how to sign?
A. Yes, because he did not know how to write that well, that's
why he ordered me to write it.
Q. Fine. We will bring up other issues now. I would like you to
tell me, sir, when they began calling you San or Ta San?
A. I cannot recall the date or when I was known by that name.
People in Kaoh Andaet also call me San when I was there, and when
I move to Tram Kak, they also call me San.
Q. So during the entire period of Democratic Kampuchea, you were
only known as San or Ta San? Or were you also known as someone
else under another name?
A. I was only known as San. They did not know my birth name --
that is, Neang Ouch.
Q. And at the Tram Kak district level, were there other cadres
also called San or whom they would call San?
A. There were people by that name in other communes, though I
cannot recall the name of the commune.
Q. Were they people, cadres, working at the district level and
who might have reported to the sector as you? And people who
would have gone by the name San?
A. No. I already stated that there were men by that name at a
commune or communes but I cannot recall the name of that commune.
Q. And these other people, would they report to the sector?
A. I did not know.
Q. Fine. And when you were at the district, did you sometimes
receive written instructions from the sector?
A. I never received any written instruction with a signature from
either Ta Ran or Ta Bit. They would come to my place or call me
to go to their place and relay their instructions. The
instructions did not exist in a written form. They never did
that.
Q. This morning you answered a certain number of questions that
were put to you by Judge Fenz regarding the ties that you might
have had with Ta Mok's family. So first of all, I would like to
clarify a few aspects here. What is the name of your wife? And
was your wife Ta Mok's sister or was she one of Ta Mok's
daughters?
A. My wife's name is Ung Koeun. She is the young blood sister of
Ta Mok, not his daughter.
Q. So, you are Ta Mok's brother-in-law. And aside from this
family tie, were you also a cousin? Did you have common aunts?
Did Ta Mok's mother have any ties with your family?
A. I was the younger brother in-law of Ta Mok and I did not have
any further relationship than that. As I was in Kandal province
where Ta Mok was in Takeo province, we were only related in the
name of the in-law because I married his younger sister.
Q. Well now, I would like you to provide me with the names of the
other sisters of Ta Mok as well as the names of his brothers. And
I'd like you to tell me which position they held during the
Democratic Kampuchea period. So, first tell me about his sisters
aside from Koeun, your wife.
A. The younger sibling of Ta Mok, name Chok (phonetic), he passed
away. And the next one -- that is, the next younger brother --
younger brother of Ta Mok was Cham. Cham also died. And following
Cham was Poun, his sister, and she also died. And after Poun was
Koup (phonetic), another younger sister, she also died. And then
comes my wife, that is, Koeun, and we -- and there is another one
Ung Ken, the youngest sister. And that is all.
Q. And does the name Kae Pok (phonetic) ring a bell?
A. I heard of the name Kae Pok (phonetic).
Q. And whom did Kae Pok (phonetic) marry?
A. I did not know whom Kae Pok (phonetic) married to because I
did not know him.
Q. So you told us that there was a brother called Chok (phonetic)
who died. Did he die during the Democratic Kampuchea period or
did he die afterwards? Same thing for Cham (phonetic); did he die
before, during or after the Democratic Kampuchea period? And the
same for the others -- the other brothers and sisters.
A. Ta Chok (phonetic) died when Vietnamese soldiers entered
Cambodia in 1979. And Cham (phonetic) also died in the same year
-- that is, 1979. As for Poun, Poun only died few years ago from
illness. And Koup (phonetic) died about three years ago from high
blood pressure.
Q. And was your wife or one of your sisters-in-law at the head of
the District 105 hospital?
A. No.
Q. Can you tell us what kind of positions your brothers and
sisters-in-law had during the Democratic Kampuchea period? Cham,
Chok (phonetic) , Poun, Koup (phonetic); what were their
positions? What were their duties?
A. Ta Chok (phonetic) was in charge of Prey Kabbas district.
Although I did not know his real position at -- in Prey Kabbas
district. As for Cham, Cham was in charge of Khpos Trabei
(phonetic) commune in Tram Kak district. As for Poun and Koup
(phonetic) and my wife, these three sisters did not hold any
positions during the DK period. They were simply housewives.
Q. So, we know that you said that Ta Mok's daughter, or one of Ta
Mok's daughters Khom - Yeay Khom was at the head of District 105,
and you provided us with a certain number of names of people who
were at the head of District 105. Can you tell us if the
following names correspond to cadres in District 105: Ta Keav,
was Ta Keav at the head of District 105?
A. Ta Keav was within the District 105 committee. And that
happened since 1970 or 1971. And after 1971, I did not know what
happened there because I was transferred to Kaoh Andaet district.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The time is convenient for short break. We take a break now and
return at 3.30 -- at 3 o'clock rather.
Court officer, please assist the witness during the break and
have him return as well as his duty counsel at 3 o'clock.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1445H to 1501H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session and again I'd
like to hand the floor to Judge Lavergne. You have the floor
Judge.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President. With your leave, I would like to show
the witness a document, and it is document E313.1.18. It is a
record of the witnesses interview, 2-TCW-809.
Q. Witness, I would like you to start by looking at the name of
the person who was interviewed according to that record and tell
us whether you know that person?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. I know this person, Pech Chim.
Q. I had hoped that the name of that person wouldn't be revealed
but on the other hand it facilitates matters. So you are telling
- have told us that you know Pech Chim. In what capacity did you
know him?
A. I knew him even earlier than 1970 because his native village
was not far from the village of my wife.
Q. Did Pech Chim, at any point in time, act as your assistant?
A. No. When I came to Tram Kak district in 1977, Pech Chim was
not in Tram Kak district.
Q. Were both of you part of the front - that is, the United
Resistance Front? You said that you were a member of that front
when you arrived in Tram Kak.
A. I cannot recall that. I recalled that I was a member of the
front. As for him, I am not sure whether he was a member of the
front or not. Initially he worked in Tram Kak, however, after the
war ended, he was - he went to work at a rubber plantation in
Kampong Thom, in Srae Ronoung, or something like that.
Q. He says, in answer number 9 in the record of the interview
that you came to Tram Kak district to supervise intelligence
agents of District 105 and he worked as your assistant. That is
what you would find in answer number 9.
A. That is not correct. I was not a teacher in Tram Kak district.
MR. KOPPE:
Excuse me. I am not sure if you were referring to E3 - E313.1.18,
question 9. Is that correct?
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Let me clarify matters because the interpreter didn't hear the
reference you've given me, but I'm referring to document
E313.1.18, answer number 9.
MR. KOPPE:
I have a different English translation. I read 105 teachers.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
In French it says that 105 teachers, perhaps it's an interpreter
-- interpretation, perhaps I'm wrong, but I believe they are
talking of teachers in District 105. Perhaps my other colleagues
who speak Khmer can tell us what the exact situation is?
Apparently, what is on that record corresponds to what I'm
saying. In any case, let us look at answer number 19. Witness
TCW-809 is asked to describe the administrative structure of the
Southwest Zone in 1975 and I will read out that answer, Witness,
and you tell me whether this reminds you of anything.
"In 1975, Ta Mok was the committee chief of the Southwest Zone.
There was several regional committees, but I only knew that of my
region." I believe we can replace the word region by the word
sector. "The number of that sector was 13. Then we had Poun
(phonetic), nicknamed Poun (phonetic) - he was the secretary, his
assistant was called Phen (phonetic). Meas Muth was a member of
the committee of my region." At this stage, Witness, does this
jog your memory?
MR. NEANG OUCH:
A. Yes. What you read out is correct.
Q. So, let me press on with the reading. Now we'll talk about the
district. The district committee consisted of a chief, Khom, we
referred to him (sic) earlier, a deputy chief, Keav, one member
Nhev (phonetic). Does this also jog your memory?
A. I only knew about Khom and Keav - Keav. And as for Nhev
(phonetic), to my recollection, Nhev was with the army but I did
not have a full grasp as to the administrative structure of that.
Q. Next, Witness 809 gives us a number of names of commune
chiefs. The chief of Trapeang Thum commune was called Pech Nuo
(phonetic) and he points out that that person was his elder
brother, his assistant Kit Chay (phonetic), that that person
died. The chief of Cheang Tong commune was called Boeun, he was
married to Chorn, this person is deceased. The chief of Popel
commune was called Khav (phonetic), deceased. There was also Khun
(phonetic), also deceased, he was one of the general brothers of
Khav (phonetic) and worked as his assistant. The chief of Ta Phem
commune was called Neat (phonetic) deceased and Kit, also
deceased. Kit was his assistant. The chief of Leay Bour commune
was called Oeun (phonetic) - perhaps I'm pronouncing it very
badly. The chief of Samraong commune was called Chun (phonetic).
The chief of Kus commune was called Saing (phonetic). I do not
know whether he is still alive. His assistant was called Phun
(phonetic). The chief of Nhaeng Nhang commune was called Sy
(phonetic). The chief of Srae Ronoung commune was called Kim
(phonetic). Now tell me, do all these names ring a bell? Or do
they correspond to what you remember?
A. I do not know Nuo (phonetic), as for Chay, it's the same
thing, I don't know. I know another Chay - that is, Ta Chay, who
was a district secretary. But I do not know his full name. I only
know him as Ta Chay. As for Boeun, female, I know her and I also
know Chorn, her husband. As for Khav and Khoeun, I know them but
I did not know about their position at Popel commune. And Ta Phem
commune chief, Nith, probably this person Nith was the husband of
Poun -- that is, my elder sister-in-law. And for the other two
names, I do not know. I also do not know Chim. And in fact, when
they established this administrative structure, I was no longer
there.
Q. Very well. When you returned, who were the cadres who were in
place? Can you give us the names of the cadres who were in place
when you were in Tram Kak district?
A. I recall that for Popel commune, it was Chorn, the husband of
Boeun. And for Leay Bour commune it was Keth (phonetic), but the
person deceased around 1980 or '81 at Damrei Romeal mountain. The
chief of Kus commune, Saem (phonetic) and I cannot recall the
name of the chief of Nhaeng Nhang commune. For Srae Ronoung
commune it was Khun, the chief. That's all I can recall. And for
Angk Ta Saom commune, it was Ta Saom who was the chief.
Q. Regarding the district committee, the names Ta Chim and Ta Kit
ring a bell?
A. I know Ta Kit and Ta Chim.
Q. Were they brothers?
A. I don't know. They lived in the same village but I did not
know whether they were related. And in fact, they also lived in
the same village that I lived but I did not know about their
relationship as blood brothers or not.
Q. What precise functions did they occupy at the level of the
district?
A. I know that Ta Kit was a district secretary. As for the
brother Chim, I do not know his real function.
Q. Who replaced Ta Kit when he left?
A. The replacement was Ta Chay.
Q. Did Ta Chay remain in place up till the end of 1979? Or he
also left at a certain point towards the Northwest region?
A. Ta Chay left for the Northwest Zone and, to my knowledge, that
happened around late 1977.
Q. Who replaced Ta Chay?
A. Nobody replaced Ta Chay. Ta Ran - that is the - who was at the
sector, came to supervise Tram Kak district directly. Yeay Boeun
and I were - Yeay Boeun was assistant there until I arrived in
June 1977.
Q. So you were direct assistants to the chief of sector?
A. At the beginning, I was an assistant to Tram Kak district,
however, when the sector directly controlled the district, I did
not know for sure of my position, because there was no official
announcement in regards to my position there. I was not an
assistant to the sector because since there was no official
announcement I still considered myself as an assistant to the
Tram Kak district.
Q. Very well. As assistant of Tram Kak district, did you hear the
names of the following cadres: Iep Duch? That name doesn't appear
on the record of the interview because you won't find it in
there. Did you hear of a cadre called Iep Duch who was in charge
of the youth in the district?
A. I never heard of a name Iep or a name Duch. Are you referring
to one person - Iep Duch? Or referring to two different
individuals?
Q. I'm referring to the same person but I think he was known
rather by the name Duch. Did you know any cadres or a cadre
called Duch who worked at 105 district?
A. No, I don't know any Duch there.
Q. Did you hear of a cadre called Kith (phonetic) Phy who was
handicapped? He was lame.
A. I heard of a name Phy.
Q. What were Phy's functions?
A. Phy worked in the same office with An.
Q. What functions did he therefore fulfil?
A. I did not know of his real function but he worked in the same
office that An worked.
Q. Can you tell us what Ta An did? Did you ever receive reports
written by Ta An?
A. I knew that Ta An was chief at Krang Ta Chan but I cannot
recall whether I received any report from him.
Q. Did you hear of a cadre called Phan Chhen?
A. No, the name Phan Chhen does not ring a bell.
Q. Did you hear of a person called Kev Chandara, alias achar Yav?
A. No. That name does not ring a bell.
Q. I would like us to talk about the sector. You said you knew a
person called alias Than (phonetic). You said he had an assistant
called Phen and that Huot (phonetic) was also a member of the
sector committee. Did you hear of a person called Ta Prak?
A. I heard people talking about Ta Prak. That Ta Prak came to
Sector 13 and he was there before Ta Ran came. So a few months
later, he disappeared, he went somewhere - I did not know and Ta
Ran came to work or to be in charge at the sector level.
Q. And have you ever heard that Ta Prak was purged?
A. No, I never heard about that. I only knew that Ta Prak worked
there for two or three months and then he was replaced by Ta Ran.
Q. And did Ta Ran remain at the head of the sector until 1979 or
was he replaced by someone? And then why was he replaced?
A. Ta Ran remained at Sector 13 until the invasion by the
Vietnamese troops.
Q. And does the name Ta Tith ring a bell? Ta Tith?
A. Ta Tith is my younger brother-in-law who married to Ung Ken
who is the younger sister of Ung Koeun.
Q. And did Ta Ran ever have a car accident?
A. Ta Ran had a car accident though I cannot recall the year that
it happened. Ta Mok went to the Northwest Zone and he called some
cadres from the sector and zone levels to go and work at the
Northwest Zone, including Ta Ran, Ta Bit and other cadres whose
names I cannot recall, and when they returned from their trip
they had a traffic accident in Pursat province -- that is, at a
bridge in Pursat province, and as a result Ta Ran had his leg
broke.
Q. Fine. I would like to return to the written record of
interview, E319.1.18, and I would like to look at question 235.
And this question is put to the witness: "Who would control the
Krang Ta Chan security centre between 1975 and 1979?" Answer: "It
was Som and Muth. Both belonged to the sector level which would
supervise the centre. An was in charge personally and Khom, the
Tram Kak district secretary was aware of this. Furthermore,
between 1971 and 1972, Cheng also worked as the head of this
centre. In 1972 he was sent elsewhere."
So, can you tell us if this corresponds to your own take on the
situation to what you saw?
A. My apology. I did not know about what you just read out as at
the time, I was at Kaoh Andaet and whether this Cheng supervised
the security office or not, it's beyond my knowledge. As for the
other names that is Saom and Muth, here it reads that the - they
took charge at the sector level, and that Saom was the chief or
the secretary and that Phen was his deputy, and Muth was a member
in charge of the Sector 13 Army, and that happened from 1970 to
around 1973, then Meas Muth went to take charge of the Zone Army.
Q. The Witness says -- Witness 809, is that that those in charge
of the sector would have direct control over the Krang Ta Chan
Security Centre. Does that correspond to your take on the
situation? Was the Security Centre at Krang Ta Chan under the
control of the sector?
A. During 1970 and '71, I didn't know about that. I knew that
Saom was the sector secretary, Phen was deputy and Muth was a
member. As regards their supervision or the security centre from
the sector, I had no idea, but when I had became the assistant, I
would report everything to Ta Ran, Ta Ran.
Q. This is what Witness 809 says. At answers 236 and 237.
Question. "Did An control the Krang Ta Chan Security Centre until
the end of the Khmer Rouge regime?" Answer. "Yes, An was in
charge of this security centre until the end of the Khmer Rouge
regime." Question. "As a member of the district committee, did
you have any contact with the Security Centre or with An?"
Answer. "No, not at all. When there were problems, I would
directly go to the region sector level."
So, does that correspond to the situation that you experienced
when you were a district deputy -- that is to say, that when
there were problems, did you have to contact or go to the sector
level?
A. When Pech Chim was there, I don't know the way of his
relationship, but when I was there I made direct contact with the
sector office.
Q. So other questions are put to this Witness, he is asked -- or
he is told:
"You are telling us that Krang Ta Chan was under the direct
supervision of the sector. A certain number of written documents
indicate that Tram Kak district was in direct contact with this
centre. So as far as you know, did Tram Kak district liaise with
the - with the Krang Ta Chan Security Centre in writing or not?"
Answer. "Yes. The centre would send reports to the district,
which would then forward them to the sector through its
messengers. Sometimes the Krang Ta Chan Security Centre would
send its messengers -- through its messengers reports to the
sector directly."
So does this corresponds to what you experienced when you were a
district deputy?
A. These answers corresponding to my work as the assistant to the
district office.
Q. What kind of reports would you receive from the Krang Ta Chan
Centre?
Mr. NEANG OUCH:
Your Honour, could you please repeat your question?
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. Yes. What kind of reports would you receive from the Krang Ta
Chan Security Centre to be - or maybe, I can be more precise.
Would you sometimes receive reports containing the confessions of
prisoners at Krang Ta Chan? Would you receive prisoner lists,
lists of prisoners who were brought to Krang Ta Chan? Would you
receive list of prisoners who had been executed at Krang Ta Chan?
Mr. NEANG OUCH:
A. I forget some things, but I understand that I have never
received any prisoners list from Krang Ta Chan nor did I receive
any execution list of prisoners from Krang Ta Chan.
Q. Fine. Let's turn to another topic. Are you aware of the way
that the District 105 hospital was managed? How was the care
managed? How was healthcare managed in District 105?
A. Tram Kak Hospital was at Wat Trapeang Kol as far as I
remember. And the care and treatment based on all responding to
the illness, traditional medicine were used for some cases and
modern medicines were also used during the treatment. That's all
I can tell you.
Q. How many nurses were there? How many sick people were there?
How were the sick people fed? Who managed the hospital?
A. The number of patients, number of staff, I don't remember
numbers, and I do not recall the name of the chief of that
hospital. For food and other meals, the supply were given by the
district office.
Q. Did you receive reports? Or were you informed that some
patients at the hospital were suffering from malnutrition,
because they did not have enough to eat?
A. I did not receive any information like this, but within the
district, it might be that the district office who solved the
problem, who supplied the food supply to the hospital.
Q. Does the name Neary Neang, apparently Ta Kit and Ta Chim's
niece, ring a bell?
A. I heard the name you said Neary Neang, but I didn't know - did
not know whether she was the niece of Ta Kit or Ta An.
Q. Fine. I have a very last question regarding visits, visits
that were done by foreign delegations. This morning, the
Prosecutor showed you a photograph. I can't find it, it seems,
but it's a photograph in which you recognized yourself, and this
photograph comes from a book that was written by Gunnar
Bergstrom. Gunnar Bergstrom was a member of a delegation from the
Marxist Leninist Communist Party of Sweden, and the photograph in
which you recognize yourself carries a caption in this book,
written by Gunnar Bergstrom.
And the caption states the leaders of the cooperative, so
Witness, were you the head or the Chief of Leay Bour cooperative?
A. I was not the chief or the leader at Leay Bour cooperative.
Q. So then who was the leader of Leay Bour cooperative?
A. I don't recall the name, but the commune chief was not serving
as the chief of cooperative, but on this photo the one behind me,
I saw on -- on this photo, his name is Ta Khe (phonetic). He was
not the chief of the cooperative. Another person was the chief of
the cooperative, but I don't recall his name now.
Q. I am now going to read out or reread because this document was
already read out by the Prosecutor. It's document E3/1339. My
apologies, because I only have the English ERN. This is, ERN
00168350 to 51; Khmer, 01063905 to 07; and this document is a -
is a FBIS report -- that is to say, a transcription of radio
broadcasts that were broadcast by the Phnom Penh National Radio
-- that is to say, the official radio of Democratic Kampuchea.
And in this broadcast the following is indicated.
"On the morning of 14 December 1977, comrade Chen Yonggui and
other Chinese comrades left Takeo for Phnom Penh, and they were
accompanied by comrade party secretary," and unless I am
mistaken, I think, this is Pol Pot, "comrade Ieng Sary, Vorn Vet
and by Thiounn Thioeunn."
And it's also stated that Ta Mok accompanied them to the limits
of the sector and the following is said, and I will read it in
English because there is no French version.
"On their way to Phnom Penh, the Chinese comrades stopped to
participate in a mass meeting at the Leay Bour cooperative. On
the arrival, comrade Chen Yonggui and other Chinese guests were
warmly applauded and welcomed by the masses, and many male and
female youth. The representative gave a history of the
cooperative from the period of the war for national and popular
liberation to the present post-liberation phase of National
defence and construction under the CPK correct and clear-sighted
leadership."
Witness, are you the representative who is mentioned in this
podcast, which describes the history of the cooperative, to
comrade Chen Yonggui?
A. I made a presentation to Chen Yonggui about the history of
cooperative at the instruction of Ta Ran to -- to do that on
behalf of the cooperative chief, but in fact I was not the chief
of that cooperative. But in this visit I saw only Chinese guests.
I didn't see Mr. Pol Pot, Ieng Sary or Ta Mok. They might have
been returning to Takeo before they come to Phnom Penh, because
during that event I saw only the Chinese guests. Some other
Cambodian staff, I think they were from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs who accompany foreign guest to make a visit to that
cooperative.
Q. Or in any case what's sure is that the presentation that was
given of the cooperative, focused on all of the positive aspects,
and on the wonderful results that this cooperative had achieved
which apparently enjoyed a workforce of more than 9,000 people
and 4,000 hectares of harvestable land and 3,000 hectares of rice
paddies, including 600 hectares that would produce two harvests
per year. So does that correspond to your -- what you remember?
A. In fact, in that cooperative reflect to what you have just
described. So, as I told the Court earlier, we achieve the plan
of 3 tonne per hectare on both side of the road on the south - to
the south and to the north of the road, reaching to the rail
track.
Q. Witness, were you working at Leay Bour cooperative on 25
September 1978?
A. In December 1978, the forces were removed, were withdrawn,
including myself, fled into the jungle. By forces here I referred
to the - the manpower who carry no weapons.
Q. Let me interrupt you. I am not speaking about December. I am
speaking about September, September 1978. So, in September 1978,
were you working at Leay Bour cooperative? And did you welcome
the Japanese delegation then that was led by His Excellency, Kozo
Sasaki?
A. No, no, I did not greet or receive any Japanese delegation.
Q. So, I would like to speak about another FBIS report, E3/974,
that describes his visit, and that says that the head of the Leay
Bour cooperative gave a presentation on the cooperative, ERN
00170173 to 74. Witness, do you remember having received a
delegation of members of the Marxist Leninist Communist Party of
the United States, a delegation led by person called Dan
Burstein?
A. Talking about receiving foreign delegation, I have responded
to the Chamber, including -- I received only two delegations,
including the Sweden journalists, and also from China, the
Chinese delegation Chen Yung-kuei. I did not receive any American
delegation.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Very well, for the transcript let me point out that we have to
report of that visit by Mr. Dan Bernstein, and this is document
E3/707 and the ERN is S00049307 to 308.
Mr. President, I have no further questions for the Witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Judge Lavergne. The proceeding today is appropriate to
adjourn and it will be resumed tomorrow from 9 o'clock in the
morning. In tomorrow's proceedings we will continue to hear the
testimony of Neang Ouch, and all Parties are invited to the
hearing.
Witness, Neang Ouch, your testimony before the Trial Chamber has
not come into a conclusion, and you are invited to continue your
-- your testimony tomorrow, and you can return to your - the
place that you stay.
And court officer, you are instructed to coordinate the travel to
his place of stay and have him back into the courtroom before 9
o'clock in the morning.
And Mr. Moeurn Sovann, the duty counsel, also -- you are also
invited to accompany and be present in the courtroom tomorrow.
Security personnel are instructed to bring both Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan to the detention facility of the ECCC and have them
back to attend the hearing tomorrow before 9 o'clock.
The Court is adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1603H)
