P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber is now in session.
Today we will continue to hear the testimony of a civil party,
Chin Met.
The Greffier, can you report on the attendance?
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, all the parties to the proceedings are present and
the civil party is also present.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the Co-Prosecutor.  You can take the floor.
MR. AHMED:
May it please Your Honour.
Your Honours, before you resume the testimony of this civil
party, I have two small points to make, subject to your leave.
One is administrative and one is substantive.
The administrative submission is regarding the testimonies of
witnesses scheduled for next week.  Your Honours have scheduled
two witnesses for two days each next week.  We were seeking your
guidance in respect of the time allocated to different parties
for those two days for which one witness will testify.
Until now, we have been hearing a witness for one day and it will
be in the interest of justice and for the parties to prepare, for
Your Honours to guide us regarding the time that we shall take.
That's the first.  I had a small consultation with Mr. Werner
and, subject to your approval, we would suggest one and a half
hours each for the Co-Prosecutors and the civil parties, and two
hours for the defence subject, of course, to the Chamber's
concurrence.
The second substantive point about the testimony of this civil
party I wish to submit, Your Honours, is regarding the photograph
that the civil party showed to Mr. President when he asked her
the question about her visit to Tuol Sleng, and she showed a
photo which was, according to her, a photo of her and also of
other female prisoners whom she knew when she went for the first
time in November 2007 to Tuol Sleng.
It would be our submission that that photograph be taken on
record because it's directly relevant to the evidence that she
tendered in this Court.
That's my limited submission, Your Honour.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, the Co-Prosecutor, for your observation.
Regarding the administrative issue on the time allocation, the
Chamber have discussed before we started today's proceeding.
Some witnesses so far took only half a day or one day to have
their testimonies heard, so for the next week -- however, in some
cases times need to be adjusted to accommodate the line of
questioning.  After the discussion, the Chamber will notify all
the parties today before we commence our proceeding next week.
Regarding the specific time allocation, the Chamber will also
consider it.
I also notice the presence of the defence counsel.  You take the
floor.
MS. CANIZARES:
Yes, Mr. President.  Thank you.
The Chamber had already decided on the time allocated to each
party to put questions to the witness.
The Chamber had decided that it was 30 minutes for the
Co-Prosecutors, 40 minutes for the civil parties and 40 minutes
for the defence.  We consider that if time should be added, it
should be for the defence.  The civil parties and the
Co-Prosecutors have 70 minutes, and so for equality of arms, the
defence should have 70 minutes and not 40.
As matters stand, we fail to see why the time that has been
allocated to the civil parties and the prosecution should be
extended, especially as for more than a day the Chamber will be
able to put questions to the witness.
So the defence is not in agreement with the request of the
Co-Prosecutors and the civil parties.  If the Chamber were to
grant that request, since the Co-Prosecutor and the civil parties
each want an hour and a half, we would be asking for not two
hours but three hours for the defence so that it can put
questions to the witness in turn.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you for your observation regarding this matter.
The Chamber does not only take the observation or request by just
one party.  The Chamber will consider all the requests from all
parties and also take into account the equality of arms.
The time allocation so far is for one day's hearing of testimony
and for half a day's hearing then it would be divided into two,
so the 40 minutes would be 20 minutes, and the 30 minutes would
be 15 minutes.  And for two days' hearing it should be multiplied
by two but we have not yet considered the matter.  We will
calculate the time allocation based on our previous arrangement.
As I have stated, the time allocations have been allocated based
on one day's testimony, but we have noticed that for some
witnesses the testimony only took half a day; some will take two
days.  And, of course, the Chamber has considered the matter and
we will notify you accordingly, and we will notify you today the
time allocation for each party.
However, the Chamber would like to remind that we have noticed
that during the questioning the time allocation is short, but
sometimes the questions are far away from the fact and they are
too long, and when the time runs out then some of the parties
seek for more time.
So this is just our observation and, of course, we will not grant
additional time.  You have to use the time allocation
appropriately; that is, asking important questions in order to
seek for the truth, and the Chamber will only consider additional
time allocation if necessary.
Next, the Chamber will give the floor to the Co-Prosecutor to put
questions to the civil party, Chin Met.  The Co-Prosecutors, you
have 30 minutes.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the defence counsel.  You take the
floor.
MS. CANIZARES:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I also had two submissions with regard
to the second request of the Co-Prosecutor; that is that the
photos mentioned by the civil party yesterday be tendered into
the record.
We would like to know exactly where these photographs come from
and when they were taken.  We would like to have more information
on these photographs, which were shown for the first time
yesterday for a brief period without allowing us to know what
they were all about.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
To clarify the defence position, does the defence intend to
challenge the tendering of these photographs or does it intend to
challenge just their probative value?
MS. CANIZARES:
As long as we will not have information enabling us to determine
the exact provenance of these photographs and when they were
taken, we suppose that if the defence were to have this
information, I'd be in a position to answer your question more
precisely.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Cartwright, you take the floor.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
I wonder, Mr. President, if we could ask this civil party to show
the photographs because I think the Chamber and the parties are
in the same situation as the defence.  We are not sure of the
nature of the photographs.  And then perhaps the defence can make
its submissions after that.  And perhaps the civil party could
explain again what they represent.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, do you have additional photographs you want to
show, and whose photographs are they?
MS. CHIN MET:
Are you talking about the photographs of the female members of
the unit or are you talking about my photograph?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Are those photos the same as the photos you showed yesterday or
are they different photos?
MS. CHIN MET:
I only have the photos that I showed yesterday.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We already looked at those photos, so if you have other photos
that you intend to put before the Chamber --
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Mr. President, if I am not mistaken, the civil party does not
understand the proceeding before her.
Yesterday, the civil party showed a photograph of two women and
also another photo of her at Tuol Sleng.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do you have other photos?
The Court officer, can you go and verify that?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The photo requested by the Co-Prosecutor to be put before the
Chamber, are you referring to that photograph or another
photograph?
MR. AHMED:
Your Honour, I refer to only this photograph in which she's
standing behind a panel of mug shots at S-21.  And in response to
Your Honour, the President's question about those photographs,
she said, "I went there" -- that is, S-21.  "I recognized some
female workers.  I saw my photo", which is near the photo of a
name she mentioned.  "I went there in November 2007."
Just because it is relevant and it states that she went there and
recognized people who were detained there, it may be relevant for
the purposes of this testimony, and that's why we submit that it
be taken in evidence.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you take these photos to be shown to the
defence counsel, so that for the defence counsel to examine the
photos and also particularly the photo with the red circle?
MS. CANIZARES:
Just a question for the civil party, if I may.
We see on the photograph on which there are a number of small
photographs but we see two people who are larger, but none of
these people are, in my view, the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party, can you respond?
The two people who were standing before those mug shots, who are
they?
MS. CHIN MET:
Mr. President, the two females standing in front of me, they came
from Kampong Cham province, from Balang.  They worked in the
commune and they came to visit Phnom Penh to look at the photos
at Tuol Slang and also she went to visit Boeng Choeung Ek.
When she went to Tuol Sleng, she saw my photo displayed on the
board, and she told me that they thought I died already and they
made a ceremony to pray for my soul already.
But I survived and I went to my village in 1982.  Then all my
relatives were surprised to see me alive and I was asked how I
survived.  I did not tell them the reasons.  I did not say
anything.  I was so happy to see my father.
They told the people from the CSD that indeed I am still alive.
I used to live in my native village but due to the hard living
conditions, then I removed to live near the rubbish dump in
Stueng Meanchey to earn our living there.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, can you look at the photo with the red
circle?  That is the main part of the photo and this photo was
displayed yesterday.  This is an attempt to discuss its relevance
to S-21 in Phnom Penh of the civil party's involvement and her
photo existed in that office.
MS. CANIZARES:
Mr. President, just to go back to one of the two photographs, and
this is the photograph on which we see only the civil party's
face.  Unless I am mistaken, it was not challenged that this
photograph was taken in Prey Sar and not at S-21.  If this
photograph was subsequently taken to S-21, then we take note, but
we think it is important to note that the photograph of the civil
party was not taken in S-21 but in Prey Sar.
If this information is not challenged, then we would not object
to the two photographs being placed on the record of the case.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, the defence counsel, for your observation.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Mr. President, for the record, it would be important for us to be
provided with a copy of the said photographs so that they can be
place officially on the record of the case.  It might also be
useful for the photographs to be placed on the screen so that all
the parties will know exactly what we are talking about.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Court officer, can you bring the photos back from the defence
counsel?
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Mr. President, I seek your leave.
I do not object to the display of the photos, but the suggestion
that the photograph was taken at Prey Sar is yet to be
determined.  My client, the civil party, said she was
photographed before she was sent to the detention centre, so it
means she was not taken at Prey Sar.
However, we are still undetermined as how the photo was sent to
Prey Sar or S-21, and the civil party does not state that the
photograph was taken at Prey Sar.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the presence of the defence counsel.  You take the
floor.
MS. CANIZARES:
Contrary to what my learned friend has said, I am looking at my
notes yesterday with regard to what the civil party stated.
When you put a question to her, Mr. President, with regard to
whether this photograph was taken in Prey Sar or S-21, the civil
party answered very clearly that it was in Prey Sar.  So as the
civil party has stated this, the doubt as to the conditions or
the circumstances under which this photograph was taken does not
exist.  The civil party stated that the photograph was taken in
Prey Sar.
MS. JACQUIN:
I do not agree with what is being said.  Mr. President, if I can
give you some of my extra explanations here.
The civil party, based on the notes that we have gathered,
declared that these photographs had been taken in her unit when
the biography had been established in her unit, and she was not
particularly concerned about the situation.  And then when she
arrived at the detention centre this biography and the
photographs were there, and the accused said it had happened at
Prey Sar but the civil party goes first to the detention centre
and then she is sent to Prey Sar, and the photographs had not
been made at Prey Sar.  She said that they had been taken before
and she said that she didn't really pay attention to this fact
before, but this is exactly what we had gathered from what the
civil party stated yesterday.
Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Silvia Cartwright, you take the floor.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, Mr. President.
This was a matter that I wanted to clarify with the accused, and
I'd like to ask the accused a question, please, with your
permission.
You said yesterday that the photograph of this civil party, which
was displayed at S-21, was in fact taken at Prey Sar, but you did
not give any further explanation as to why you are confident that
it was taken at Prey Sar.
Could you explain further, please?
THE ACCUSED:
Your Honours, this photo is based on the testimony of Chin Met
that she took at Prey Sar.  I think the transcript proves that
she did say so yesterday.  It was rather confused when she said
that the biography was done at S-21, but then I found the ERN and
S-21 record that this unit that she belonged to, Unit 17, and she
was confused herself.  And regarding the photo, I think she made
it clear that she took that at Prey Sar.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you.  So just to clarify, you drew the conclusion -- that,
of course, is for the Trial Chamber to make -- that this
photograph was taken at Prey Sar from the testimony of this civil
party.  You had no other reason for making that statement
yesterday.  Is that correct?
THE ACCUSED:
Yesterday, I agreed with testimony of Chin Met and I did not make
any observation of mine regarding that testimony.  If you would
wish, I give my remarks concerning the photo, I would do so at
will.
Anyone who was sent to S-21 would be taken a photograph by our
subordinate without having a number; I mean those who were sent
from S-24.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
What was the practice at Prey Sar for the taking of photographs?
THE ACCUSED:
I do not think I fully understand the practice there, but people
who were in charge of taking photographs at Prey Sar was the
second in rank in the photograph team from S-21, including
Comrade Song, who would be assigned to have the photographs of
the detainees taken at Prey Sar, but I don't fully understand how
the practice would have been.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Were photographs taken routinely of those detained at Prey Sar?
THE ACCUSED:
The photographers, five of them, were in Phnom Penh.  They're
stationed to the east of Tuol Sleng prison.  Sreang was the head
of the photographers team who regularly controlled the team, but
one of them would be assigned on an occasional basis to take
photographs of detainees at Prey Sar.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
So can I conclude that not all of those detained at Prey Sar were
necessarily photographed; just some of them when the photographer
came from S-21?
THE ACCUSED:
In principle, people who were sent to Prey Sar would have been
taken photographs, except children, so far as I remember.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, and just one last word -- not to the accused, thank
you.
In English, I would prefer the word "mug shot" not to be used in
this context.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is advised to put up the photo with several
people inside on the screens.
We would like to give the floor to the prosecutor to put
questions to the civil party, and you have 30 minutes.  The floor
is yours.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
I have no questions, actually, regarding this photo.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR.SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Good morning, Madam Chin Met.
MR. PRESIDENT
The Court officer, please remove the photo from the projector.
The prosecutor, you can now proceed.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you.
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Yesterday, you stated that in Unit 450 of Division 3 in which
you worked in -- my question is, did anyone in that division who
committed any wrongdoing -- I will rephrase the question.  If
someone committed any wrongdoing in that unit, where would they
be sent to?
A. In 1976 to 1977, if any female staff made any mistakes, for
example, if they had talked with a man, then she would be called
by the chief of the unit to be educated.  If she could not be
refreshened, then she would be taken away to be educated and
disappeared.
Q. Thank you.  So you have no idea where those women would be
sent to.  Is that correct?
A. I don't think I know where these people who committed minor
wrongdoings -- I don't know where they would have been detained.
I know that they would be taken to be educated.
Q. Thank you.  Do you know that in Division 450, were there any
prisons?
A. I don't know because when the other women who disappeared
since they worked with me in Tuol Kok and Chrouy Changla, people
would only tell to me that those women would be taken to be
educated but not to be jailed or imprisoned.  And I have no idea
whether there would have been any prisons in the division to
detain those people.
Q. Thank you.  Now, we're coming back to the point when she was
put on a truck.  Do you remember which truck it belonged to -- or
which unit the truck belonged to?
A. When I was arrested and put on a truck and I reached Brother
Ouen near the Japanese Bridge, I did not care about the truck.  I
think it was a kind of dark green-coloured truck used to
transport soldiers.  We called it a GMC 10-wheels vehicle.
Q. Thank you.  When you were released from the first detention
centre and transferred to Prey Sar, were you told anything about
the reason why you would be transferred, and who actually took
you there?
A. When I was transferred from the prison to Prey Sar, I did not
know that it was Prey Sar because I was not told by the person
who took me there.  Three of us would be put on the truck while
we were being blindfolded and we did not exchange any words.
Then when we reached the location, we were received by a woman.
She did not even say anything.  I heard she said that someone
would come to pick us.
Q. Thank you.  In your complaint, you said at one point you were
assigned to sow rice and that you got the quota for your
assignment; for example, you had to plant at least one hectare of
rice a day.
The question, who actually initiated the plan, the assignment to
be given to you, and did you know that other than Unit 17 there
was any such plan for planting rice like that?
A. In Unit 17 it was the general plan, common plan.  Everyone was
expected to plant as scheduled.  For example, according to the
format they would prefer, and that we had to finish one hectare a
day.  The chief of the unit would assign that task, I did not
know who else.
Q. Thank you.  When you were forced to hard labour and at one
point you passed out, were you treated after you regained your
consciousness?
A. No, I was not treated.  In my unit there was no medicines, no
medical treatment.  When we got tired, some of us were so
terrified by the regime and some even got heart attack, and every
one of us experienced almost the same problem.
Q. Thank you.  So is that correct that there were no medics in
your location?
(No interpretation)
Q. At Prey Sar you were taken to be tortured -- or were you
tortured in particular at that location?
A. At that location at Unit 17, we were not asked to be tortured
again.  We only were given assignments to transplant rice, a
hectare per day, and there was no interrogation.
Q. Thank you.  In your unit, did you exchange conversations with
other people why people were sent to that location?  Did you ever
say anything like that?
A. I asked them some questions because I was inquisitive at that
time, and some elderly women warned me not to ask lots of
questions because they said that if I asked a lot of questions, I
would disappear soon because they noticed the trucks that would
come in and took other people.  They asked me to be quiet.
Q. Thank you.  Could you tell us about the situation when you was
detained before you were sent to Prey Sar, and at Prey Sar did
you see people were tortured and people died, for example?
A. I never saw anyone die.  At Unit 17, I did not see anyone who
died too.  When people passed out or were so weak to work, then
they would be collected and put in the house.
Q. Thank you.  Did you know who was actually the chief at Prey
Sar?
A. I don't know.  I only know the chief of the unit, Brother Nhor
and Brother Ang, the chief of Unit 17.
Q. Thank you.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Mr. President, I have no further questions to be put to the civil
party but, with your leave, I would like to ask a few questions
to the accused.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are allowed to put questions to the accused, and the accused
is advised to listen to the questions of the prosecutor and be
ready to respond.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
According to testimony of Chin Met yesterday, she said she saw
her photo on the wall of Tuol Sleng, and the photo had not
carried any numbers.  What is your impression concerning that
photo?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. Prosecutor, the photo and the brief biography, I would like
to make my observations regarding these two matters.
The photo was taken in Prey Sar but developed in Phnom Penh, and
it was not kept in Prey Sar but kept in Phnom Penh, and the
biography produced by Comrade Huy and that we used here, also
made at Prey Sar and kept in Phnom Penh because we got the
letters TSL that refers to the material collected from Phnom
Penh, not from Prey Sar.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, the accused.  Mr. President, I have no further
questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you take the floor.
Could you please activate the mike?
BY MR. AHMED:
Q. Ms. Chin Met, you gave a Victim Information Form when you were
registered as a civil party and that is on the case file, and I'd
request my colleague to project it for your convenience.  It is
in Khmer ERN number 00281156 to 00281162.
MR. AHMED:
Can the Court officer project it on the projector, please?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV Unit is advised to put this document on the screen.
The prosecutor is advised to make sure the mike is activated
before he speaks, and the prosecutor is also advised to speak
rather slower in order for good interpretation, so I'm afraid
that time has been used already before you can turn the mike on.
MR. AHMED:
All right.  Should I ask this only question, Your Honour, to
finish my questioning or I can rest if Your Honour would prefers?
BY MR. AHMED:
Q. Can you see this document on the screen and identify that you
read this document and signed on it?
MR. AHMED:
Can it be scrolled down to the last page, please?
BY MR. AHMED:
Q. This was a statement that you made to Centre for Social
Development, as a result of which you were registered as a civil
party.
A. Of course, that was my application with my own thumbprint.
Q. And you were read this document before you signed this, and
you believe that the contents of this document are true, to your
knowledge?
A. These contents of the application was written by me and, of
course, they're true to my knowledge because it's my own
handwriting and it has been expressed from my own feeling.
MR. AHMED:
Your Honour, I have no further question except for a request to
the Chamber that this be taken in evidence.
Your Honour, I understood that my time was over.  That's why I
sat.
BY MR. AHMED:
Q. Mrs. Chin Met, my next question to you is, in this document
that you just saw, you mentioned that on the second day you
realized that you were in Tuol Sleng.  Can you elaborate on that?
A. The day that I knew I was in Tuol Sleng -- actually, I did not
know I was detained there.  I only learned when the CSD brought
these documents along with the photograph, my own photograph that
I realized I was once detained at a prison, although I didn't
know that it would have been Tuol Sleng because I knew that I was
detained in a building that lies from the east to the west.
Q. And also in this document you state that you realized that
Duch was the director of this prison.  This was on  of this
document.
A. I did not personally recognize or see the face of Duch, but
Comrade Moeun who was detained there with me, she came from
Stoung district.  She told me that Duch used to live in the same
district and that now he was the chief of the Security Office
Tuol Sleng.
I only learned that when I was detained at Prey Sar and I was
asked whether I knew Duch, but I told the person that I did not
know him, I only heard his name.
Q. In the same document, you mentioned that you were tortured,
starved and exposed to sun and rain.  Can you elaborate how you
were exposed to sun and rain?
A. I was taken out of the room.  I was blindfolded.  I was placed
under the sunlight.  I was ordered to stand in the sunlight and
two of them were nearby.  I didn't know whether they were sitting
or standing.  I was standing for about two hours and then I
collapsed.  I did not know the reason for being ordered to stand
in the sunlight.
I was not chained while I was ordered to stand, but I was warned
if I ran I would be shot and killed.  But after a certain period,
then I collapsed.  Then the guards dragged me back into my cell.
MR. AHMED:
And Your Honours, my last question.
BY MR. AHMED:
Q. Yesterday, you told this Court that when your friends, your
co-detainees, went to take a bath and came back, they said you
should not go to take a bath; you should rather die and not go
there.
What, according to you, may have been the reason why they told
you this?
A. When Comrade Moeun was taken to have a bath and upon her
return, she wept and it seems that she suffered.  I had a glimpse
at her and asked her how she went.  She shook her head and she
said, "I warned you.  If the guards ask you to go for a bath,
then don't go even if you have a diarrhoea and it stains your
pants.  Just don't go."
And I asked, "Why you wept after you came back from a shower?"
She just kept weeping and she did not tell me any other reasons.
And while we were later on at Prey Sar for two days, I asked her
the same thing but she did not say anything.
MR. AHMED:
Your Honours, I have no further questions.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV officer, can you return to the normal view of the
courtroom?
The floor is now given to the civil party lawyers.  I think it's
group 3 first.  The floor is yours.
Please inform us the arrangements that you have amongst
yourselves.  Yesterday, you spent quite a lot of time in doing
the questioning.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Mr. President, Your Honours, the civil party lawyers of group 3
will start the questioning as yesterday.  We will spend some time
questioning the victim, Chin Met.  The international co-lawyer
will start and then I will take my turn.  The remaining time will
be given to the rest of the civil party lawyers.
MS. JACQUIN:
Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY CIVIL PARTY COUNSEL
BY MS. JACQUIN:
Q. Good morning, Ms. Chin Met.  I am going to put questions with
regard to your biography to shed more light on it.
First of all, why were you living in the countryside before you
joined the Khmer Rouge?
A. Before I served the revolutionary army, I lived with my
grandmother and my uncle and auntie.  They looked after me with
the financial and material support and I also had the opportunity
going to school.  I also looked after the cattle while I was
living with my grandmother.
After the Prince Sihanouk was toppled, I stopped studying and I
still lived in the same village.  In 1974, in my village, a
person named Den guarded the youth, both male and female, in
order to work.  Some went to work at certain departments or
ministries and within my group, 20 of us were guarded and we were
chosen to join the army and we stationed at Prey Chhor.
Q. Why, when you were young, why weren't you with your mother and
what did your father do exactly?  What kind of job did he have
exactly?
A. My father -- I did not know my father; I never saw him.  I
only heard my grandparents said my father, from his childhood, he
studied all the way up, and my father's parents sold everything
in order to support his education, and he became a police
officer.   So they spent everything in order to support my
father's career.
From my birth, I never saw the face of my father; I only saw his
photos.
Q. And what about your mother?
A. I never saw my mother's face as well.
MS. JACQUIN:
Mr. President, maybe we can adjourn for a few minutes in order to
allow Chin Met to collect herself.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Chin Met, would you like to take a short break or you think you
can continue?  It's up to you.
THE WITNESS:
I can continue, Mr. President.   I never saw the face of my
mother because after my birth my father stationed in Stoung
district and my mother went with my father, and I -- she gave
birth to me in Stoung district.  After three months after I was
born, she died.  I never saw the face of my mother, I only saw
her photos.  After the death of my mother, then my grandparents
brought me back to the Balang district and raised me up.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The lawyer, you are reminded that you should question to the
civil party only on the facts, and if you ask the details in her
background, it might not be relevant to the facts.
You should focus on her detention at a detention centre which she
claims to be either Prey Sar or Tuol Sleng.  And certain
questions have been put to her regarding her detention and
involvement in Prey Sar.
MS. JACQUIN:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The previous question I put was just
to link up with the following question which, however, is
important in order to understand things clearly.  It is the
following.
BY MS. JACQUIN:
Q. Did Ms. Chin Met join the Khmer Rouge wilfully or not, and in
which conditions did she join the Khmer Rouge?  This is the only
question I'd like to put to her concerning her youth.
A. When I joined the female soldier unit, it was the second
gathering.  Initially, the five of us were gathered to be female
revolutionaries and we were placed at the Pon Reap (phonetic)
village.  We were placed there for three nights.
At that time, we were still young teenagers and we were not
comfortable with those who were in charge of us, so we fled back
home.  My grandparents were happy to receive me back.
For the second gathering, Den and Sem -- those people who were
also from the same village -- said, "This time, if you dare to
run back home you would be taken elsewhere".  So we were sent to
the Sala Visai and later on to Cheung Prey district in Kampong
Cham province.  We were not voluntarily joining, but we were
forced to do so.
Q.  Thank you.  Well, I was only seeking to have Ms. Chin Met
bring up before us that when she was enrolled with the Khmer
Rouge she did so because she did not have the choice, and she did
so because the Khmer Rouge came into her village and that she was
conscripted.  So I just wanted her to confirm this point
concerning the origin of her joining the Khmer Rouge.
A. When I joined the female unit stationed at Cheung Prey
district, we were provided with military training, including how
to crawl, for example.  Three days later, we were trained how to
dissemble and clean the weapons.  We worked on the AK rifle.
Later, we were taught how to mine and de-mine and how to throw
grenades.
After we learned all these techniques, then we were taught how to
shoot, including the AK 47 and also the rocket launcher.  We were
trained in several weapons.  After a few months then we were put
into actual practice.  We didn't know how we would be tested, so
we were asked to practice shooting for an hour.  I was asked to
shoot the B-40 rocket launcher.  I had no problem with firing
that rocket launcher, but for the other guns, I could not do it.
After I fired three rounds of the rocket launcher, then I had
problems with my ears.  The blood dripped from my ears.  Then
they noticed that my health was not good enough to fire the
rocket launcher, so later on I was assigned to work at the rear
battlefield to carry ammunition and weapons to the front and to
provide food to the soldiers, and also to look after the wounded.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The lawyer, you are reminded to ask questions related to the
civil party and to S-21 in Phnom Penh and to Prey Sar.  That is
the facts before our proceeding and our jurisdiction is from the
17 April '75 to the 7 January '79.  The facts related to this
civil party from the 10th of October '77 until the time she
claims she was detained to a detention centre for 15 days.  And
later on she was sent to Prey Sar and subsequently she was sent
to S'ang to grow vegetables until the Liberation Day of the 7
January '79
MS. JACQUIN:
Yes, Mr. President.  I apologize for these questions which
allowed me to put Ms. Chin Met's integration into the Khmer Rouge
into their context.
Now, I would like to speak about the detention centre.  She today
has traces of this on her arms and on her ankles.  Can she tell
us which torture instrument inflicted these traces on her body?
Q. The tools which was used to torture me, I could not see them.
As I said from the beginning, during that time I was blindfolded.
I thought the people who blindfolded me were probably those whom
I could recognize.  I was beaten and probably I was beaten with a
rattan stick.  It's not a whip because the sound was different.
My ankle was clamped with something.  I am not sure if it was a
pincer or a plier.  And the other part of the ankle which was
bruised, it was the result of being beaten.  In summary, I did
not see the torturing tools.
Q. She stated to us that when she returned to her cell after her
interrogation that one of her friends helped her to heal with her
krama.  Can she tell us why she was bleeding?
A. At that time the blood was flowing as a result of torture.
After I was taken back into the cell, the blindfold was removed.
After I was out into the cell, then they locked the door from the
outside.
Then Comrade Moeun saw the blood flowing from my leg.  I was so
weak at the time I was feeling like I fainted.  Comrade Moeun
looked at the wound on my leg and asked whether I hurt and she
wanted to find something to fix the wound.  I actually had a
krama with me so she ripped the krama and tied the wound on my
leg.
Q. Did she see her friends in her cell also being taken away with
a blindfold?
A. Comrade Moeun and Comrade Yat and I, myself, were in the same
room.  When the guards came, the guard would call each one of us
and then she would be blindfolded and taken away.  I did not know
where she was taken.
In about an hour, she would be brought back, and when she was
brought back her physical condition was in really bad shape.  I
think we all received the same type of torture and mistreatment.
Q. Was she also bleeding and were they in a different physical
condition from the day when they went to the shower?
A. When Comrade Moeun went for the shower and upon her return, we
did not notice her physical condition because every one of us was
scared.  We only sat on our own.
Q. She told us that when she was in the detention centre that she
heard cries.  Does she believe that somebody could have been in
this detention centre without hearing these cries and these
howls?
A. At night time when we slept, I heard the groaning.  Then I
thought probably those people who were arrested before us from
the unit were receiving torture.  That's what I was thinking at
the time, and the rest of us thought the same.  So we whispered
to each other what was going on and we presumed that instead of
taken to be educated, they were brought here to be tortured.
Q. Did she, as well as her friends, consider suicide?
A. When we were in the same room, the three of us talked.  If
they only tied our feet and if our hands were not tied, then if
there was any tool nearby then we would all agree to commit
suicide.  However, in that room, there was no tool, nothing left.
It was just plain wall.  We thought of committing suicide, but we
had no opportunity.
Q. Afterwards, I would like to put a few questions to her
concerning the period when she was in Unit 17.
She said to us that when some of them did not work sufficiently,
they were beaten and sometimes beaten to death.  And with which
instruments were they being beaten?
A. When I was in Unit 17, what I saw with my own eyes was that
when we were used to drag the plough to plough the ground, the
rice field, Comrade Kea had a wound on her leg.  When we dragged
the plough for one or two rounds, it was okay, but for the third
or the fourth round she stumbled and fell on to the ground.
Then the man, who was using us to plough to ground, used a stick
to hit on Kea and she got seizure after that.  So the three of us
tried to beg that old man not to beat her up and to help her, but
he did not care.  Instead, he beat us up.  And later on we
dragged Kea to the rice dyke and I didn't know later on what
happened to her.
Q. Finally, before I let my colleague take the floor, she
explained to us that her father had gone to school, and she said
that he was from the same district as the accused.  So does she
believe that the accused might have known her father during his
youth?
A. I don't know whether Uncle Duch knew my father or not, but
through my conclusion, since my father was the police he would
have worked in several locations in Kampong Thom, and he would
have stationed at Peam Bang where he would be known by Duch
because he would be called Chief Chin, and I think Duch may have
known him.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Mr. President, Your Honours.
BY MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Q. Good morning, Madam Chin Met.  I would like to put a few
questions to you.
Do you still remember, before you were arrested were you pregnant
or what was your situation back then?
A. When I was at Division 310 - 450, we worked in the women's
unit but we had very modest food, although we could eat enough
compared to at a later date, and we were taken care of and we ate
rice mixed with banana trees.  And I and other women were healthy
although it was not very healthy.
Q. Do you think that your photo resembles your real physical
condition the time before you were arrested?
A. It was the real physical condition that I was -- while I was
being taken a photograph, but I looked rather sad in the photo
because I was terrified when I was called to have my photograph
taken, and I think was back then the same size and my physical
fitness was exactly the same as what I was in the photo.
Q. Thank you.  Could you please emphasize further, when you were
called to have your biography and photo taken, how long was it
before you were arrested and sent to the prison?
A. Yan asked me to have my biography taken in June or July and I
asked Yan why I would be called to give my biography so often.
If I would ultimately be arrested, let arrest me.  Why should I
be called so often?
Q. Thank you.  Yesterday, you said about this and today you
repeated your statement that you and your female colleagues --
inmates attempted to commit suicide time and again.  You would
like to die.  Why would that happen to you?  How did you feel
that made you want to commit suicide?
A. When three of us had lived together during the battlefields
until we were transferred to Kilo Number 6 and Kilo Number 7, we
shared the same sentiment.  We understood one another very well.
We knew the suffering and we knew that we could not stand the
situation.  We wished we could be living peacefully with our
parents.  We were betrayed.  That's why we made a decision to
commit suicide all together.
When we were sent to Prey Sar a few days later Ouen and Yat
disappeared and I realized that those two people must have been
killed, although the chief of the unit told me that they would be
taken to be educated.
So, after all, I was the only person in the group who remained,
and then I learned that the bark of the tree -- what we call in
Khmer  --  Kantout tree, could be very poisonous and I could have
it dried and mixed up with potato, and then I would consume it to
kill myself.  But it did not kill me but it gave me some
strength, and then I was reassured by a woman who told me to be
strong, "Life means struggle".
So I had to be very cautious of living longer and I was asked to
abandon my suicidal plan because it was not good to die without
any cause; for example, commit suicide would be not a good idea.
So she even told me that God could not save anyone who committed
suicide.  God only helped people who struggled their life until
the last day.  So I was encouraged to work on.
Q. Thank you very much for your clarification.
Since time is limited, I would like to also tell you that in this
hearing you can make your requests or suggestions, after our
questioning, to the Chamber.  And you may express your requests
and you may also ask questions of your sufferings to be put to
the accused concerning S-21.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
And, finally I, with the President's leave, would like to ask
some questions to the accused, Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, regarding some
certain issues he stated earlier.  With your leave, I may put the
questions now?
MR. PRESIDENT:
You are allowed to put the questions.
Mr. Kaing Guek Eav, please be ready and respond to the questions
by the civil party lawyer.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Before I put questions, I think my questions would implicate the
time allocated to the other lawyers, and if the response of Kaing
Guek Eav would be included in the time allocated, I would not be
asking that question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Your time is well calculated with the question and response.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Thank you, Mr. President; however, I would like to put the
questions to Mr. Kaing Guek Eav now.
In your statements and responses concerning the photograph of the
people who were beheaded would not be taken photograph, and that
you said any photograph would be taken of any particular detainee
to prove that the person died and that the upper echelon would
later on be informed based on this evidence -- the photograph as
evidence.
The question is that the photo of Madam Chin Met displayed on the
board at S-21 is the proof of the person or of an enemy who would
have been smashed?  What do you think abut this?  Would she be
the perished enemy?
Another question, the civil parties has already mentioned about
her father's name, Chief Chin.  Do you know the police chief, Mr.
Chin?
And can you tell us why the person, for example like Chin Met,
who shares the home village like you, would be sent to Prey Sar
to be inflicted the hard work like slave?
You also told the Court that any interrogation to female
detainees at S-21 would be carried out by female cadres.  And you
mentioned that at one point a male interrogator inserted a stick
into her genitals.  She was your teacher.  I did not know whether
when the female detainees took the assignment they still
proceeded the practice --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do you think that with a lot of questions like that the accused
would be able to remember and respond properly?  If you were
asked the same long question, would you be able to respond to
that question?
So now it is time for the accused to actually respond to the
civil party lawyer, based on what you can remember.  Otherwise,
you can ask the civil party lawyer to repeat his questions if you
feel like the questions were too long and that it is far beyond
your memory.
So the floor is yours.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. Lawyer, first regarding the photography.  A photograph would
have been taken by the upper echelon.  Regarding any particular
detainee, the upper echelon would like the photo to be taken.
Number two, regarding the beheading of any detainee, I still
maintain my position.
Number three, regarding Mr. Chin.  I don't know his full name,
Choeun Chin.  I did not know where he stationed in Steung
district.  I left the district to study in Kampong Thom school.
I only paid a visit once in a year to the home town and, later
on, I never paid any visit to the village.
I remember that in 1964 the police who stationed at Steung, there
were an inspector police who were deployed at the district, but I
did not know them.  I know the police chief, Tong (phonetic).  I
did not know Mr. Chin, so I'm frank.  I don't know them.
So I can only manage to respond to the three questions.  If you
would like to ask me further questions, please one question at a
time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyer, you have three minutes, including the
question and response.  If your question eats up all the three
minutes, then the response would not be expected.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Thank you.  I would like to ask the last important question on
behalf of my client and the civil party group 3.
This question is to the accused.  He said in any cases, he is
responsible emotionally for the crimes he committed and in the
eyes of all victims.  So can you please tell Madam Chin Met at
this time whether your emotional responsibility, to what extent
does it mean before her actually?
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. Lawyer, regarding Chin Met, I am not responsible emotionally.
I am responsible fully for the crimes committed before the Court.
That's all.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers have no further time left to put
questions to the civil party.
Since it is now time to take and adjournment, the Court will take
the adjournment for 17 minutes.  We resume at 11 a.m.
The Court official, could you please make sure that Madam Chin
Met can have a good rest.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1045H to 1105H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We will continue to hear the testimony of the civil party, Chin
Met.
I would like to give the floor to the defence counsel.  If you
have questions for the civil party, the floor is yours.
I notice the presence of the civil party lawyer.
MR. KIM MENGKHY:
Mr. President, Your Honours, on behalf of the civil party lawyers
group 3 and also on behalf of the other civil party lawyers, I
would like to submit a request on the time allocation for the
civil party lawyers.
In previous proceedings, the Chamber informed the civil party
lawyers on the time allocation to the accused and to the
witnesses, and that the time spent to ask the accused will not be
taken into consideration or deducted from the time allocation for
the civil party lawyers.
If that is the case, there shall be another five minutes
remaining for other civil party lawyers to put questions to the
civil party.  I would submit that the President permit and grant
us five more minutes for other civil party lawyers.
And as you have noted, the civil party took two or three minutes
to console herself.  This is just my request.  And as I took most
of the time, other civil party lawyers did not have the
opportunity to ask questions to the civil party.
I would seek your approval for an additional five minutes for
other civil party lawyers.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber will not allow it.
Now, the Chamber will give the floor to the defence counsel.  Is
there questions to be put to this civil party?
MS. JACQUIN:
(Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber already decided additional time is not allowed.
THE INTERPRETER:
The Interpreter would like to request that Ms. Jacquin activate
her mic, please?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Lawyer, you can sit down because you are not allowed any
additional time.
MS. JACQUIN:
(Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT
The Chamber does not grant additional time.  The time for the
civil party lawyers ran out.
MS. JACQUIN:
(Microphone not activated)
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, you take the floor.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Good morning, Your Honours.  Good morning, the Chamber.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Chin Met, in your complaint you claimed you wrote it by
yourself.  You described that you were stuffed with fish sauce
and soapy water.  However, during your oral testimony yesterday,
you stated you were splashed soapy water or fish sauce on your
face, and you also confirmed you tasted the water and it was fish
sauce or soapy water.
There is a distinction when you were forced to drink the water or
when you are splashed with water.  How come there is a
discrepancy in your complaint in comparison to your oral
testimony yesterday in responding to the President's question?
Can you elaborate on this?
A. I, myself, was splashed with the water, but for the other two
women they were forced to drink the water.  So amongst the three
of us, the other two were forced to drink the water and I myself
was splashed the water on.
Q. This complaint is your personal complaint and that you claimed
that you personally wrote it, and that you were stuffed with fish
sauce and soapy water.  You did not state that the other two
women were forced to drink the water.
My second question.  In your complaint, you claimed that you
wrote by yourself that you were also electrocuted; however, when
the President asked you yesterday, you stated you were not
electrocuted.  Why is there this discrepancy?  Can you elaborate?
A. At the detention centre I was not electrocuted, but I was
electrocuted at my unit when I was asked to make my biography.
Yann personally asked me the questions.  At the detention centre,
I was only beaten and I was splashed with fish sauce and soapy
water, and my ankle was clamped with an instrument that I could
not identify.
Q. Thank you.  So at Prey Sar you were not electrocuted.  Instead
you were electrocuted at your unit.  Is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. Thank you.
A. At Prey Sar unit I was not electrocuted.
Q. Thank you.  At the place where you grew vegetables at S'ang,
can you further elaborate?  How could you identify the location
as S'ang?
A. There was an island, and next to the place where we grew
vegetables there was a river, and there were also big mango trees
and there were a lot of rows of vegetable beds.  They also grew
young seedlings and all types of vegetables.  After we collect
the production, then a car would come and collect them.
Q. That's what I want to know.  Thank you.
So when the Vietnamese came in, you fled.  Whom did you flee with
amongst those who grew vegetables with you?  Were there any
people from S-21 or Prey Sar going along with you?
A. When I fled from the place where we grew vegetables, we all
ran together, but when there were a lot of Vietnamese armoured
tanks coming from behind we fled in separate directions.
Q. So you said you were all fleeing together.  I want to know who
were those people?
A. Those people in my group -- there were five of us.  Leng,
Kheng and the other two whose names I did not know, but we
separated at Kampong Tralach.
Q. So you did not run away with the Prey Sar group?
A. No, I did not know where the Prey Sar group went.  There were
many of them.
Q. Thank you.  Another question.
When you were arrested from your unit, you presumed that you were
detained at S-21 for
days and nights.  Did you ever wonder why           15   in that room there were only Moeun and Yat who were your
associates, and that you did not see any other people, any other
prisoners or any other people from the units?  You only saw two
other people from your same unit.  Did you ever wonder about
that?
A. As I stated earlier, when I was arrested, I didn't know
whether it was Prey Sar or S-21 where I was detained.  I was
placed and I was detained in a location.  That was what I stated
to the President from the beginning.
Q. Thank you.  What I said is that you might be confused from the
detention centre of your unit to S-21 because you were detained
and there were only two only people from your same unit.  Because
at Prey Sar, there were other people from other units and that is
the point I would like clarification.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I do not have any more questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel, you take the floor.
BY MS. CANIZARES:
Q. You indicated that back then you did not know that you were at
Tuol Sleng, however, recently you went to Tuol Sleng with
representatives from the DC-Cam organization.
Were you able to find the cell where you had been detained, as
well as the place where you had been interrogated?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I need to object or clarify better.  It was not DC-Cam; it was
CSD, the organization -- and to phrase the question accurately to
the civil party.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, you can ask the question again
appropriately.
MS. CANIZARES:
Maybe it was a mistake on my part, or I don't know if it was a
problem with the translation but I believe, however, that my
question was appropriate.
BY MS. CANIZARES:
Q. You have indicated, therefore, that you did not know that you
were at Tuol Sleng back then, and recently you returned to Tuol
Sleng with representatives from an organization, and were you
able to find the cell where you had been detained?  And were you
also able to find the place where you had been interrogated?
A. When I went to visit Tuol Sleng I could not recognize whether
I was detained there.  When I was detained I was always
blindfolded, so I had no opportunity to recognize anything.
Q. Can we therefore say that the only element that allows you to
say that you had been detained at Tuol Sleng is your photograph
which is on display over there?
A. When I saw my own photograph, as well as the photographs of
the females in my unit, I did not realize I was detained at Tuol
Sleng but probably -- maybe those people also from the same unit
or the chief of the unit would be detained there as well, because
Tuol Sleng was a big prison.  That's why in my complaint I
concluded that the other four people were also killed at Tuol
Sleng.
Q. If I have understood correctly, even by seeing your photograph
very recently at Tuol Sleng, this is not what allowed you to say
that you had been detained at Tuol Sleng?
A. As I said, I did not know whether I was detained at Tuol Sleng
or not.  I told you I was detained at a detention centre and
whether it was Tuol Sleng or S-21 or not, I did not know at the
time.
MS. CANIZARES:
Since the civil party confirmed to us that she does not yet know
whether or not she was at Tuol Sleng, I no longer have any
further questions to put to her.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Kar Savuth, you take the floor.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, after I heard the testimony, she said during the
15 days' incarceration, "You could not see anything because you
were blindfolded."
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. This leads to me wondering how could you know that your ankle
was bleeding if you were blindfolded, and how could another
female detainee fix your wound if you were all blindfolded?  Can
you elaborate on this matter?
A. When I was tortured they blindfolded us, but when the guards
took us back into the room then the blindfold was removed.
During the initial three days we were blindfolded the whole time
but after that, when we were in the cell we were not blindfolded.
Q. Thank you.  But you just responded to my co-counsel that you
were blindfolded and you could not see anything.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Madam Chin Met.  The Chamber acknowledges that it is
difficult for you to respond to various questions raised by the
Chamber and the parties, and due to the facts that the events
occurred a long time ago and you had lived through the sufferings
and miserable conditions during the three years, eight months and
20 days period.  Actually you had suffered before 1970 that you
lost your parents in early stage and then you were raised by your
grandmother.
We notice that you have been striving to survive and you have so
far provided us a complete account of what we asked you.  The
Chamber no longer have questions for you.  You are now free to
return back to your residence.
Court officer, can you make necessary arrangements for the return
of the civil party, in co operation with the WESU unit?  And
Court officer, after that can you invite E2/32 to enter the
courtroom?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Mr. President, I would like to make some preliminary remarks
related to the civil party E2/80 and further, I'm a little bit
worried because she left the courtroom this morning, and I would
like to be granted, after my preliminary remarks on her
testimony, to get some minutes to speak to her again because she
is very moved emotionally.  And for my preliminary remarks I
would need, I would say, not more than five minutes.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Do you want to make your preliminary remarks before the civil
party provides their testimony?  Is this correct?  Can you
clearly state your observation, because I, the President of the
Chamber cannot understand your request?  Can you make it clearly,
because I do not understand what you have just said?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, thank you.
I would like to make some preliminary remarks concerning the
testimony of the civil party E2/80 and I would need not more than
five minutes for this.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Yes, Ms. Studzinsky, are you talking about E2/80 or 32?  That's
where the confusion is arising, I think.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I am sorry.  Yes, I correct; E2/32.  Sorry.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Go ahead.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Today, our client will dare to reveal for the first time her
story, which is much broader than it appears in the victim
information form.  She is strongly encouraged by so many
witnesses and civil parties who dared and started to talk about
their stories.  She has never talked before about it except
recently to the lawyers.
Her story will include, among others, the following facts:
first, her personal relationship to high ranking Khmer Rouge
relatives like her Uncle Oeun, most probably Spelf Him, the
secretary of Division 310.
Second, she will talk about the fact that she had a training to
become a medic and that she subsequently worked in Tuol Sleng as
a medic.
Third, she will talk about the fact that two of her elder
brothers worked as well in Tuol Sleng.  And fourth, she will talk
about the accused and her observations that she made how he was
personally and physically involved in treatment -- I want to be
very general at this point -- towards two of her relatives who
were imprisoned in Tuol Sleng.
Our client is, therefore, very excited, discomposed and nervous
to speak today before this Court, but she is strongly willed to
give a full testimony because she is now less scared and dares to
speak out what she could not do when she submitted and filled in
the victim's information form that you, Your Honours, and the
parties know which is included in the case file.
So it is expected that she will be sometimes emotional,
overwhelmed and will face difficulties to continue, and I plead
to the Chamber to take into account this special situation and
the fact that her family will listen and will hear for the first
time this story and to -- and, therefore, I plead to the Chamber
if this occurs and then she needs more time this time should be
granted and without calling on her to control her emotions.
These emotions are necessarily going with her testimony and are
also evidence for the Chamber, non-verbal evidence, and should be
taken into account and into consideration and to wait -- that is
one option -- until she can continue or as the President has
already practiced during the last days, if necessary to give a
break -- grant a break for the civil parties.
These are my submissions and, of course, only one last remark:
What I have listed here, the facts on which she will -- about
which she will talk here in the Court are not exhaustive, these
are only examples and short, very short summaries, and we will
hear and the Chamber and the parties will hear and the public her
whole testimony.
This is, of course, not all, so far my observations and thank you
very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Silvia Cartwright will take the floor.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Yes.  Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Ms. Studzinsky, for outlining those matters and
explaining that it was only after you had further discussed her
testimony with her that you learned of these additional matters.
Can you help me with some information about when you first met
with E2/32 or when any member of your team met with her in order
to prepare her for the possibility of coming to Court and/or
filling out the right information for the Court's benefit?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I do not remember.  It is long -- I would say a long time ago.  I
do absolutely not remember the date when I discussed for the
first time with her, her story.
But it was revealed and disclosed for me and my whole team
recently; that was before this session -- not today the session
in the Court, but two weeks -- yes, 10 days, I would say, ago.
When I requested additional time is needed for the civil party I
did it immediately on the next day in Court but she did not
disclose it before, and that was the fact.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you.
Can you confirm that it was your civil party group who put this
person forward as someone who would be a useful witness for the
Court to hear?  Was it on your suggestion?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Yes, that is true.  But, of course ---
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Well, I'd like to just ask one other question then.  So when you
put her forward as a witness, you had not gone thoroughly through
her information, as you have done very recently?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I discussed with her but she did not disclose the story.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
So you have met with her twice or three times?
MS. STUDZINSKY:
For this discussion, twice; but once a long time ago, and then
very recently 10 days ago or one week ago -- 10 days ago, I
think.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
And perhaps just for the general benefit of the lawyers for the
civil parties, it might help to know that the Trial Chamber many
weeks ago had an assessment taken of witnesses to make sure that
they were able emotionally and, if necessary, physically to give
evidence in Court, and also to seek advice on how best to treat
such witnesses in Court.
So observations that are made perhaps have been made without that
knowledge, and we are all of course very experienced Judges and
perhaps don't need the advice always that you give us.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court official is now instructed to bring in civil party Nam
Mon into the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
MS. CANIZARES:
Mr. President, may you please allow me to put a question?  Could
you please ask my colleague if she might have documents that are
different from those that we have, or complementary documents to
present during the questioning of the civil party?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Studzinsky, are you able to present any additional documents?
So far as we observed, we only knew that there is not any other
additional document except the one already filed in the case
file.  Are you now in the position to provide those documents?
Because normally the parties propose such documents.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
Thank you, Mr. President.
No, there are no additional documents.  If not, I would have
provided them to the Chamber and the parties -- at least until
today.  I don't know if at a later stage additional documents can
be found, but so far I do not have -- or are not in the situation
to have additional documents.
Thank you.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Your name is Nam Mon.  Is that correct?
A. Yes, Mr. President, I am Nam Mon.
Q. Do you use other names, other than Mon?
A. I would be also called Rouen Chantha.
Q. When did you start using the last name, Roeun Chantha.
A. I used this name in 1975.
Q. What about Nam Mon?  When did you use this name?
A. The name was used when I lived with my parents.  Later on,
when I settled down in Phnom Penh, I then used another name:
Roeun Chantha.
Q. What is your official name registered in your local community?
Do you still use Roeun Chantha  or Nam Mon?
A. Nam Mon is the official name here at the current day.
Q. Other than these two names do you use other names?
A. No, I don't.  Mr. President, these are the only two names I
have used.
Q. How old are you this year?
A. I am 48 years old now.
Q. Where do you live and what do you do for the living?
A. I live in Kya village, Kampong Siem district, Kampong Cham
province.  I am a peasant.
Q. Where were you born?
A. I was born in Romeas village, Kampong Siem district, the same
province.
Q. What is your father's name?
A. His name was Yorn but when he came to live in Phnom Penh with
us he changed to Prak.
Q. What is his full name?
A. When he went into Tuol Sleng his name was Chuon Yorn.
Q. When he used the name Prak, what was the full name back then?
A. He used Yiet Prak.
Q. Yiet Prak; is that correct?
(No interpretation)
Q. Do you know when was he born?  Your father, I mean.
A. No, I don't.
Q. What is your mother's name?
A. Currently her name was -- at the village she was Toh but now
in Phnom Penh she would be called San.
Q. What is her full name?
A. Her full name is Khin Toh, now changed to Khin San.
Q. Khin Soh or Khin Toh?  Please repeat your mother's name.
A. Toh.
Q. When was she born?
A. I don't know, Mr. President.
Q. How many brothers and sisters have you got?
A. I have five siblings; four brothers, one sister, and I am the
only single daughter in the family.
Q. Where do you come in the family?
A. I am the third child in the family.
Q. Can you tell us the names of your brothers, starting from the
eldest brother until your youngest brother?
A. I can.  My brother was Roeun, then Noeun, then Khin, then I
myself, and the youngest brother named Yon.
Q. You said there were five siblings.  Now, after what you have
told us we seem to miss one person.  So Khin is the third child,
so you're the fourth child in the family, right?
Can you tell us the full names of your brothers?
A. They used the family name Yiet.  Yiet Roeun, Yiet Khoeun.
Q. What about your youngest brother?  What is his family name?
A. His family name was Prak -- Prak Yon.
Q. The Chamber has received your civil party application to join
as the civil party.  Our question at this moment is that whether
you would like to seek reparations, civil reparations on your
behalf, or would you want the civil party lawyers, your civil
party lawyers, to act on your behalf?
A. Regarding the civil party reparations, I would like to allow
my lawyers to act on my behalf.
Q. Now, we are talking about the damages, physical and emotional
damages.  Can you describe about them a little bit to the Court?
A. I am now fighting to find justice for my parents and brothers.
Q. You have decided to join as the civil party in this case.  So
how are you related to the facts in which Kaing Guek Eav, alias
Duch, is the accused?
A. I have suffered a great deal because my father was detained
along with me and my brothers at S-21.  I would like to tell the
Court that my father had worked so hard, but after all he was
detained for no reason.
Q. So, in conclusion, the reason you have lodged your civil party
application to join as a civil party in this case, and that the
facts that are related here are the facts that have the relation
with S-21, now known as Kuok Tuol Sleng or Tuol Sleng prison.
And, number two, it is related to the Security Office, S-21.  Of
course, you said your father was detained along with your
brothers at the detention centre.  Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. Are your brothers related to the crimes committed at S-21?
A. My parents, my brothers, were directly detained at Tuol Sleng
prison.  I know the location very well because when I worked in
the hospital, I was working here at Tuol Sleng.
Q. It is not yet time that you know the premises correctly or
clearly or Tuol Sleng prison.  Of course, now it is well-known as
Tuol Sleng.  The Chamber is going to hear your testimony
concerning that matter.
But we would like to ask a few more questions before that.  The
question is that whether you are here because you are here on
behalf of your brothers and on behalf of the other relatives who
were detained at the location, and what happened to them
actually, and what happened to you in person?
Another brother of yours, the youngest named Prak Yon.  I hope
you understand my question.  So what happened to your family
members -- your parents, your brothers, the elder brothers and
your youngest brother?  And what happened, in particular, to you
that makes you join here as the civil party to seek justice for
them and for you?
A. I am here today to seek justice for my family.  My father came
to Phnom Penh in 1974.  He had been working for the Khmer Rouge
since we were young.
In 1975, he was evacuated and ---
Q. Please wait.  You will have the moment to tell us details
about the facts, but please answer to my questions.
Were they deceased or were they detained and then released and
were all of them executed at the location and tell us about this
question, this matter a little bit, because it is just the
introductory matter to the other matters.  We would like to know
about this brief information before you can have the whole
afternoon to tell your account.
So what happened to your brothers and the other people of your --
members of the family?
A. Mr. President, the fact was that my father was detained at
Tuol Sleng.  He was the chief of logistics in Phnom Penh.  In
1977, he was arrested and detained at Tuol Sleng prison, along
with my other siblings and my mother, including myself.  We were
detained and cuffed at Tuol Sleng.  My elder siblings were
ordered to kill my father.
Q. So it means your parents were arrested and sent and executed
at Tuol Sleng.  What happened to your three other brothers?  What
were their fates?
A. My two other brothers were used as guards at Tuol Sleng.  They
were ordered to kill my father and later on they were killed.  I
saw the event with my own eyes.
Q. What happened to your younger brother?  Was he dead or he's
still alive?
A. My younger brother was also arrested along with my mother and
detained at Tuol Sleng.  My mother also died at Tuol Sleng, along
with my younger brother, but they died at different times.
Q. You, yourself, you were detained at Tuol Sleng.  How long were
you detained at Tuol Sleng and when were you released?  And after
you were released, where were you taken to?
A. I was arrested and detained at Tuol Sleng for about three
months.  Later on, I was transferred to Prey Sar.  I was shackled
in one individual cell.
Q. Until when were you released from Prey Sar prison?
A. Toward late '78, I was transferred to Prey Totueng prison in
Kampong Cham and later on I was rescued by the Vietnamese
soldiers.
Q. Thank you.  Thank you, Madam Nam Mon, for providing
preliminary information.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Because now it is time for a break for lunch, the Chamber will
adjourn and it will resume at 1.30 p.m. this afternoon.
Court officer, can you make necessary arrangements for Madam Nam
Mon in co-operation with the Victims Unit.
Security guards, take the accused back to the detention facility
and bring him back before 1.30.
The Chamber is adjourned.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1202H to 1330H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
We will continue to hear the testimony of the civil party Nam
Mon.
Before we start our questioning of the civil party, I would like
to announce the time allocation for the parties in questioning
the witnesses and the experts, as set out in the sitting schedule
started from next Monday until the 25th of August, 2009.
The Chamber would like to notify the parties that the Chamber has
allocated the time in questioning the witnesses and the experts
for each.  For the Co-Prosecutor 30 minutes for one day witness
and 40 minutes for all the four civil party lawyers and 40
minutes for the defence counsel.
Based on this time allocation for the parties for hearing the
testimony of a witness or an expert which takes half a day, the
Co-Prosecutors would have 15 minutes, the civil party lawyers,
the four groups, 20 minutes and the defence counsel will have 20
minutes.
For hearing the testimony of a witness or an expert, which will
take one and a half days, the Co-Prosecutors would have 45
minutes and the four groups of the civil party lawyers will have
60 minutes and 60 minutes for the defence counsel.
For the testimony of a witness or an expert which takes two days,
the Co-Prosecutors will have 60 minutes, the civil party lawyers,
the four groups, would have 80 minutes and the defence counsel
will have 80 minutes.
Please take note of the time allocation for your party.
Now, we will proceed with the hearing of the testimony of civil
party Nam Mon.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Nam Mon, this morning the Chamber asked you some preliminary
information regarding the facts which are the grounds for your
application to join as a civil party in this case.
Now, the Chamber would like to know about your accounts and the
accounts of your family during the Democratic Kampuchea regime
three years, eight months and 20-day period when you and your
family had experienced.
Can you describe your life experience or your accounts, both
personally experienced by yourself and your family?
A. The background and activities of my parents and my siblings
and myself; we used to live in the forest.  My parents joined the
resistance movement since I was very young.  He later worked as
an infiltrator in Phnom Penh and my mother was a miscellaneous
vendor.  And, in '75, we were evacuated.
I lived in Phnom Penh from early '75 until '78.  My parents were
the resistance in the revolution.  And after the successful
defeat of the previous regime, he was detained and killed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Can you describe more in details?
Because when we asked you regarding the grounds for your
application as a civil party to the case, you seemed to want to
describe the accounts of your family members and yourself through
the entire period of the Democratic Kampuchea.  That is the
reason the Chamber provided you the opportunity to describe the
accounts.
Can you do that?  Can you do that in more, much more details from
the beginning?
And the emphasis shall be on the periods after the 17 April, 1975
until the date of the arrest of your family members, including
your parents and your siblings, by the Khmer Rouge force and the
treatment or activities inflicted upon you and your parents and
your siblings by the Khmer Rouge force.  And also the accounts
that you yourself left alone or with your younger brother until a
later date, that is at 7 January, 1975.
These are the accounts that the Chamber want to know, and that
the Chamber wants you to describe to the Chamber so that the
Chamber can understand your experience and your family members'
experience.  Can you do that?
A. Yes, I can do that.
I lived with my parents in Phnom Penh.  I lived in Tuol Sleng.  I
worked as a medic in Tuol Sleng and my father worked in logistics
to the north of Tuol Sleng.  I did not know why they arrested my
father, and my two uncles were also arrested.  I did not know the
reasons for their arrests.  I did not know what mistakes they
made.
I lived miserably during the period.  I separated from my parents
and my siblings.  My uncles had been arrested since mid-1976 and
my father was arrested in '77, and my mother in late '77 when my
younger brother was also arrested.
I lived alone and I met my younger sibling at Prey Totueng
prison.  That was my younger sibling, but my blood younger
brother already died with my mother in the prison.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please listen carefully to my question.  I think it is difficult
for you to describe the accounts due to the long period of time,
and it is also emotional for you to recall the sufferings and the
miserable accounts.  It is, therefore, likely the result for you
not to be able to appropriately describe the accounts to the
Chamber.
Before the 17th April 1975, where did you live and what were you
doing at the time?
A. Before 1975, I lived in Phnom Penh with my parents.
Q. Please listen to the question carefully.  I have attempted two
times already.
You cannot describe in details your accounts.  It's going to be
confusing if you cannot listen carefully to the question, so it
will be hard for the Chamber to determine the accounts.
And your parents -- before 17th April 1975, where were they and
what were their occupations?
A. Before 1975, they lived in Phnom Penh.  They were vendor in
Phnom Penh.
Q. Where's about in Phnom Penh; Phnom Penh was a huge city?
There were districts and quarters.  Which section of Phnom Penh
they were, from what you can recall?
A. I cannot recall since I was young at the time.
Q. After the liberation of the 17th April 1975, where were you
and where were your parents and siblings?
A. In 1975, I lived in Phnom Penh.  My siblings and my parents
also lived in Phnom Penh.  I was sent to study medicine by my
father in Phnom Penh.
Q. What about your parents after the liberation?  Had they
returned to Kampong Cham province?
A. No, they did not.  They only went up to Prek Kdam and they
returned.
Q. When your family and yourself returned to Phnom Penh, why did
you return, and on what day you returned back to Phnom Penh from
Prek Kdam?
A. I could not recall the date, but it was in 1975.  After the
people were evacuated from Phnom Penh, my father and the family
returned and he was in charge of logistics.
Q. He was in charge of logistics.  Which department or which
ministry, and where did he work?  Can you recall?
A. I did not know where he worked.  I did not know Phnom Penh
clearly at the time, I was still young.
Q. Can you recall in 1975, how old were you?
A. In 1975, I was 15 years old.
Q. What about your residence?  You said the Khmer Rouge fell.
Had you returned to live in Phnom Penh?  Where did you live?  Do
you know the location where you lived?  For example, like
somewhere near Tuol Kok or Tuol Sangkae or Ponchentong or Steung
Meanchey, for example?  Which part of Phnom Penh did you live?
A. I cannot recall.  I only know I lived to the south of the Tuol
Sleng prison.
Q. Do you know why your family returned and that your parents
returned and worked in Phnom Penh when you only reached Prek Kdam
and you returned?
A. I did not know about his resistance movement because maybe his
network contacted him to work in Phnom Penh.  I only followed my
parents.
Q. You stated that your family returned to live to the south of
the present Tuol Sleng prison location, and you said your father
was in charge of logistics.
What about your mother?  What was her occupation?
A. She did not do anything.  She stayed at home.
Q. What about the three eldest siblings who returned to Phnom
Penh after the 17th April 1975?  Did they live with your parents
as well?  And what were their occupations?
A. My two elder siblings were the Tuol Sleng guards, and another
elder brother lived with my uncle near the Pochentong Airport.
They worked as soldiers guarding the Tuol Sleng prison from 1975.
Q. Amongst your three elder brothers, the two who worked at Tuol
Sleng, what were their names?
A. Noeun and Roeun are the two elder brothers who worked at Tuol
Sleng.
Q. During the time that your elder brothers worked in the Tuol
Sleng prison, where did they live?  Did they live within the
compound of their workplace or did they live with your parents
south of Tuol Sleng?
A. They lived where they worked.
Q. What about the other brother; he worked at the airport; right?
What was his name and what was his position at the airport?
A. The other brother named Koeun.  He worked with my uncle.  The
uncle was a pilot.
Q. You said your father was arrested by Angkar before the rest of
the family.  When was your father arrested by Angkar and where
was he arrested?
A. He was arrested in 1977.  I cannot recall the date.  He was
arrested from the place where he worked.
Q. Your father was arrested.  Was it during the day or the
night-time and how was he arrested?
A. They arrested him at about 6 p.m. but I did not -- how he was
arrested, I only saw when he was tied and blindfolded and walked
away.
Q. The house where your parents lived south of Tuol Sleng, how
far was that house from the current Tuol Sleng prison?  Do you
know the current Tuol Sleng prison?
A. Yes, I know.  I think it is like two kilometres away from Tuol
Sleng prison.
Q. So the house was two kilometres away from Tuol Sleng prison,
and when Angkar or the Khmer Rouge force arrested your father at
p.m., how did you know that your father was arrested, 
 
          6   blindfolded and put into the Tuol Sleng prison?  How did you
clearly know that?  Because the house where you and your father
lived was two kilometres away from the Tuol Sleng prison.  That's
one point.  And the other point is it was at 6 p.m.  Can you
elaborate on these two points?
A. When I said it was about 6 p.m. when he was arrested and
blindfolded, because I also lived in the Tuol Sleng prison, I was
a medic there and my elder brothers were the guards there, and we
saw our father when he was arrested and blindfolded.
Q. So it meant that when the Angkar arrested your father you were
not at your house with your father, you were at the S-21 or Tuol
Sleng prison, and that you saw your father arrested and sent to
Tuol Sleng because you met him accidentally when your father was
sent to the prison.  Is this what you want to say?
A. That is correct.
Q. You worked as a medic at Tuol Sleng prison.  When did you
start working there?  Can you recall the date?
A. I cannot recall the month.  I only can recall the year.  It
was in mid-'75.  I worked as a medic at the Tuol Sleng prison
until '77, when my parents were arrested.  Then I was removed
from being a medic.
Q. When you worked as a medic at the Tuol Sleng prison -- this is
the current name.  At that time it was called the S-21 Office,
but you said you worked at the Tuol Sleng prison.  The question
is what was the location of S-21 Office at the time when you
started to work as a medic in mid-'75?
A. Could you please rephrase your question?
Q. You just responded that you worked as a medic at the Tuol
Sleng prison in mid-'75, and the question is when you worked in
that Tuol Sleng prison, which was at that time called the
Santebal office, S-21, at that time where was the location of
that S-21 Office?  Was it at the current Tuol Sleng prison or
not?  I meant it is now called the Tuol Sleng Museum, or commonly
known as Tuol Sleng prison.
A. When I worked from the beginning, first of all, first I
started to study medicine at the current Radio Station Number 5,
and after that I came to work straightaway at where the current
Tuol Sleng prison was.  I worked as a medic there.
Q. During the time that you worked as a medic in the Tuol Sleng
prison, as you said, at that time what was the office called?
What was the name of the office where you worked?
A. I did not know what it was called.  I only know that only
senior prisoners would be detained there, and later on I heard
people refer to it as Tuol Sleng prison.
Q. During the time that you worked as a medic at the S-21 or Tuol
Sleng prison, as you said, the question is how many medics who
worked with you and what were their names, if you can recall?
A. We were assigned to work at the medics at S-21, known as Tuol
Sleng prison.  There were three people:  Lorn, Comrade Khim and I
myself.
Q. Comrade Lorn was a male medic.  What about Kim; was she male
or female?
A. They're all female medics.
Q. Now we would like to talk about your office where you worked
with Comrades Lorn  and Khim as medics.  Where did you routinely
carry out your work as the medics?  You can even point out
whether it was inside the location of the prison or in any
direction of that location.  If you don't remember exactly where
it is, just point to the direction you would remember.
A. I paid a visit to the location.  That place where I once
worked was to the north of the prison.  It's opposite the prison
itself.
Q. I don't understand why you said the prison faces north.  What
do you think; Tuol Sleng faces north or facing the other
direction?
A. I don't know.  I think from my own recollection, in my home
village, that direction opposite Tuol Sleng would be the north.
Q. So you are not quite sure where you would work but you know
that it was located right before the entrance to Tuol Sleng
prison.  Is that correct?
A. That's correct, Mr. President.  We were just in front of Tuol
Sleng prison.
Q. There was a road crossing between Tuol Sleng gate and that
location, I guess, so can you tell the Court again about the
location -- exact location of that place where you worked?  Was
that house located across from the gate, the front gate of S-21?
A. It was across from the front entrance to the prison on that
main road.
Q. Were there only three medics, and who actually was the team
leader of the group of three?
A. There were only three people assigned to be the medics and
there were no chief.  We were on our own.  Lorn, Khim and I were
equally as the medics.
Q. You said you worked as the medic.  Had you ever given any
treatments to anybody at that location?  I mean, were you
supposed to treat the detainees or staff at S 21?
A. We were divided into three groups.  I was in charge of one
building and the others would be assigned to cover other three
buildings.
Q. Could you please tell the Court in which building you were
supposed to work in?  You said about the building that lies from
the east to the west, for example.  What do you mean by that?
A. That building is very tall.  There are some coconut trees
behind it and it's the big building.
Q. So after entering that gate from the front gate, which
building -- to the left-hand side or to the right-hand side from
that gate that you worked in?
A. That building lies just right in front of the pathway when we
entered into that gate.  There were five buildings.  We've got
big buildings on the left and big building on the right.  So I
was assigned to work in the building which was to the north.
Q. Please be more precise, because you're talking about the
building and I seem to have a problem understanding which
building it was, the building in which you worked as a medic to
treat people in that building.  So tell me again.
A. When we walked past the gate there was a small building and
then we have a big building.  I know that there are five big
buildings, and I was in charge of the building which was to the
south of the location.
Q. What about the other two buildings, where were they?  You said
the small buildings were in the middle.  And what about the
bigger buildings?
A. The big buildings were surrounding the smaller buildings to
the west and to the east.
Q. When you treated the detainees, which building exactly did you
pay the visit to give that kind of treatment:  the building to
the west, to the north, to the south?  Which one is it in
particular?
A. I was in charge of the building to the south.
Q. Tell us again, when you entered into that location from the
front gate was the building to your left-hand side or to your
right-hand side, to be sure?
A. It depends.  If I face east then the building would be on my
right-hand side.  If I face west then it would be on my left-hand
side.
Q. Are you sure that you remember the east or the west?  You said
you are not sure of the direction but now you seem to be so
obvious that you know it.
So can you tell me where could you access to the S-21 -- from the
west or from the east?
A. So far as I remember, we entered from the north gate.
Q. Now, we come to the matter of your father.  You said you saw
him while he was being arrested.  Where were you back then and
what were you doing and that you saw your father being arrested?
A. I saw him being arrested at dusk.  We were on duty to see
whether there were any detainees who needed treatment.  Then I
could see him by chance.  I saw a prisoner was being walked from
a truck, down from a truck, and then I noted that it was my
father.
Q. Where did you live while you were working at that location?
Did you stay with your parents?
A. I worked and lived there with the other medics, all together,
right in front of Tuol Sleng prison.
Q. When you saw your father being arrested and sent into the
prison, was he trucked to that location or was he walked from
other location before he could be walked right into the S-21
compound the moment that you saw him?
A. I saw a truck close to the staircase and I only saw him being
walked by a guard from the truck and walked into the S-21
building.
Q. Can you describe about how you saw him?
A. Later on, I saw him being stripped of his clothes.  He was
tortured severely and I was traumatized.  I could not concentrate
on working any longer.
Q. He was tortured.  I mean, was he tortured while he was being
stripped of his clothes or was he tortured at another moment
after he arrived?
A. When he arrived, he was not tortured and I could continue my
routines.  And then I talked to detainees and they told me that
the room was filled with cadres and I went to another room.  Then
I could see my father.
Q. When you saw your father, it was the moment when he was being
walked from a truck and then put into the building and that his
clothes were stripped off.  Is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Did you see his biography being recorded or obtained, or his
photograph being taken before he was walked to the detention
cell?
A. I did not remember seeing him being taken photograph.  I only
learned that his photograph was taken when I paid the last visit
to the location recently and I saw his names and numbers.
Q. Do you still remember in which building your father was
detained and on which floor?
A. He was detained on the second floor in the special building.
There were all cadres.  No ordinary detainee would be kept there.
And he told me that I should try not to recognize him and I never
saw him again, ever since.
Q. You are talking about the special building.  Which building
was it?  Was it the building you were in charge of treating
detainees or was it another building?
A. It was that building but there was a special room designed for
cadres.
Q. In which floor was he kept?
A. My father was kept on the top floor, third floor.  Among him,
there were other four detainees.
Q. You are telling us that your father was executed.  Do you know
where he was executed?
A. I did not see where he was executed but my brother was ordered
to kill him.
Q. Which brother among the two brothers who worked at S-21, that
you claim staff at S-21, and who killed your father and their
father, personally?
A. My first brother, Noeun.  So he killed my father and later on
he too was executed.
Q. So you have no idea where your father would be taken to be
executed.  What makes you know that your brother Noeun was
ordered to kill him?
A. I did not see him but Comrade Lorn who was the same medic as
me told me about the incident.  She said that my brother was
ordered to kill my father and that he was later on executed too.
Q. So you learned of this information from Comrade Lorn and that
you did not witness the incident.  Is that correct?
A. It is correct.  I only witness the torture inflicted onto my
brother but not to my father.
Q. We just want to know how you got to know your father being
killed.  So you learned from Comrade Lorn , who could brief you
the account of that event that your brother was ordered to kill
your father.  Just clarify is that correct?
A. That is correct, Mr. President.
Q. Did you also ask her -- ask Lorn, I mean -- how she knew that
your brother was ordered to kill his own father?  Did she share
with you how she came to know that kind of incident?
A. Comrade Lorn worked at 6 to 7 p.m.  Then she saw the incidence
by chance and she later on told this to me.
Q. So do I understand correctly that your father was killed by
your brother?  And was he killed in S-21 building that made Lorn
know the incidence?
A. He was killed behind S-21, just outside the fence of that
location.
Q. At what time was he executed?
A. He was killed at about 6 to 7 p.m. because I was told at 7
p.m., so he could have been killed at six or so.
Q. What happened to your brother?  I mean you told us that your
brother who killed your father later on was executed.  Was he
killed immediately after he killed your father or was he executed
a few days later after your father died?
A. My brother still continued working as usual.  Three days later
he would be called to be executed.
Q. Was he detained first before he was killed, and where?
A. He was executed immediately without any detention because they
accused him of betraying the Angkar, and they accused him of
being hesitated to kill my father.
Q. Do you know where your brother was killed?  Because you claim
that you worked at S-21, so you could have known where your
brother would have been killed.
A. My brother and my father and my other siblings were killed at
the premises -- in the premises of Tuol Sleng.  They were not
killed at Choeung Ek.
Q. There were several locations at Tuol Sleng in which people
would have been killed.  They would be killed and buried in mass
graves within the compound of S-21 or they would have been killed
somewhere outside of the surrounding location.  So how could you
describe the location of where your brother could have been
killed?  Because in your statement and in your civil party
application you stated clearly the exact locations of where your
relatives and father were killed.  That's why the Chamber would
like to make sure that we can verify this information.
So can you please tell the Court whether your brother was killed
at the same place where your father was killed?
A. I don't know where he was killed.  I only know that they must
have been killed at Tuol Sleng compound.
Q. What makes you believe or makes you feel convinced that your
brother was killed at Tuol Sleng?
A. I learned, I heard, and I saw this incident, although I did
not witness but I heard about the killing.  Because when he was
killed there was no truck coming in and out.
Q. Can you recollect the moment when your father was arrested and
that he was killed?  How long was it between the time you saw
your father being arrested and the time when he was executed?
A. He was detained for six months.  So after he was arrested in
1977 -- so six months after that he perished.
Q. What about the other Brother, Noeun what happened to him?
A. Are you talking about Roeun?
Q. Yes.  You already mentioned about Noeun, I'm sorry.  Actually
it's about Roeun  this time.
A. Brother Roeun was later on arrested and executed.  It was just
a matter of time before one after another was taken to be killed.
Q. In which year do you believe that your brother Roeun was
executed?
A. I learned that he was detained at the prison at the same time
when my mother and younger brother were detained -- arrested and
detained but I don't know when he was executed.
Q. Your mother and your youngest brother -- so your mother was
Yann.  Is that correct?  When she was arrested was it at the same
time when your father was being detained or was she arrested
after your father and your eldest brother were already executed?
A. My father was arrested and detained.  He was being detained
and he was not yet executed, while my mother would be arrested
and detained.
Q. What about your younger brother, Prak Yon; when was he
arrested?
A. He lived with my mother and he was arrested on the day that my
mother was arrested.
Q. When you worked there you heard that your mother and younger
brother were killed.  Did you know when, or were they killed when
your brother Roeun was killed?
A. My mother and my other brother were killed.  My mother was
killed first and then my brother -- elder brother was killed.  My
mother was killed toward late '77.  Later, after my mother was
killed, a month later I was arrested and detained.
Q. Your mother was killed and your younger brother was killed
too.  Is this correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. So it means they were arrested at the detention centre where
they were detained.  So that was your father Choeun Yon, alias
Yut Prak, and your mother Khin Toh, alias San; three, Yit Noeun;
four, Yit Roeun; five, Yit Khoeun; and six, Prak Yon.  Is this
correct?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. Can you recall when you were arrested?  When were you arrested
and where were you detained?
A. I was arrested in early '78.  I was detained in Tuol Sleng
prison for three months.  I was detained on the second floor in
the small cell.  I was shackled on one ankle.
Q. Which building were you detained and on what floor?
A. I was detained on the first floor in the small cell, the
east-west building.
Q. Was it the building where you looked after the sick prisoners?
And was it also the building where your father was detained, or
was it a separate building?
A. It was that same building, but there were individual cells in
that building, only two or three individual cells.
Q. When you were detained for three months that you claimed, were
you shackled or you were not shackled or cuffed, you were only
put into the room and the door was locked from the outside?
A. After I was arrested I was detained and I was shackled.
During my interrogation I was not beaten with a stick but they
tightened the shackle on my ankle.
Q. It means during the three months detention you were shackled.
Was it on a permanent basis?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And you were detained in a separate small room by yourself.
Is this correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. When you were taken to be interrogated, where were you
interrogated?  Were you interrogated in the room where you were
detained or were you taken to be interrogated elsewhere?
A. When I was interrogated I was not taken anywhere, it was in
the same room, but they tightened the shackle on my ankle to
force me to confess.
Q. Your interrogators, how many of them?  Were they male or
female?
A. There were two male interrogators.  One was standing and
another person was interrogating me.  I got wounds on my ankle
from the tightening of the shackle.
Q. You were a staff working there.  Do you recall the
interrogators?  As you said, you were a staff there.
A. The interrogators were newcomers, so I did not know them.  The
guards constantly changed as well.
Q. What about the age of the interrogators; how old were they,
roughly?
Please wait till the red light is on before you can speak,
otherwise the interpreter cannot hear so cannot interpret for the
international Judges.
A. My interrogators were about 20 to 21 years old.
Q. How many times were you interrogated during the three-month
detention?
A. It depends.  Sometimes I was interrogated two times.
Sometimes I was interrogated three times.  I was interrogated on
a daily basis.
Q. So how many times in total; can you recall?
A. I was detained for three months and during this period I was
constantly interrogated for the first two weeks.
Q. So you were interrogated for about two weeks in the same room
where you were detained.  Is this correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. During your interrogation what was the purpose of the
interrogation?  What did they want you to confess?
A. I was interrogated as I was accused to be a daughter of the
traitor.  They know that I was the daughter of Prak and I denied
that I was not.
So they pressured me on this matter and they tightened the
shackle on my ankle while I was being asked.
Q. So each time you were interrogated they used the same method,
that is, they used a tool to tighten the shackle on your ankle to
force you to confess.  Is that correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. During the time you stated you were arrested because your
father was alleged to be a traitor, during your detention, what
was your food ration?
A. I was given a ladle of gruel twice a day.
Q. What about taking a bath?
A. They asked me to have a bath too, but I did not want to have a
bath so I did not go for a bath, and another reason because my
ankles were hurt so I did not go.
Q. In your detention room, could you sit up or stand up or you
could only lie down on the floor?
A. In that detention room, I could sit up.  I could stand and I
could rest.
Q. In the adjacent rooms, were they detention rooms or what were
they?  If they were detention rooms, were they also for female
detainees or for male detainees?
A. The adjacent rooms were the detention rooms.  But in each room
there was a detainee, although I was not sure whether they were
male or female.
Q. What about your clothes during the time of your detention?
A. I wore the same clothes from the time I was shackled.  I never
have my clothes changed.
Q. What was the colour of your clothes when you wore while you
were detained?
A. My clothes were black.  It was a black skirt and black shirt.
[14.42.333]
Q. So your clothes were black.  It was the clothes that you wore
while you worked as a staff medic at that location.  Is this
correct?
A. It was not the clothes that I wore when I was a medic.  After
I was no longer a medic, I was only given the black clothes.
Q. Where did you get your clothes?
A. The black clothes that I wore were given to me.  After I was
ordered to strip off my clothes, I was given a set of clothes.
First, I was ordered to clean the grass, to cut the grass, when I
was given the black clothes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now it is time for a break.  The Chamber will take 20 minutes
break until
p.m. when we will resume.  
          3   Court officer, can you arrange refreshment for the civil party?
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1443H to 1502H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
The AV unit is instructed to put up document with ERN 00189137,
Document D45/1/8.  Please put it up on the screen.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Nam Mon, could you please have a look at this
photograph?  It's an aerial photograph.  Please spend a moment
looking at this photo and I will put more questions.  Do you see
it, or can you read letters in the photo?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court official is instructed to go to her so that you can be
of her assistance if she needs help.
The lawyer, we note your presence.
MS. STUDZINSKY:
I only want to inform you that our client is illiterate, and to
take this into account.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Court official is instructed to point to her the entrance to
Tuol Sleng.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Could you please point out to the office that you said you
once had worked?  So this is the location of Tuol Sleng, as you
can see with the red label, so where was your office back then?
A. So that building is on the right-hand side.
Q. I'm asking about your medic house where you stayed and worked;
I mean, the other medics who stayed and worked.  Where was it?
A. That house, that office, was right in front of the prison.
Q. Where was your father detained; in which point or building?
A. He was detained in the D building.
Q. Where were you detained; in which building?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. Do you understand the map, the location?  If you find it
difficult, then the AV Unit is advised to remove it and change to
the normal view.
MR. TAN SENARONG:
We would like to make a small suggestion, whether we can really
print out the photo from this file; the photo 00189137.  No,
another photo with different ERN, correction; 00181396, which is
the photo of the building which would have been easier for the
civil party to show her.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Co-Prosecutor.  Wait until your time is allocated
and you can present that photo.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. What happened to Yiet Khoeun, another brother of yours?  Do
you know anything about him?
A. Yiet Khoeun worked with my uncle at the airport and he was
also arrested because Khmer Rouge believed that to dig the grass
they had to root out its roots.
Q. You were detained at the same location along with you, or was
he detained elsewhere?
A. He was detained in the same prison but in different building.
I don't know where he would have been detained, but all children
of the cadres would have been sent to be detained here, no other
location.
Q. After three months of your captivity -- and you claim that you
were detained at S-21, now known as Kuk Tuol Sleng -- where were
you sent next?  Were you transferred at night or in the daytime?
A. I was sent in the late afternoon to Prey Sar prison.  I was
detained there and tortured severely at Prey Sar prison.
Q. How did you go to Prey Sar?  I mean, how were you transported
to Prey Sar?  Were you blindfolded too?
A. I was not blindfolded.  I was handcuffed and put on the truck.
Q. Was you by yourself when you were being transferred to Prey
Sar or were you with other detainees?
A. In 1978 there were five or six other detainees who were being
sent altogether with me; I don't remember.
Q. Do you remember the location at Prey Sar where you were
detained?
A. I was detained with other people in that location.  I don't
remember because the next day I would already be asked to dig
pits to bury the corpses.  Only in the afternoon that I would be
asked to return.  When I went to Prey Totueng prison that the
situation would be less severe.
Q. Who was the chief of Prey Sar prison at that time?  Was he or
she the chief?
A. There was a woman who was waiting to receive us.  I don't know
whether she was our chief, but the people who ordered us were all
men.
Q. The highest person in authority in that location, do you know?
Please just say you know or you don't know.  You don't need to
answer and giving the names of other persons instead of the
question that I'm asking here.
A. The chief of the prisons was a male person. but I don't know
his name.
Q. Were there many people living in that location and were there
children and women -- old, aged people or soldiers?  Can you
describe the kinds of people who were detained in that unit?
A. There were a lot of children and women.  There were less men.
A lot of children and women died in that prison.
Q. What kind of works were assigned to the people in general?
A. I did not -- I don't know what they did, but I was asked to
dig pits to bury the children who died.
Q. So you have no idea what kind of works other people assigned.
Is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Besides digging pits to bury the corpses of the children, what
else were you asked to do?
A. I would only dig the pits every day, and until my sentence
were relieved then I would be sent to Prey Totueng prison, and
then the Vietnamese came.
Q. You said you were in charge of digging the pits to bury the
children.  The first question is how far were the pits you dug
from the place where the detainees would take -- as called home?
A. More or less I can say that the pits were not very far.  It
was a brief walk.  I could reach the location.
Q. Were you only asked to dig the pits or were you also asked to
carry the dead bodies of the children to be buried in those pits?
A. I was only asked to dig the pits.  I have no idea about the
corpses.
Q. How deep were the pits or how big were the pits?
A. I could dig the pit with the size of five by five metres.
Q. What about the depth of that pit or those pits?
A. Four metres in depth -- about four to five metres.
Q. Were you digging that pit alone or were you working with other
people?
A. There were other people also who shared the work.  There were
more women than men who took part in digging the pits.
Q. Can you give us an estimated number of pits?  The four by four
metres pit, how many of those pits did you dig during the time
you were assigned to work there before you left for Kampong Cham
province?
A. I only could manage to dig one pit.
Q. How long did you stay in Prey Sar?
A. For about five months, but I worked less because I got my
injured legs that I could not work hard.
Q. You said -- you used the term "tortures", or it can be
interpreted that you would have been inflicted violence against
you.  The question is how were you treated?
A. I was mistreated.  I was beaten arbitrarily.  Even I talked
something to -- I gave some responses to them, they kept beating
me, they kept treating me badly.
Q. What kind of tools were used to beat you and what kind of
equipment was used to squeeze your legs?
Here we are now talking about the situation in which you were
detained at Prey Sar.  And how were you treated at Prey Sar?  You
said your legs were squeezed and that you would have been beaten.
So tell us how many times were you beaten or badly treated?
A. At Prey Sar prison, after leaving here, of course I had been
tortured, mistreated at the previous location.  When I reached
Prey Sar I would have been inflicted the same torture techniques.
My legs would have been squeezed, and then a rattan stick would
be used to beat onto my back.
Q. So when you were detained at -- sorry, when you were at Prey
Sar you were detained in a detention cell like the way you would
have experienced at the previous location.  Is that correct?
A. It's true.  People who were sent to Prey Sar were allegedly
not tortured, but it was just a pretext. Everyone would have been
tortured before they were executed at Prey Sar.
Q. How were you detained at Prey Sar?
A. At night they would lock the door and leave us behind, and
while we were shackled, and when they asked us to dig the pits
then they would remove the shackles, but then only when our
sentence or offence becomes less severe.
Q. How many people were detained in those locations in the cells,
or would you be treated badly on your own?
A. There were about 30 to 40 people who would have been treated
the same.  It was the building believed by many as the
re-correction centre or when the sentence would be lighter, but
it was not true.
Q. When you were asked to dig pits to bury the dead bodies of
children, how many times were you asked to dig that pit?
A. I would work from 6 a.m. until twelve and I could only eat
gruel, and then we continued to work until
p.m. in the            5   afternoon.
Q. Were you asked to work at night also?
A. At night we would be locked inside the room.  We did not work.
Q. Now, coming back to the pit that you said you were asked to
dig to bury the dead bodies of the children, were there guards
who had to be there to guard you while you were digging the pit
and while the others were digging the pits, or were you all left
alone to work while the guards would not pay attention to your
work performance?
A. We were guarded.  The guards would be sitting with guns around
us.  Only after we finished our work that they would walk back.
Q. You're saying that the pit was meant to bury children, a four
by four-metre pit.  Do you think that the children died of
disease before they were buried, or died of other causes?  Can
you tell us about this?
A. I don't know whether the children got sick and then they would
be buried.  I have no idea.  I could hear the cries of those
children but I cannot tell you whether they would have died of
disease or of execution.
Q. You said you were there for three months before you were let
out.  Where were you transferred next and how?
A. I was told that I would be sent to Kampong Cham to find my
parents.  I was no longer imprisoned and I was to be put in the
Prey Totueng prison.  So when I arrived at the location I was put
into the Prey Totueng prison.  I told them that my parents were
those people who were my godparents living at that location.
Q. You were detained at the Prey Totueng prison.  How long were
you detained there?
A. When I arrived at the Prey Totueng prison, after I was
disembarked from the prison, I got my other god brother, who was
detained there, so I was detained there together with my god
brother for about two months before the Vietnamese arrived.
Q. Let me go back a little bit.
From the time you were first arrested, were you told the reasons
for your arrest?
A. When I first arrested, I was not told of any reasons.  They
put the cuff on me and arrested me.  I didn't know what mistakes
I made.
Q. Did they make any record of your personal biography before you
were sent to be detained?
A. I was questioned about my background, my parents' background,
about my family situation.
I was -- I denied that I was the daughter of Father Prak.  I told
them my father was Roeun.  They did not believe me, so they put
the handcuffs on me and they threatened me and they accused me of
being a traitor of the Khmer Rouge.
Q. In your biography you put that your father was Roeun.  What
was the family name of the father?
You only speak when the red light is on.
A. My godfather's name, Roeun.  His family name was Rim; Rim
Roeun.  He's my godfather.
Q. When you worked as a medic, as you claimed, at the S-21
Office, what name was used, Nam Mon or Roeun Chantha?
A. I used the name Roeun Chantha subsequently until Phnom Penh
fell and when the Vietnamese came in.
Q. When you were questioned about your biography did you use the
name Roeun Chantha or Nam Mon when you were questioned by the
security staff?
A. When I was questioned, I told them my name was Roeun Chantha,
I lived at Stueng Sangke, Stueng Trang, Kampong Cham, and they
threatened me.  Whatever I said they did not believe me.
Q. When you were asked about the names of your mother, which name
were you used for your mother in your biography?
A. My mother's name was Rim and the father's name was Roeun.
That's the name of my godmother.  I did not dare use my real
mother's name.
Q. You just stated that your godfather's name was Rim Roeun, and
now you said your godmother's name was Rim.  What was the surname
of your godfather?
A. My godfather's surname was Rim and his full name was Rim
Roeun, and my godmother's name was also Rim.
Q. What was the surname of your godmother?
A. My godmother's surname was Hak; Hak Rim, that's her full name.
Q. So your godfather's name was Rim Rouen; is that correct?
At that time, were you photographed, I mean a half-photo of your
upper body, before you were detained?
A. I was not photographed.  I was detained for a short period of
time, only for three months.  Maybe that's the reason they did
not photograph me.
Q. When you were transferred to the re-education camp in Prey
Sar, were you photographed there?
A. At Prey Sar prison, I was photographed but I could not find my
photo.
Q. At Prey Sar, were you questioned again about your biography?
A. At Prey Sar prison, I was interrogated for a few times and I
provided the same response.  I did not change.  So they saw I was
loyal to them, so they did not mistreat me.
Q. You claimed that your entire family, totalling seven of them,
including your parents, your three elder brothers and your
younger brother, they were all killed.  So six of your family
members were killed except yourself.
Besides what you have described to the Chamber during this oral
testimony, do you have any other materials to attach to your
claim?
A. What materials do you want, Mr. President.
Q. You said you have tried to find the photo, that you know when
you were transferred to Prey Sar you were photographed.  However,
you have not found the photo.  And the question is do you have
such photos for your family members whom you claimed were killed
at S-21 or Tuol Sleng?  If you cannot find your own photo, have
you found the photos of your family members?
A. I have found all the photos of my family members, including
some of my relatives at Tuol Sleng.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV officer, can you show a photo, ERN in English, 00274367?
Can you show this document on the screen, please?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Madam Nam Mon, can you continue or would you like to have a
little break?
A. I would like to take a break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber will take a 10-minute break for the civil party to
console herself.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1543H to 1553H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
Madam Nam Mon, how are you feeling?  I hope you have recollected
yourself and that we can proceed further.
MS. NAM MON:
I have recollected myself, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  So we now proceed our questioning.
The AV unit is advised to put the photo up on the screen again;
photo with ERN in English, 00274367; another one, 4368 and 4369.
Is anyone from the Victims Unit present?  Please, if you are, go
close to her so that she can feel warm and the proceeding will be
proceeding just a little while then we will adjourn.
BY THE PRESIDENT:
Q. Madame Nam Mon, could you please look at the photograph?  Do
you recognize him?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The AV unit is advised to remove the photo.
The civil party is very moved and emotional to look at the
photograph so, since it is already time take an adjournment, and
to give more time for the civil party to recollect herself fully,
the Chamber will take the adjournment by now and we will resume
the session next week, on Monday, at 9:00 a.m.
Monday, the 13th of July, 2009 at 9:00 a.m.   So Parties to the
proceeding are invited to come back.
And Nam Mon, the Chamber will end its session today although we
still have a few other questions from the Chamber and from the
Parties and we have noticed that you are very emotional when you
see the photos; so we will only hear your testimony on Monday,
next week.
The Court Officer is instructed to make sure that Madame Nam Mon
is well assisted so that she can go home.
The security guards please take the Accused back to the detention
facility and bring him back to the courtroom by 9:00 a.m., the
13th of July.  The Court is adjourned.
(Judges exit the courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1602H)
