PROCEEDINGS
(Court opens at 0901H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now in session.
Today the Chamber will resume hearing the testimony of Khoem
Boeun via video link.
Mr. Em Hoy, please report the attendance of the Parties and other
individuals to today's proceedings.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, for today's proceedings all Parties to this case
are present. Mr. Nuon Chea is present in the holding cell
downstairs. He has waived his rights to be present in the
courtroom; the waiver has been delivered to the greffier.
The witness who is to testify today -- that is, Madam Khoem
Boeun, she will provide testimony via video link from Battambang
province. The AV technicians confirm that the technical system
has been ready and for witness and duty counsel, Mr. Mam Rithea,
they are ready for today's proceedings. Thank you very much, Mr.
President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you. The Chamber now decides on the request by Nuon Chea.
The Chamber has received a waiver from Nuon Chea dated 5th May
2015, which states that due to his health -- that is, headache,
back pain, he cannot sit or concentrate for long and in order to
effectively participate in future hearings, he requests to waive
his rights to participate in and be present at the 5th of May
2015, hearing. He advised that -- his counsel advised him about
the consequence of this waiver, that in no way it can be
construed as a waiver of his rights to be tried fairly or to
challenge evidence presented or admitted to this Court at any
time during this trial.
Having seen the medical report of Nuon Chea, by the duty doctor
for the Accused at ECCC dated 5th of May 2015, who notes that
Nuon Chea has a chronic back pain when he sits for long and
recommends that the Chamber shall grant him his request so that
he can follow the proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs.
Based on the above information and pursuant to Rule 81.5 of the
ECCC Internal Rules, the Chamber grants Nuon Chea's his request
to follow today's proceedings remotely from the holding cell
downstairs via an audio visual means.
AV technicians are instructed to connect -- to link the
proceedings to the room downstairs so that he can follow the
proceedings. That applies for the whole day.
Before I give the floor to the Defence Counsel for the Accused, I
would like to ask whether Judges on the Bench has any questions
for this witness.
You may now proceed, Judge Lavergne.
QUESTIONING BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning Madam.
Q. Can you hear me?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, I could hear you. Good morning.
Q. Very well Madam, I would have some very short follow up
questions regarding questions that have already been put to you.
For starters I would like us to talk about the date on which you
were appointed chief of Cheang Tong commune. Can you please tell
us exactly when you were appointed chief of that commune?
A. Mr. President, I do not recall when I was appointed. However,
I remember that I was appointed in 1973. There was no official
ceremony held at that time. I was only told that I was appointed.
Q. And do you remember the names of your predecessors -- that is,
the persons who were chiefs of that commune before you?
A. Yes. However I do not recall well before that time.
Q. Does the name Sao Van, alias Sao Pok, mean anything to you?
The name Sao Van, alias Sao Pok.
A. Could you repeat the name again? It's not clear to me.
Q. I grieve your indulgence because my accent is of course very
bad, but the name I am giving you is Sao Van alias Sao Pok.
A. Yes.
Q. What were the duties and responsibilities of that person?
A. I did not know clearly about him. He was also in charge in the
commune and I do not know his position.
Q. Was he in charge at the same time as yourself? Was he an
official at the same time as yourself, and if so, up until when?
A. He was in charge at the same as me, I do not know when his
duty ended but we were working together for long time as well.
Q. In the record of your interview you referred to someone called
Sam Bit, can you tell us, what was the position of Sam Bit?
A. I do not know Sam Bit very well. He came to work in Takeo
region and after -- later I do not know about him.
Q. Did you attend meetings chaired by Sam Bit and if yes, what
were the subjects discussed during that meeting or during those
meetings?
A. I never attended the meeting with him.
Q. Yesterday, you were told of a person called Dam (phonetic) and
who worked in the district office, you stated that you remembered
that person. Can you tell us, what was his precise role in the
district office?
A. Dam (phonetic) did not work in the district office. I cannot
recall it.
Q. What were his duties and responsibilities therefore, if he was
not working in the district, what was his position?
A. From what I know, Dam (phonetic) was working at Krang Ta Chan.
Q. Did you ever have a chance to converse with Dam (phonetic),
did you meet him?
A. No. He was working in the district, in the office. I have
never met him.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I noticed you are on your feet; you have anything to address the
Chamber?
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Forgive me for this interruption. Good morning. I believe there
is some confusion regarding pronunciation since mention was made
of Dam and I think the person Judge Lavergne is referring to in
the district office is Dorn, D-Â-N, and I don't know whether you
can clarify the witness's name to assist the Witness.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Witness, did you hear the Prosecutor? It would appear there are
two people, there's Dam who worked at Krang Ta Chan and Dorn who
worked in the district office. Do you remember a person called
Dorn who worked in the district office?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, Dorn. His name was Dorn.
Q. And up until when did Dorn work in the district office?
A. Dorn was working in the district office up until a certain
period time I do not recall when, he was working there for a long
period of time from my recollection.
Q. And where did he go after that?
A. I do not have any idea where he went afterwards since I was
not working in the district office.
Q. Now, we will talk about Dam, the one who worked at Krang Ta
Chan. Did he work at Krang Ta Chan throughout the period or did
he stop working at Krang Ta Chan at any point in time?
A. I do not remember it because he was not in the commune where I
worked.
Q. Did you know whether Dam was subsequently detained at Krang Ta
Chan?
A. I do not know about this.
Q. Do you recall having being shown a document and it is document
D157.64? Can your counsel show you that document?
(Short pause)
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Have you found that document, D157.64?
MR. MAM RITHEA:
There are many documents. We are now looking for the right one.
The document is now found.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. For the record let me point out that the ERN in Khmer is as
follows, 00270974 - 75; and the ERN in French is, 00789272; and
ERN in English, the French goes to 73 by the way, in English it
is, 00363655.
Madam Witness, have you been able to identify the document?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I am now reading the document.
Q. Does that document remind you of anything?
A. I am not able to find the right page. I got the document with
me, however, I do not recall about the event after I read the
document. During that time I was in the commune and I was not yet
transferred to the district.
Q. Can you see the signature at the bottom of that document?
A. Yes.
Q. Do you recognise that signature?
A. The name was mine and the signature was mine. However I do not
recall the document or the content of the document.
Q. Very well, there is also an annotation close to your signature
and it reads as follows; "copied from comrade Huot (phonetic)
from the unit 4 committee". Do you know who the person Huot
(phonetic) from the unit 4 committee was?
A. It was not -- the name was not Huot (phonetic), it was Hou.
Hou was the chief of the units. He was the head of the unit in
the village.
THE INTERPRETER:
There was an overlap.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. What was the role of that unit? Was it a unit of the militia,
what was the work of that unit?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. As for Unit 4, actually there were men's unit which were under
responsibility of the head of men's unit. And for men's unit,
they are working to -- they are working in the fields and they
are also militia units, militia unit is also working in the
fields.
Q. Very well. Can you explain why we have that annotation copied
from comrade Hou? What was the role of Hou in this matter?
A. It appears that I did not copy anything from Hou. I do not
really understand about this document. Could Your Honour, tell me
whether the document was dated in 1977 or in 1970 something,
because it was not clear to me in the document that I'm reading
now?
Q. I can tell you what I am reading in the French version I have
before me. At the end it is written done at Cheang Tong 21st July
1977. Let me point out, by the way, that we have another document
and it is document E3/4164. The ERN in French is, 00937104; and
00974147, in English; and in Khmer it is, 00079337 - 338. The
document is titled "Summary biography of prisoners detained at
Tram Kak district" and the first name on that list is Neang Dam,
who is also called Cheang Dam in English, and it is stated on the
document that the date of entry for re-education was the 20th
July 1977. Now, does that ring a bell?
A. I do not really understand about the matter of Dam. As for in
1977, I was still working in the commune and for Dam, he was
working in Krang Ta Chan so it was under the district
responsibilities. That is why, as I said, I do not really
understand about this matter.
Q. Madam Witness, there must be a mix up somewhere. When I read
out the document bearing the name Neang Dam to you, that name was
indicated as that of a prisoner and not that of a staff member at
Krang Ta Chan. He had been a staff member at Krang Ta Chan but it
would appear that he subsequently was in prison. Let me also
inform you that we have just told you that the record bearing
your signature dates back to the same period when it appears that
Dam was detained at Krang Ta Chan. Do you have any explanations
for this?
A. Dam was not living or working in Cheang Tong commune. He was
in Trapeang Thum Khang Cheung commune. Why this matter is related
to my case as I said I do not really understand about this. As
for this signature, it was mine.
Q. Yes, fine, fine. I think we should move on to something else.
Witness, when you were interviewed by the Co-Investigating
Judges, you said that sometimes you would not always respect the
instructions that you received from the higher echelon and you
said in particular that at times you hid rice. So can you confirm
this to us?
A. There were plans from the upper echelon. For example, when
people did not have enough food to eat and when -- after the
harvest, I would hide some to supply my people to have enough
food to eat. It is true that I hid some rice.
Q. Did you hide rice in violation of the instructions that were
given to you by the district?
A. Yes, it seems that way. However, my expectation was to hide it
for the supplies to my people.
Q. How many times did you hide rice in this way and why, what
were the reasons?
A. The reason for hiding the rice was that I did it for my people
and I only hid it a few times and most of the time I hid it in
the pagoda.
Q. Did you sometimes note that people would die because they did
not have enough to eat?
A. It might have happened due to shortage of food as the shortage
of food or malnutrition led people to be sick.
Q. I am not asking you to make suppositions, I'm asking you to
tell us what you know, did this happen or did this not happen?
Were there food shortages and did people die because of these
food shortages?
A. First there were indeed food shortages. However, allow me to
stress the food shortage in Cheang Tong commune was not that
serious and no one died out of hunger in Cheang Tong commune.
Q. I don't understand your answer because just before you told us
that probably people had died because of food shortages. You told
us people had been sick, so where were the people who were sick?
Were the sick people everywhere else except for in your commune?
A. No, that's not the case. Of course people became ill also in
my commune but no one died from starvation in my commune although
sometimes the food supply was not sufficient that's what I meant
in my previous statement and that's what I saw in my commune.
Q. And was it the same situation elsewhere in the district or was
the situation particularly bad or was it better elsewhere?
A. I did not know about what happened in other areas.
Q. You never spoke about production problems when you had
meetings at the district levels? Never, never these issues were
brought up?
A. For the meetings at the district, they discussed about the
rice productions and about the rainy and dry season cultivation
and about growing vegetables and about finding supplementary food
for the people.
Q. Fine, I have a last question for you, Ms. Witness. You were
interviewed by Co-Investigating Judges office and you were
interviewed with respect to an annotation that is on document --
where the word "komtech" is mentioned. "Komtech", which means "to
smash", so when this word is applied to people who were arrested
and who are -- were detained -- that is, people who were
considered enemies, what then was the real meaning of the word
"komtech"?
A. It is my understanding that the word "komtech", means the
arrest or the cleansing.
Q. So in that case, what does cleansing mean?
A. There are various kinds of cleansings, namely, the arrest or
getting rid of old ideas or concepts and build a new one.
Q. Witness, someone who was sent to Krang Ta Chan and for whom
the order was given to smash him, what do you believe then was
the meaning of that order?
A. I do not know about its meaning in that context as I said the
word "komtech" or "boh somat" or cleansing, I only heard about it
but I myself did not involve in it.
Q. Witness, and this would be my last comment, let me remind you
of your answer which is in document E312 -- .2, this is
answer 264, and the word "smash" do you remember having said
that, Witness?
A. Yes, I see that phrase.
Q. Fine. If you have no further comments and I have no further
questions, so thank you, Mr. President.
Just to confirm something, you did say that to the
Co-Investigating Judges, is that so, they did not invent that
right, what I read out to you at answer 264, you are the person
who said that right, or was this invented by the investigators?
A. That's what I said and that's what I said because that was
what I was told and based on the decision of Prak.
Q. Who told you that?
A. It was Prak.
Q. And who was Prak?
A. Prak worked at the sector level.
Q. Thank you, Witness. I have no further questions for you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Judge Lavergne.
The Chamber would like to give the floor to the Defence teams and
first to the Defence team for Nuon Chea to put questions to
witness Khoem Boeun. You have the floor, Counsel.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning,Your Honours, good
morning, Counsel. Good morning, Madam Witness. My name is Victor
Koppe, I am the International Co-Lawyer for Nuon Chea and I have
some questions to ask to you.
Q. First I would like to start with some follow up questions to
questions from the Judge this morning. You said that at some
occasions you were hiding rice to feed your people. When you say,
"my people", what exactly do you mean with that?
A. When I said my people, I meant the people who were living in
my commune.
Q. And when you talk about my people, does it also include the
people who had arrived from Phnom Penh or from Takeo provincial
town and who were considered New People?
A. Yes, I meant everyone.
Q. So, in supplying food to the people of your commune, you made
no distinction at all between New People and Old People, is that
correct?
A. Yes.
Q. How about access to hospitals for people who were sick and
access to medicine for people who were sick, did you in your
commune make any distinction between New People and Old People in
terms of access to hospitals and medicines?
A. No. I would send everyone to the hospital and it was up to the
hospital staff to treat those people. To me there was no
distinction between the people in my commune.
Q. And how about education, was there a difference in treatment
for children of parents coming from Phnom Penh or the Old People,
in other terms, in other words, did everybody in your commune
have access to education?
A. On the matter of education and schooling, they all did
together, there was no distinction.
Q. Summarising, Madam Witness, would it be fair to say that in
your commune you did not discriminate so-called New People?
A. Yes.
Q. In your commune did you ever send somebody for re-education
simply because he was a New Person or if you send somebody for
re-education that person had to have done something -- done
something wrong?
A. Allow me to clarify that I personally never sent people. If
someone made mistake then I would report it, report the matter to
the upper level and only after I received the instruction from
the upper level then the person would have been sent.
Q. I understand, but are you aware of situations in your commune
or maybe other communes within District 105 in which people were
punished simply because they were New People.
A. I only knew what happened in my commune -- that is, Cheang
Tong commune, and there was no such case.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. Two more short questions on the food
situation. I would like to read to you a question and answer that
you gave to the investigators of the International
Co-Investigating Judge -- that is, document .2, it is
your answer to question 56. The subject is Ta Mok and whether you
know Ta Mok. The question is: "Did you personally know him?" And
you answered to the investigators as follows: "Yes, I personally
knew him. Sometimes he came to see the co-operative kitchen and
he asked the people whether they ate enough or not. Ta Mok
visited every site. I met Ta Mok." Can you be -- it's a long time
ago, I realise -- but can you be a little more specific as to
what exactly Ta Mok asked you or asked the people, whether they
ate enough, yes or no? Was he -- in other words, was he concerned
about the food situation of the people in the district?
A. Yes. He came to the base -- that is, to the villages or to the
cooperatives, and he would ask the people down there directly, he
did not ask me about this matter.
Q. Was it your understanding that he was concerned about the
situation of food for the people?
A. It seemed that he was concerned about it.
Q. Did you ever witness any action on his side when he saw or
concluded that the food situation was difficult?
A. From my observation, he paid attention to the issue of food
shortage. I saw him taking food from other places to supplement
the areas that they had shortage of food.
Q. In your recollection, Madam Witness, was it the goal of the
regime to make sure that everybody in Democratic Kampuchea had
enough to eat?
A. I could only speak about the area that I lived as I did not
have a full understanding about other areas.
Q. So within your area was it the objective of the regime that
everybody in the place where you were assigned to, had enough to
eat?
A. Yes, I wanted to have sufficient food for the people to eat
but sometimes there were cases of food shortage.
Q. And if that was the case was it the instructions of the upper
echelon to fix the situation as soon as possible?
A. Yes, there was instructions from the upper level for us to
try hard to resolve the living conditions of the people.
Q. Yesterday, Madam Witness, you were asked about the stealing of
food by people who were hungry and you said, I believe, that that
was considered to be a minor offence. If someone had committed
such a minor offence for instance, stealing a coconut because the
person was hungry, what would be the sanction against this
person, what would happen to this person, somebody who just stole
a coconut because he or she was hungry, what would happen to that
person?
A. Nothing would happen, the only thing was to educate that
person as he or she would be told that we were in the same
situation.
Q. Are you aware of any example either within your commune or in
other communes within District 105, of people who were executed
because they stole a coconut or a cassava?
A. I did not have a full understanding of this matter elsewhere,
I could only understand about the situation in my commune.
Q. Were you implementing the Party line when it comes to
sanctioning people who had stolen food because they were hungry?
A. I never sanctioned or disciplined anyone who stole food like
coconut. The only thing that I did was to educate that person
that we were in the same situation that, if you were hungry, I
myself was also hungry, so please stop doing that again.
Q. And in such situations, that you didn't sanction somebody,
were you following the instructions from the upper echelon?
A. Yes, the instruction from the upper echelon was that stealing
of any food because of the insufficient food, then we should not
sanction that individual and that I implemented that instruction.
Q. And did you implement that instruction regardless whether the
person was a New Person or an Old Person?
A. Yes.
Q. One very last question on the food situation, Madam Witness,
are you aware of any instances in which a person who was of the
Cham origin was forced to eat pork against her or his will?
A. No, I was not aware of such a case and there were no Cham in
my area.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. I would like to turn to another
subject on which you have been asked already some questions and
that is the policy about marriage within your commune and
district. I would like to read a few excerpts from your earlier
statement. I will put them together and then I would like to ask
your comment on this.
First, I would like start with your answer to question 111, A111,
"The commune level" -- let me, let me ask the question first --
let me, let me cite the question first, Madam Witness. "During
the Khmer Rouge regime the Party arranged marriages, how did they
arrange the marriages, was there a discussion within the sector
level or was that decided by the cooperative level or village
level?"
The second part of your answer, because the first part was read
yesterday, the second part of your answer is; "The ones who loved
each other came to inform us and we listed their names and sent
their names to the sector, those who did not agree also told us
they did not agree and we crossed out their names."
In answer 112, you said: "If the New People had to marry Old
People and if anyone refused, we crossed their names out because
some people had bad backgrounds."
114: "At my site I checked which man and woman worked together
and got along with each other so I arranged them to marry one
another."
And finally your answer in 116, the question is: "What happened
if they refused to get married as arranged?" Your answer:
"Nothing like that happened at my site. They all had known one
another because my site was not large. We arranged their marriage
and the couples agreed but if the upper level did not approve,
they could not marry."
Now, Madam Witness, having read these four excerpts from your
statement, is it fair to conclude that in your commune there was
no -- there were no examples of people forcibly married to each
other?
A. Yes.
Q. To be clear, if anybody, any man or any woman did not want
marry another woman or man then this person could tell so, is
that correct and then the person wouldn't have to marry?
A. Yes.
Q. One last question in respect of marriage policy, yesterday you
spoke about people who divorced after their marriage, were you
speaking about divorces in the time that you were commune chief
or were speaking about divorces after 1979?
A. I mean those who got married voluntarily later on they could
get divorced.
Q. But just to be clear, are you speaking about divorce within
the period between 1975 and 1979? Were people allowed to divorce
during the regime of Democratic Kampuchea within your commune?
A. In the period of 1975 and 1977, there was arranged marriage
and there were also divorces amongst New People and Old People. I
do not know the figures how many people get divorces. And there
were no torture inflicted on those who agreed to get divorced.
Q. It's a long time ago; do you remember any couples from your
commune who got divorced between 1975 and 1979?
A. Yes, there were couples who got divorced, however I do not
recall them and I do not recall where they got divorced.
Q. Did they get divorced when you were still commune chief?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you, as commune chief, have to give permission for the
divorce of these couples?
A. Even I did not permit them to get divorced, they eventually
got divorced. However, I tried to negotiate and try to advise the
ones who wanted to get divorced and if they did not agree and
could not get back to each other and then they got divorced.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. Now I would like to move to another
subject. The subject of the district chief called Khom. In your
answer 285 of your interview before the investigators of the
Co-Investigating Judge, you said that Khom had mental problems.
Could you describe a little bit more from what you remember from
the personality of Khom?
A. Khom was not a normal person as us. She had a psychiatric
problem on some occasions, that's what I know.
Q. And do you know what kind of psychiatric problem Khom had?
A. I do not know the type of psychiatric problem she had but I
know that she had such a problem.
Q. I understand that the title of her disease is maybe difficult
to describe but could you, if you remember, describe her
behaviour? What was it that made you say, as many others, that
she had mental problems, what was her behaviour like?
A. I was not with her regularly or always that is why I do not
know well.
Q. Maybe, I understand it is not very nice to speak about
someone's mental problems, but if you try to remember, what was
it that Khom did which indicated that she had psychiatric
problems?
A. It is very difficult for me to describe. On some occasions I
noticed that she was walking without having food. I was staying
with her for once in a while so I could not describe her
personalities well.
Q. My final question on Khom, Madam Witness, do you know, do you
remember whether her mental illness influenced the decisions that
she made within the district?
A. Yes. In relation to your question, she made, I mean Khom, made
the decision on her own, the decision in the commune. She would
never come to discuss with those who were in the commune.
Q. I understand, but my question was whether you know if her
mental illness in some way influenced the decisions that she
made?
A. Yes. It may be such a case I could not describe and recall
exactly, but yes.
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, I am looking at the clock, this could be a moment
to have a break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much. Madam Khoem Boeun and Mr. Duty Counsel, it
is now the break time.
The Chamber takes a short break from now until 10.30 and by that
time the hearing will resume. And I instruct the witness and duty
counsel to be present before 10.30.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1011H to 1032H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated. The Court is now back in session.
And again the Chamber gives the floor to the Defence team for
Nuon Chea to continue putting questions to the witness, Khoem
Boeun. You may proceed, Counsel.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning again, Madam Witness. We
talked before the break about Khom. I would like now to ask you a
few questions about some other 105 -- District 105 cadres and
sector cadres.
First of all I would like to start with Ta Keav. You were asked a
question about Ta Keav. By the investigators of the
Co-Investigating Judge, question 29, and in that answer to that
question you said that Ta Keav was arrested during the Khmer
Rouge regime. Do you remember any details as to the reasons for
Ta Keav's arrest?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. No, I do not know the reason for his arrest.
Q. Do you know if there is any relation between Ta Keav and the
former leader of the West Zone Chou Chet, alias Si?
A. Please repeat your question.
Q. Do you know whether there is any relation between Ta Keav and
Chou Chet, also known as Si, who used to be the former leader of
the West Zone and before that of the Southwest Zone?
A. No, I do not know whether they had any relationship, as I did
not know the person you mentioned.
Q. Okay. Another cadre I would like to ask you a question about
is a person named Im Chaem. You were asked several questions
about her, but there's one question that was asked to you that I
would like to particularly talk to you about, and that is your
answer to question 312. I will read both the question and your
answer, Madam Witness. The question is as follows: "A witness
said, 'Yeay Bouen was white, Im Chaem was black.' White and black
meaning kind and unkind. Why did they make such a comparison? Can
you describe what Im Chaem was like?" Your answer is: "I cannot
describe Im Chaem because I did not actually know her. Some
witnesses seek the facts personally, so it is not all correct
because some people had conflicts of interest."
That's your answer. What I'm interested in, Madam Witness, is why
there is a witness who apparently calls you white as opposed to
black, and kind as opposed to unkind. Do you know any reason for
this?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, Ms. Khoem Boeun, please hold on. And the International
Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
This is a question that leads the witness to speculate, so I wish
to object to it.
MR. KOPPE:
Well, Mr. President, if the Co-Investigating Judge or the
investigators can ask this question, I certainly can ask this
question as well, I would say. Plus I'm not asking the witness to
speculate, I'm just asking the witness if she can put this
particular answer of a witness in perspective, that's what I'm
doing. And I think I'm entitled to.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, you may respond to that question, if you recall the
question itself.
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, you just mentioned from the statement that I was white
and Im Chaem was black. I myself, did not determine that I was
white or that she was black. In fact that statement was put to me
by the investigator and that investigator said people used that
phrase. And so for that reason I cannot provide any further
comment on this statement.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. I understand. It's difficult to answer a question about
yourself, but let me rephrase the question, Madam Witness. Were
you, in the time that you were commune chief and later district
person, a kind person, a kind person to the people that you were
leading?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Personally, I wanted everything good. However, I cannot say
about the perceptions of other people. Personally I believed I
was good.
Q. And if you say, "personally I believed I was good", how did
that translate into your actions and your behaviour between
seventy-five and seventy-nine? What was it that you did for which
you now say that you were good?
A. Allow me to respond to that question. From 1975 to 1977, and
of course I cannot recall every event, and currently I have poor
vision and hard hearing. What I said that I considered myself a
good person because I organised people into various units in my
commune, namely men's unit, women's unit, children's unit and
youth unit, and I myself went to talk to the people directly to
resolve the issues with the people there and to provide them with
food as I could afford it, including pork, beef or chicken. And I
had generosity and pitiness (sic) on my people, and that was my
good deed to them.
Q. Following up on your answer, Madam Witness, in your statement
to the OCIJ, in answer 141, you said the following, and I will
quote you and then ask you a question.
"There was an election to select a good cooperative chairperson
in the village, to find a good person. After the villagers had
agreed to select someone I appointed that person to be a
chairperson. I was authorised to remove bad or uncivilised
cooperative chairpersons and make them become ordinary people
again. The cooperative chairpersons were normally selected from
the ordinary people." And my question to you is: can you give us
an example of a bad or uncivilised cooperative chairperson that
you, in your duty, in your function, removed?
A. The chief of the cooperative had to be a good person and if
the person was bad or uncivilised or hid food from the people in
the cooperative, I would consider that person bad and I would
remove that person and replace by somebody else
Q. And do you remember any concrete example of somebody that you
removed because of bad behaviour, any cadre that you removed
because of bad behaviour?
A. There were many, or there were several instances, however I
cannot recall them all.
Q. I understand that it is difficult to remember a name, but do
you remember a concrete action of a cadre that led you to the
decision that this person should be removed because of bad
behaviour to the people?
A. I simply cannot recall it. I forget all about it.
Q. Very well, Madam Witness. Now I would like to ask you
questions about another District 105 cadre, and ask you what you
remember of him, and that's a person called Pech Chim. What is it
today that you remember about him?
A. I know Pech Chim but I do not recall any particular contact or
dealings with him.
Q. Do you remember anything about his political stance, anything
about his ideas and thoughts, and also actions in the Democratic
Kampuchea time period?
A. No, I cannot recall it. I know him and from his appearance he
was a humble person and not a mean one.
Q. Was he a kind, or as opposed to black, white person like you?
A. I only recall that he was a humble person and not a mean one.
Here I refer to the period that I knew him.
Q. I will get back to Pech Chim later, Madam Witness. Now I would
like to ask you some questions about a person named Saom. You
spoke also about him to the investigators, more specifically in
question and answer 58 of your statement, and I will read that to
you. The question is: "At the time who was Sector
committee?" 
          13   And you answer: "At the very beginning Ta Mok and Uncle Saom were
Sector 13 committee. Uncle Saom might have been Sector 13
secretary because he was always the speaker and decision maker
during meetings." Do you recall having said that to the
investigators?
A. Yes.
Q. What else do you remember about Saom?
A. I don't have any particular recollection about him, as it
happened quite a long time ago.
Q. I understand. Madam Witness, I would like to read an excerpt
to you from a document, which is E3/1682, English ERN, 00819074 -
5; French, 00842928, French; and Khmer, 00013961. It is a
document which is a confession of Chou Chet, probably given
during his detention in S-21, and I would like to read a specific
passage to you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The International Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President. I could not find this document nor on
the list that was given to us last week among the documents that
had to be presented to this witness, nor on the interface today.
So I'm asking myself questions about the Defence's desire to
surprise the Chamber as well as the Parties. And on top of that,
to quote an excerpt from confessions, I don't know which excerpt
is going to be quoted, but insofar that this is about what Chou
Chet allegedly said under torture, we cannot accept this. If the
point is to quote what interrogators may have relayed, or
annotations, it's something else. But first of all there is a
question of principle. There is an obstacle, which is the
principle of an adversarial hearing. This document was not
communicated to us, so we are again facing a surprise, which is
very unpleasant, especially in an adversarial hearing that is
supposed to be respectful of all Parties. So I object to using
this document.
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, the Prosecution is right, I apologise. I thought
it was on our interface list. May I suggest that I leave this
question to after the lunch break in order for all Parties to be
able to study this document well? It has already been discussed
already last week and the week before, so I presume the
Prosecution is aware of the document. But it is -- something went
wrong by putting it -- by not putting it on the interface. So, I
concede deferring, that is my suggestion, the question to after
the break, but of course I would still like to ask the question.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you have the floor.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Yes, thank you, Mr. President. Counsel Koppe the Chamber first
would like to get clarification about this and to be sure we
understand well what you want to do. Could you tell us if you
intend to read out the content of Chou Chet's confessions, the
confessions he gave at S-21, or do you only want to read out
annotations that are on these confessions? And my second question
is, regards the relevance of this question -- of this reading,
given the fact that this morning you already put questions to the
Witness with respect to Chou Chet and the existence of possible
links between Chou Chet and Tram Kak district cadres, and the
Witness answered to you that she did not know anything about
this.
MR. KOPPE:
Yes, I can answer both questions, Judge Lavergne. My intention
was to read one specific passage from his confession, or from his
statement and it's a part that is his description about the
political stance or behaviour of Saom. Where he says that Saom
was a too oppressive person within the sector. That is the
passage I would like to read to the Witness.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Isn't this exactly the same topic that is discussed here -- that
is to say, regarding the issue -- the question that you asked
this morning to the Witness? So my question, what is the
relevance of this question? I think she already answered your
question in fact.
MR. KOPPE:
I would like to confront her with the statement of Chou Chet that
Saom was a very oppressive and radical person, and my question
would be whether she would agree with this, yes or no?
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Well, listen Counsel, what is the relevance? She has said that
she doesn't know and that she doesn't know any of the links at
all, or the ties. Do you think she was in S-21 and attended the
interrogation of Chou Chet?
MR. KOPPE:
I am not intending to ask her if she knows anything about the
relation between Chou Chet and Saom, I want to ask her something
-- what Chou Chet apparently said while in S-21, that Saom was an
oppressive radical left wing, cultural revolution, kind of
person. That's what I want to ask her.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Koppe, the Chamber would like to inform you that any
questions based on the interview or record or statement as a
result of torture may be prohibited in this Chamber. And in fact
you sought clarification on this very matter from the Chamber.
And we will issue our written decision likely next week to all
Parties.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Yes, Mr. President, I am looking very much forward to that
decision, but allow me to at least remark that our investigation,
preliminary investigation, shows that there is no even prima
facie evidence that Chou Chet was tortured. So, I think we have
the same situation as referred to by the Prosecution yesterday.
Reading from a statement for which there is no prima facie
evidence of any torture. So, having said that I think I should be
allowed to ask this very specific question to the Witness about
the behaviour and political views of Saom.
But I will move on to another topic, that is, Madam Witness, this
morning you spoke about them already briefly, briefly on -- in
relation to questions of Judge Lavergne, about a man called Sao
Van, alias Sao Pok. This morning you testified that you did not
recall clearly about him. I quote you. You said that he was in
charge of the commune but that you did not know his position. You
also said that he was in charge at the same time as you were and
that you didn't know when his duties ended and that you worked
together for a long time. That is my understanding of your
testimony this morning. I would now like to read you an excerpt
from his statement to the Investigating Judge and then I would
like to ask you if this somehow refreshes your memory. Mr.
President, I am referring to document .8, English ERN,
00901568; Khmer, 00893275; and French, 00978647.
The investigators ask -- are asking Sao Van the following
question.
"Prior to the Khmer Rouge era, 17 April '75, where did you live
and what did you do?" And Sao Van, alias Sao Pok answers as
follows.
Answer 1: "Prior to 1975, I farmed paddies at Srae Kruo village.
I did not hold any administrative position. After the coup d'état
in 1970, I got married in Trapeang Tuek village, Cheang Tong
commune, and later I moved to live with my wife in Trapeang Tuek
village. Because I was formerly a student the Khmer Rouge front
assigned me to be the Trapeang Tuek village chief in 1970. On
January 1, 1971, I was assigned to work in the re-education
committee of Popel commune in Tram Kak district. I would like to
clarify that Cheang Tong commune, Tram Kak district was liberated
area during that time and the Khmer Rouge assigned me to be the
commune chief. After 17 April '75, I was assigned to be the
Kampong Svay commune committee, Kien Svay district in Sector 25,
the Southwest Zone."
Madam Witness, having heard the answer of Sao Van to this
question from the Investigating Judge investigators, does it
somehow refresh your memory about Sao Van?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Khoem Boeun, please give your response to the question.
Could you hear the question?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, I could hear it. I recall that he was removed but I do
not recall when he was removed.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Is what I read to you accurate? Do you know that he in fact
held these positions I just described to you?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I could not get your question clearly. I had a difficulty in
hearing so could you speak louder?
Q. I read his answer to you, and in his answer he described the
various positions that he held. And my question to you is whether
you remember -- whether you know that it is accurate, what Sao
Van said about his positions?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. More specifically, he refers to his work at the re-education
committee of Popel. Do you remember or do you know whether your
husband knew Sao Van?
A. Yes, he knew, but I -- for me I do not know that he worked in
Popel commune.
Q. And my last question; having read his background, does it
somehow jog your memory? Do other things come back as to the
person and policies of Sao Van?
A. Yes, I knew him. We used to work together but I did not know
that he went to work in Popel commune.
Q. Very well. What I would like to do now, Madam Witness, is
reading to you a quite long, I must say, excerpt from the
testimony of Pech Chim, one week and a half ago. I will read it
to you; it might take a minute or two. I will read slowly. I have
given the interpreters the exact passages, so if everything goes
well they can read along. And what I would like to ask you is to
listen to me for about 10 minutes and then I will ask questions.
Is that okay?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Madam Khoem Boeun, please give your response, please.
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I could not hear the question well. That is why I was silent.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. I hadn't really asked you a question yet about the content,
but I told you Madam Witness that I'm going to read a passage
from Pech Chim's testimony that will last about 10 minutes. Is
that all right?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, it's all right.
Q. Mr. President, for the Parties, this is ; it's his
testimony on 24th April of this year. It starts at 9.37 and it
ends at 10.04. I will select a few excerpts and then ask the
reaction of the Witness.
By means of introduction, Madam Witness, I have -- I am putting
before Mr. Pech Chim a statement of Sao Van, and I am asking Mr.
Pech Chim his reaction. And now I start reading. And I start
reading at 09.37.50.
So, the question Mr. Pech Chim to this cadre, which is Sao Van,
is as follows:
"Question 5: As the Kampong Svay commune chief, did you receive
an order from the upper echelon to arrest people?" End of quote.
"Answer: As part of the Kampong Svay commune committee, I did not
wish to harm anyone who did something wrong, but the commune
level had the right to report to the upper echelon. I had rights
to report to the upper echelon; for example, when people did not
have enough rice to eat, or when they produced only two tonnes of
rice per hectare. With this regard, Grandfather Mok issued an
order that the commune, district and sector levels did not have
the authority to make arrests or kill people."
"Question: What levels did the commune level have rights to
report to?"
"Answer: The commune level had rights to report to the district
level, but in order to make a report about a person, the commune
committee of five to seven members had to hold a meeting, to have
an agreement before making the report to the district level."
"Question: Grandfather Mok said that the district and sector
levels did not have the authority to kill people. Why were many
people killed in the district and the sectors?"
Sao Van in his statement answers: "I did not know either about
the implementation, but I recall Grandfather Mok's remarks
clearly."
"Question: Was Grandfather Mok in the zone committee?"
"Yes he was," is the answer of Sao Van.
Madam Witness, and then I tell Mr. Pech Chim that now the
important part of Sao Van's statement comes, and I quote again.
"When did Grandfather Mok make this announcement?" Answer of Sao
Van: "Grandfather Mok made this announcement prior to 1975,
during a wrap up meeting held annually in the forest,
participated by the commune, district and provincial committee
and the regiments. After 1975, there was another meeting in the
provincial town of Takeo, in the presence of Grandfather Mok and
Saom, who was in the Sector 13 committee, announced that soldiers
with the ranks from second lieutenant to colonel were not to be
harmed."
Question, again to Sao Van: "You meant that soldiers from the
ranks of second lieutenant to colonel were not arrested?"
"Answer: I did not know because implementation was varied from
sector to sector."
Now these excerpts from Sao Van are put by me to Mr. Pech Chim,
and Mr. Pech Chim answers as follows, that is shortly before
9.43.
Mr. Pech Chim, quote: "I only attended the meeting after 1975,
behind the Party office where Ta Mok also attended. And the
meeting that was held in the forest I did not attend. Maybe it
could have been Khom attending the meeting, it was hardly
possible to convene the meeting of all members."
My question to Pech Chim: "I understand, so I will focus on that
second meeting in the provincial town of Takeo. This cadre talks
about after 1975."
And his answer: "In Takeo it was after the liberation. In Takeo
province the meeting was held after 1975. It was held in one of
the houses along the river edge, north part of the provincial
town. That was the learning session over there and the sector
committee and the district committee including the military
committee attended."
Question, sorry answer: "The meeting held in Takeo took place
after the meeting in Phnom Penh."
Further down, 9.46, question: "But do you confirm the statement
of this Southwest Zone cadre, who told the investigators that Ta
Mok announced that soldiers with the ranks from second lieutenant
to colonel were not to be harmed? Do you confirm this Southwest
Zone's cadre's statement?" And then, Madam Witness, Pech Chim
answers: "Yes, that is correct. But I can confirm the statement
that that was the announcement at that time."
My question to Pech Chim: "Do you remember if any other cadres
from District 105 were present at this meeting? More specifically
do you remember if Boeun was present at this meeting as well?"
Pech Chim answers, "Yes," -- a little further down, "Yes that's
correct, the woman. For that Boeun was present in the meeting in
Takeo."
Then Pech Chim goes on to answer: "Approximately 50 to 60 people.
They were representatives from the military, from the base, there
was no one representing the department because Ta Mok attended
himself, and as for the military they would convene, they would
invite the commanders from the regiment or division to come and
they also extended the invitation to the district and commune,
but to some communes only, not all of them. They were of similar
rank, but there were different tasks designated to them, that's
why certain communes attended and others did not."
I think I will pause here because it's a long excerpt that I have
been reading. My first question to you Madam Witness, do you
remember attending this meeting after liberation in 1975, in
Takeo provincial town, which both Sao Van and Pech Chim attended
and that you apparently also attended. Do you remember this
meeting?
A. It appears that I do not recall that I was in the meeting, and
I also do not recall that second lieutenant to colonel, were not
mistreated.
Q. There is double negation in your answer. Can you repeat your
answer, please?
A. I may not recall what you have just read.
Q. So you're not recalling the meeting, is that what you are
saying?
A. I did not recall the meeting.
Q. Could it be possible, I mean you have -- it's a long time ago,
could it be possible that Pech Chim was right and you did attend
such a meeting in Takeo provincial town after '75?
A. I attended a meeting or meetings but I do not recall that
there was an announcement from Ta Mok regarding the soldiers.
Q. But both Sao Van and Pech Chim refer to a very specific
meeting in Takeo provincial town. Let's start there. He's also
describing a specific place of the meeting. Maybe you can try to
remember. Probably the meeting took place in May, June, July '75.
Do your remember such a meeting? Does it come to your memory if
you think well?
A. I may have been at the meeting but I did not recall what was
discussed.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Co-Prosecutor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President. I was going to say that it is a
repetitive question, because the witness answered the question
very clearly, but she answered before I raised my objection.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Let me read some more details from Pech Chim's statement,
maybe that will jog your memory, Madam Witness. Mr. President,
same document -- that is at 9.48. Question to Pech Chim, Madam
Witness. "Do you remember roughly how many people attended this
meeting?" Pech Chim's answer: "Approximately 50 to 60 people.
There were representatives from the military, from the base,
there was no one representing the department because Ta Mok
attended himself, and as for the military they would convene,
they would invite the commanders from the regiment or division to
come and they also extended the invitation to the district and
commune, but to some communes only, not all of them. They were of
a similar rank, but there were different tasks designated to
them, that's why certain communes attended and others did not."
And then I asked the question at 9.40 --9.54, excuse me.
The question, to Pech Chim, Madam Witness, whether he remembers
anybody being present. He said, Pech Chim, and I quote: "I only
recall that there was Ta Mok, Phen, Saom, and on that day Khom
did not attended. He had asked for leave to visit his family. And
at the sector level it was Sector 13 and I do not recall others.
Meas Muth was not there but Ren was there. And Run (phonetic) was
there as well, but his alias was, Zero Five."
And then my last question to Pech Chim in relation to the
meeting, and I quote, and that is at 9.56: "You confirmed that it
was Ta Mok who spoke and it was Ta Mok who gave the instruction
in relation to ranking officers. Did Saom himself also speak?"
Answer of Pech Chim: "Whenever Ta Mok spoke, Saom did not speak.
Only when Ta Mok did not say anything, then he would explain.
That was the rule and the working procedure: if the senior, if
the superior spoke, then the subordinate must not speak, so Saom
did not speak at that meeting." I've given a little more, some
more details from Pech Chim's statement in relation to that
meeting, and again my question, I realise it's a long time ago
Madam Witness, does it somehow jog your memory?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I do not recall it.
Q. Very well. Thank you, Madam Witness. I have some more minutes;
I would like to ask you about, some questions about minor
offences and serious offences. You gave testimony, Madam Witness,
to the investigators of the Co-Investigating Judge, questions 151
and 152. These are questions about sexual offences.
The question is as follows: "You specified two types of minor and
serious crimes, and serious crimes included sexual rape. In terms
of punishment how were the victims and the perpetrators
punished?" And you answered: "The victim was not punished; only
the rapist was punished." Question: "When we talk about the term
rape, that is the act of forcing someone by violence to have
sexual intercourse, did you mean this?" Your answer: "Yes, in
cases of a man raping a woman and the woman did not consent, the
man was punished while the woman was not."
Do you remember, Madam Witness, giving this answer to the
investigators?
A. Yes, I gave such a statement to the investigator.
Q. Do you recall whether, in your commune while you were chief,
you ever sanctioned, or somebody was ever sanctioned for a sexual
offence? Do you remember any concrete example?
A. There was no punishment happening in my commune, but there was
such a rule or law in my commune.
Q. Do you remember, or do you know, whether this rule was ever
enforced against sexual perpetrators within other communes within
the district?
(Short pause)
A. I do not get the question. Could you repeat it?
Q. I asked you for specific examples of people who were punished
in your commune for sexual offences; you said you did not know
any examples. My question is, do you know any examples from other
communes within District 105?
A. There may be instances where punishment was imposed. As for
the punishment, in Popel, there was a rape case and the rapist
was -- his head was shaved, and shaved and to make, to shave his
hair and to have a crossed marked on his head. And this man was
walked around the commune.
Q. Let me get back to your commune, Madam Witness. Yesterday we
spoke about the family, and the family of Mom Boeun and Meas Kun.
You might recall that. Do you remember Mom Boeun the husband of
Meas Sarat?
A. Yes, I know him.
Q. Do you know anything, do you remember anything about
allegations against him of raping a New Person, a female New
Person named Khorn in a place Ou Svay Chek?
A. I forget it. I do not recall it.
Q. Mr. President I think this is a good moment to pause.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much, Counsel. It is now time for lunch break and
the Court will take a break, a short break from now until 1.30.
Madam Khoem Boeun, it is now the lunch break so you can take a
short break during this period. And the resumption of hearing
your testimony will start from 1.30. And I instruct you and your
duty counsel to be present at your place before that time.
Security personnel are instructed to bring Mr. Khieu Samphan to
the waiting room downstairs and return him to the courtroom
before 1.30, this afternoon.
The Court is now in recess.
(Court recesses from 1133H to 1334H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
(No interpretation)
-- and she is informing the Parties that since Tuesday, 5 May,
until the end of the week, Judge Fenz will not be able to sit for
health reasons.
After having spoken to the Judges of the Trial Chamber, the
Chamber is appointing Judge Karopkin to replace Judge Fenz until
she will be able to assume her duties at the Trial Chamber,
pursuant to Rule 79 of the Internal Rules, the decision was
taken.
The Chamber now gives the floor to the defence counsel.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Thank you, Mr. President. Good afternoon, Your Honours.
Q. I have a few rounding up questions to you, Madam Witness. Are
you there?
Before the break --
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, indeed.
Q. Madam Witness, before the break, we spoke about you and also
about Pech Chim, as being respectively kind and humble
revolutionary cadres. I have a follow-up question on this topic.
Have you -- what can you tell us about the 12 revolutionary moral
principles of the CPK? What is it that you remember of it?
A. I do not remember these 12 commandments of the CPK.
Q. I can understand that you don't remember them all. But do you
remember that between 1975 and '79, you tried to abide by these
12 principles, that you tried to live up, or that you tried to
act according to these 12 revolutionary principles?
A. Yes, indeed. These 12 commandments existed indeed, but I
cannot tell you what their exact scope was.
Q. I understand, Madam Witness. Let me assist you a bit. Do you
remember one of the 12 revolutionary principles that stipulated
that cadres should not behave in any way that violates women?
A. Yes, I do remember that commandment.
Q. And do you remember whether you ever at one point read about
these
revolutionary principles in one of the "Revolutionary  
         12   Flags"?
A. No, I don't remember having read such an issue of
"Revolutionary Flag". I read the different articles, but I don't
remember when I read about this commandment in particular.
Q. Do you maybe remember any other terms that in relation to this
specific principle, guidance was also given as to what the points
were, relating to the setting up of a family, marriage, et
cetera? Do you remember anything about marriage policy in
connection with this revolutionary principle?
A. I don't understand your question.
Q. I understand. It was a little poorly formulated. Let me
rephrase.
Do you know whether the issue of family and marriage was
connected to the revolutionary principle of not violating women?
A. Yes, I understand your question now.
Q. In other words, the treatment of women was connected to the
Party's policy on setting up a family; is that correct?
A. Yes, that is true.
Q. And is it correct that there are -- there were two principles
in -- that there were two principles in relation to family and
marriage: First, that both parties agree; and second, that the
collective agrees, and then that -- the marriage would be done?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Witness, please hold on for a little while. The Deputy
Co-Prosecutor has the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I understand the Defence's question, and I'm asking myself
questions in fact in relation to that question. The witness spoke
about the fact that she remembered that there were commandments,
and -- but she didn't remember the exact contents of these
commandments. And here the question that is put to her which is
in fact suggesting the answers that you should provide. So
therefore, the question somehow already accepts the fact that the
commandments already existed with respect to marriage. And I
don't believe I heard the witness speak about this specifically.
So therefore, I think we -- preliminary questions should be put
with regard to the content of the commandments, or at least the
contents of some of the commandments before jumping to
conclusions, and leading the witness to make conclusions on the
basis of things that have not been determined beforehand. I don't
know if I'm clear, but in any case I have issues with the
methodology here.
MR. KOPPE:
Mr. President, I think I asked the question to the witness
whether she remembers one of the 12 principles being not
violating females in any way. She concurred -- she agreed. And
then I asked some follow-up questions. And now, I am asking
questions about the link between this specific revolutionary
principle and the policy of setting up a family. So I think I've
-- I laid the foundation for these questions, and I think the
last specific question, this witness should be able to answer.
(Judges deliberate)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel Koppe, please rephrase your last question. The question
has -- poses a risk of being a leading question. So could you
please rephrase your question in another way?
BY MR. KOPPE:
Q. Madam Witness, was the policy of family and marriage connected
to the sixth revolutionary principle not to behave in any way
that violates women?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I don't understand the sixth revolutionary commandment. I
don't in fact remember it at all.
Q. Let me rephrase. Let me ask the question completely different.
Was the marriage and family policy of the CPK based on two
principles: First, that both parties agree to the marriage; and
second, that the collective agrees; and if that is the case, then
two people could get married?
A. Yes, that is true.
Q. My final question: Does this marriage or family policy follow
from the revolutionary principle that says, "Do not behave in any
way that violates women"?
(Short pause)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Khoem Boeun, did you hear the question?
Ms. Khoem Boeun? Apparently there are some technical issues here.
(Technical problem)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Khoem Boeun, hello.
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
Yes, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Can you please listen to the questions and try to answer them?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
Yes, of course.
BY MR. KOPPE:
Did you hear my last question or should I repeat it for you?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Please repeat the question since I couldn't hear you well. And
your question was rather complicated because as you know, I don't
have a very high level of education. So, could you please
simplify your question?
Q. I will do my very best, Madam Witness.
The policy of the Party in relation to marriage was based -- was
that based on two principles: First, both parties agree; second,
the collective agrees? I believe you said yes. My follow-up
question: These two principles, do they follow from the
revolutionary commandment that women -- that you should not
behave in any way bad to women?
A. Yes, that's true.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. I will move on to a point related to
those 12 revolutionary principles. And I would like to read to
you from a "Revolutionary Flag" from July 1978. Mr. President,
that is E3/746; English, ERN 00428304, 305; French, 00611886; and
Khmer, 0064504 until 5.
Madam Witness, I'm reading something now to you from the
"Revolutionary Flag" and it deals about the selection of members
of cooperative committees -- the characteristics that these
people should have in order to become a member. They must have
staunch revolutionary stance in terms of the political line of
the Party. They must have a staunch revolutionary stand in terms
of the Party's lines in organising leadership and carrying out
work. And -- and now I'm quoting literally -- "They must be most
vigilant about the stances and attitudes of carrying out work in
bureaucratic, mandarin, authoritarian, militaristic, liberal,
single-minded (aekachet), styles, the styles of taking no
responsibility for anything vis-à-vis the Party, the revolution,
and the people".
Madam Witness, this instruction, this guideline as to
characteristics of members of the committee, does it ring a bell
with you? Do you remember this instruction?
A. Yes, this does ring a bell. It was necessary to choose leaders
in the cooperatives who had good conduct and who would respect
Angkar's discipline as you described. And I agree with you, but I
don't remember the details because I have almost forgotten
everything.
Q. I understand, Madam Witness. It's a long time ago. But do you
remember maybe members of the cooperative who did not have these
characteristics, who were bad people in the sense that they were
bad revolutionaries? Do you have any -- do you remember any
concrete examples?
A. I don't quite understand your question. Could you please
rephrase it?
Q. Do you remember any examples of cadres within your commune who
were "bureaucratic, mandarin, authoritarian, militaristic,
single-minded"? Do you remember any of those cadres in your
commune?
A. There were not very many of them. As I said, some people would
eat secretly and they did not have a responsible attitude, but,
however, they were not authoritarian.
Q. Let me maybe move on to a concrete example, an example which
you can also find in one of the 12 revolutionary moral
principles. And that is not to drink or use alcohol as a cadre.
Do you remember the revolutionary principle not to drink in your
time in the commune?
A. Yes, I do remember that.
Q. What would happen to a cadre if he was caught drinking
alcohol?
A. Well, if ever they caught him off guard, he would be educated,
and they would be threatened of being corrected or being
dismissed, so that they would not continue with that kind of
behaviour.
Q. Thank you, Madam Witness. I'll move on to another subject.
And, Mr. President, that is revisiting my earlier question before
the break. I'm not sure yet if you have ruled already, however,
what I would propose is that, at least I'd be able before you
come with your final decision or with your decision to read the
passage from Chou Chet's confession so that you know exactly what
I'm talking about. So that we know which specific details of his
confessions I would like to put before the witness. And I think
now also all parties have been able to have a look at this
document. So it's eight or
lines from this document which I  
         10   would like to read and then, I would sit down and listen to your
decision.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber actually ruled this morning that the content of the
document as a result of torture cannot be used before this
Chamber. And the full decision will be issued next week. And I
expressly stated that in the morning. You also stated that --
this morning that the International Co-Prosecutor quoted a part
of a document. Anyhow, it was ruled, so please move on, Counsel.
MR. KOPPE:
Then I apologise; it's my misunderstanding. I thought there
wasn't a formal ruling yet. But allow me to come back to this. I
am fine with this witness not answering this question, but I
would like to have that in the record at least the passage that I
would like to have read to her. I don't think it is forbidden to
formulate my question. And I think I would like to have in the
record what it is exactly that I would have put to the witness.
So I think I'm allowed to read that passage and then you -- the
Chamber can stick with its decision that I cannot ask this
question. However, I would like for the record to be very clear
also for the appeal hearings the very specific question that I
wanted to ask to this witness.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The International Deputy Co-Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President. There is no need to read the passage in
a document in regard to which we can't put any questions to the
witness. That's the first point. Secondly, by reading a passage,
Counsel would be attempting to influence the witness' answers by
asking subsequent questions. I would request the Chamber not to
fall into this trap and accept such a request.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber does not allow you to do that or to read an extract
from a record or statement as a result of torture, and that's the
end of it.
BY MR. KOPPE:
That's a very interesting ruling, but we still have S-21 to deal
with, including the question whether torture was committed. But
that's not the point.
Q. Okay, Madam Witness, I will move on to the very last question.
There you are. And that is your husband who was in the Popel
commune. My question to you is -- he has come up already few
times in your testimony -- my question is: Did you ever discuss
with him your work in the commune, your decisions? And vice
versa, did he ever discuss with you his decisions, his policies,
et cetera?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I don't fully understand your question. Please rephrase it.
Q. Put very simply, Madam Witness, did you ever speak to your
husband between '75 and '79 about your work at home?
A. As a husband and wife, we spoke to one another, we fought one
another, and that was typical nature. Of course, it was not a big
fight, but we had our personal opinions on various aspects,
including political aspects. Yes, we did speak to one another.
Q. And would you be able, in general terms, to say whether his
decisions, his policy in Popel commune were the same as yours or
corresponding with yours?
A. I cannot make a conclusion on this matter. However, in terms
of implementing the order or instruction from the upper echelon,
both of us would do it -- would implement it.
Q. But was there a difference between you and him in terms of
implementation of the policy? Was he doing it the same way as you
were?
A. I am unclear on that. As we did not meet very often during the
regime, sometimes we met only once in a month. And we didn't
spend much time discussing these matters.
Q. Okay. Thank you, Madam Witness. Last subject I would like to
discuss with you. And that is the enemy situation or the defence
situation in April, May, June 1977, two years after the
liberation. Do you remember whether there was increased violence
coming from the Vietnamese in the period March, April, May '77?
A. No, I cannot recall that as I was sick almost a year round in
1977.
Q. So you won't be able to answer any concrete questions on enemy
activity at the border in those months of '77; am I correct?
A. Yes.
MR. KOPPE:
Thank you very much, Madam Witness, for answering my sometimes
difficult questions. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like to hand the floor to the defence team for
Khieu Samphan to put questions to this witness. You may proceed,
Counsel.
QUESTIONING BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Q. Madam Witness, my name is Kong Sam Onn. I am a national
counsel for Khieu Samphan, and I have some questions that I'll
like to seek clarification from you.
In relation to your written record of witness interview -- that
is, your interview, document .2 (sic), question/answer
17, 18, and 19, you told the investigator of the Office of the
Co-Investigating Judges and also you stated on the same matter
yesterday when you answered to the question of the National
Co-Prosecutor around 09.30. You stated that you never knew Mr.
Khieu Samphan nor met him nor worked as his messenger. And my
question to you is the following: Did you ever work as a
messenger, say from 1970 to 1979?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. No, I never worked as a messenger as I had young children to
take care of.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Counsel, please check the document number again. It should be
E319 not E312.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Allow me to check it, Mr. President. My apology, Mr. President,
the document is .2.
Q. Also, Madam Witness, on the same document at question/answer
327, you stated that during the period -- the three years period
of the Khmer Rouge regime -- did any senior ranking cadres -- and
in parenthesis Khieu Samphan, Pol Pot, Nuon Chea, pay a visit to
your area? And your reply is the following in A327: "None. Only
Ta Mok did. Furthermore, no one knew Khieu Samphan, Pol Pot, and
Nuon Chea." In relation to this extract, my question to you is
the following: Do you confirm and stand by that statement?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, I confirm and stand by my statement.
Q. Thank you. Now I'd like to ask you about Ta Mok and his
family. In the same document -- that is, your written record of
interview at question/answer 55 and 56 -- and allow me to quote
these two question/answers:
Question: "Did you know Ta Mok?"
Answer 55: "Yes, I did. Ta Mok travelled around looking after
work in the cooperatives and communes."
Question: "Did you personally know him?"
Answer 56: "Yes, I personally knew him. Sometimes, he came to see
the cooperative kitchen, and he asked the people whether they ate
enough or not. Ta Mok visited every site. I met Ta Mok." End of
quote.
Do you stand by your statement that I just read out?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Thank you. Did you know Ta Mok went to various other worksites
within the area?
A. I only knew that he came to my area.
Q. Thank you. In the same interview at question/answer 61, you
state -- and I quote: "I no longer saw Ta Mok about a year before
fleeing the 'Yuon' because he went to work at different site, but
I did not know where he was." Do you still stand by that
statement of yours?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Thank you. Did you ever hear a phrase that was used that,
"above Mok" -- "Mok's head, there was a head and above the head,
there was a sky"?
A. No, I have never heard that expression.
Q. Thank you. Regarding your role or position during the period
of Democratic Kampuchea and as you have stated that you were a
commune chief at the beginning of the regime and you then worked
at the district level towards the end of the regime. And I have
some questions regarding your position at the commune level.
You stated that you attended meetings at the sector level -- that
is, Sector 13. And you made that statement in your written record
of interview at question/answer 82 of the same document that I
quoted earlier. And you stated that for the -- you asked whether
any senior cadres from Phnom Penh attended the meeting and you
answer, 82 with "No cadres of the Centre came to attend those
meetings". And Madam Witness, do you still stand by that
statement?
A. Yes, I do. It is correct.
Q. Thank you. Did you ever see Ta Mok attend meetings at the
sector level?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. Thank you. In your same interview at question/answer 85, and
you were asked the following question -- and I quote:
"Were the meeting outcomes disseminated to the Centre level?"
Answer 85: "I did not know whether or not they reported them to
the Centre." End of quote.
And Madam Witness, do you still stand by that statement as
correct?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. In your response to Question 146, you stated that it was sent
to the district and that you did not know whether the district
forwarded it to the upper echelon or not. And do you still stand
by that statement?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. On the issue of agriculture -- and there has been a lot of
discussions on this very matter -- that is, on the issue of
producing three tons of rice yield per hectare -- did you know
about the policy of rice produce of three tons per hectare per
year? Rather three tons of rice yields per hectare -- can you
tell the Chamber from whom you heard about this policy?
A. The plan of producing three tons of rice yield per hectare, I
received that instruction from the district. So we tried to use
more fertiliser in a rice field in order to achieve that outcome.
Q. And who actually at the district level gave you that
instruction, if you can recall?
A. I cannot actually remember well. It could be -- it was at the
time of Ta Chay or Ta Kit.
Q. Thank you. On the issue of urgent meetings as you were asked
by the OCIJ investigator in Question 160, you said that there
were various kinds of urgent meetings. And let me quote: "[…] For
example, when there was abundance of rice in my commune, the
impoverished commune immediately called for me to share the
abundant rice to the commune where rice was lacking." Can you
tell the Chamber whether your commune had a lot of surplus?
A. No, there was not much surplus. However, if you compare the
produce in my commune to other communes, we did have more rice as
our rice was sent through other communes.
Q. Thank you. Also in your same written record of interview at
question/answer 83, you stated that -- and I quote -- when you
were asked about what happened in the village, you said: "When
any event happened at the base, village, or commune, the village
reported it to me. And if I could not sort it out, I had to refer
it to the upper echelon. Besides this, they talked only about
lack of food at the cooperatives and how we had to grow other
supplementary crops for food. Additionally, if anyone misbehaved,
we had to send them to the upper echelon, but I did not send very
many." End of quote. And Madam, do you still stand by your
statement?
A. Yes.
Q. On some matters that you made your own decisions; am I correct
in saying that?
A. No, that's not the case.
Q. Allow me to rephrase my question, in case that you found it
difficult to understand. In your Answer 83, you talk about the
reporting to the upper echelon, and that certain matters, you
resolved them by yourself. So, my question to you was that you
made certain decisions on certain issues, and that you did not
have to report those issues to the upper echelon. Is my
understanding correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Thank you. Now I move to the time period when you worked at
the district. In that same document of your interview at
question/answer 275, 276 and 277, and allow me to quote from 275
as follows:
"Ta Sarun appointed me district committee. There was no actual
appointment; he just told me to help the district work, because
San was working alone. Furthermore, it just to help supervise the
tailoring women. There was no written appointment. For example,
during a meeting, they told us, 'You do this. You are transferred
from here to that place.' Ta Ran said, 'Go help San, because San
is alone.' Ta Ran might have received an order from the upper
echelon too."
Question: "The sector echelon came to tell you to be district
committee, and the sector might have received an order from the
upper echelon. Do you think that the decision to appoint you on
the district committee came from the Centre in Phnom Penh?"
Answer 276: "No, it came from the sector."
Question: "Could the sector level appoint the district level
people without discussion with the Zone?"
Answer 277: "I do not know." End of quote.
Madam, do you still stand by the statements that I've just read
out?
A. Yes, I do. It is correct.
Q. Thank you. You said to the Co-Investigating Judges as well as
during the hearing itself yesterday, with regard to your
appointment at Tram Kak district, you said that you had been
appointed in October 1968 -- '78. This is in your written record
of interview at question/answer 30 and 31, and this involves an
exception. Can you explain this notion of exception to the
Chamber at questions 30 and 31 of your written record of
interview?
A. I don't remember very well, but there was an exception for
those who had committed minor offences, and these people had to
be released. This is what I said.
Q. You say that these people had to be released. What do you mean
by that? Do you mean that those who had committed minor offences
had to be released?
A. What I mean by "exception" is forgiving, forgiving those who
had committed minor offences. And I can't really understand this
idea in depth. I simply believe that sometimes exceptional
measures were taken.
Q. Thank you. How long did you stay in Tram Kak, because you told
us that you were appointed in October 1978, so I'd like to know
how long you remained in Tram Kak?
A. I was there until the Vietnamese arrived, and then I escaped
to the jungle.
Q. Do you remember the date? Did you leave before 7 January 1979,
or how much time before, or how much time after that date?
A. I don't really remember specifically, but I know that I left
Tram Kak when Takeo was bombed. I don't remember exactly which
month it was.
Q. Thank you. Now, with regard to question/answer 69 -- and I
quote:
"Did you go to the Sector 13 office when you were commune chief,
or when you were district committee?"
Answer: "I went there when I was commune chief, and I never went
there when I was district committee because the Vietnamese were
attacking and approaching, and there was turmoil. So I could not
go to the meetings there."
Well, I would like to ask you if you stand by your answer?
A. Yes, I do. I indeed stand by that answer.
Q. Thank you. I now would like to put questions to you regarding
the "Revolutionary Flag" issues. In your written record of
interview at Question 121 -- and I quote:
"As a commune chief, did you ever have to do any propaganda on
the "Revolutionary Flag" issues that appeared back then?"
Answer -- this is your answer: "I did not know about those
magazines. I am not sure if the upper levels published magazines,
but there were no magazines at my level."
So, I'd like to know if your -- what you say here is correct, and
if you stand by it?
A. I was not aware of the existence of these "Revolutionary Flag"
magazines.
Q. And when you were part of the district committee, did you ever
see issues of "Revolutionary Flag"?
A. Yes, but I did not know the content.
Q. When you said that you had seen these issues, does that mean
that you read them, or you just simply saw them?
A. No. I never read these issues, or in any case not in detail. I
perused them, because I had a lot of things to do. I was very
busy. I had to work on farming the land.
Q. Thank you. Now I would like to turn to another topic, which
concerns marriages. Yesterday, this was at around 09.55 in the
morning, you spoke about marriage. You spoke about different
reasons why people would misbehave morally, and I would like to
ask you if single men or single young men could make love when
they wished to? That is to say, could they have a love
relationship without them being married?
A. No. That was not possible.
Q. Thank you. At Question 153 and 154 in your written record of
interview -- so Answer 153 -- and I quote: "At my site, if such a
case happened, that meant that man and woman loved each other, so
the village had to report to me, and I would call them to talk in
order to arrange a marriage for them."
Question: "Did people consider this kind of act as an offence?"
Answer: "Yes, it was indeed something that did not comply with
our tradition."
So, I would to know therefore if you stand by what you said?
A. I don't understand exactly what you just said. Could you
please repeat your question?
Q. Yes, thank you. As I said, at Question 153 and 154, I quoted
your answer from Question 153: "'At my site, if such a case
happened, that meant that man and woman loved each other, so the
village had to report to me, and I would call them to talk in
order to arrange a marriage for them."
Question: "So, was this considered an offence?"
Answer 154: "Yes, it was against tradition."
So, these were single young men and women who were in love with
each other. So, I would like to ask you if your statement here is
correct.
A. No. If both the young man and the young woman said that they
were in love with each other, and there was no problem if the
village chiefs approved of it, so what I've said was not correct.
Q. So, let me please repeat what you said. If a single young man
and woman loved each other, and they confessed that they were in
love with each other, this did -- was not a form of moral
misconduct, and therefore they could get married. Is that what
you wanted to say?
A. Yes, that's indeed what I wanted to say.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The time has come for a short break, so the hearing will resume
at 3 p.m.
Ms. Khoem Boeun, we will resume at 3 p.m., so you can rest now.
So please return to the courtroom with your counsel before 3
o'clock. Thank you.
(Court recesses from 1443H to 1501H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.
The Court is now back in session, and again the Chamber will hand
the floor to Khieu Samphan's defence to continue putting
questions to the witness.
Counsel, you may proceed.
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. Thank you.
And Madam Witness, can you hear me?
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. Yes, I can.
Q. Before the break, we discussed the issue of marriages. I'd
like to put a question to you again by referring to your
statement -- that is, question/answer 156, and I quote:
Question: "Did that require approval from the parents or from
Angkar?"
Answer 156: "There had to be approval from the parents, and it
was reported to Angkar at the district level." End of quote. So
that is on the decision to marry those people, and Madam Witness,
do you stand by your statement as correct?
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. Thank you. In question/answer 113, and allow me to quote:
Question: "Were those forced marriages -- those marriage
arrangements -- designated by Centre level down to Zone level to
Sector level, then to district and commune level? Or were they
decided by the commune or district level?"
Answer 113: "The Centre level did not decide them. The commune
and district level did." End of quote. And Madam Witness, do you
stand by that statement that I just read out?
A. Yes, I do. It is correct.
Q. Thank you. Again on the decision of marriage, a witness who
testified a few days ago -- that is, on the 22 April 2015, and I
refer to transcript , at around 13.57, and allow me to
quote from the transcript:
Question: "And the decision to have group marriages, was that a
decision made by the district itself, or was that also an
instruction from the upper echelon?"
Answer: "The upper level officials gave their authorisation, and
it was up to us to organize those marriages, whether they were
individual or collective. We consulted the communes and the
district in order to celebrate such marriages, but we also had to
consult the parents of those involved and, in particular, the
couples themselves." End of quote.
Madam Witness, do you concur with the statement of Pech Chim?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Thank you. Now I move to another topic -- that is, Krang Ta
Chan office.
In your written record of interview with the OCIJ, you spoke
about Krang Ta Chan office that it was under the supervision of
the district. And in question/answer 187, you mentioned what I
just stated. Is that statement correct, Madam Witness?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Thank you. Yesterday at around 11.08, the Co-Prosecutor showed
a document which was a letter from Ta An, who was chief of Krang
Ta Chan office, to you. The letter is dated 1 August 1977, and I
refer to document E3/2012. In that document, Ta An made a request
to you to send militiamen for the arrest of two men, and that
document was shown to you by the OCIJ investigator. And in your
interview, you said that your commune received that kind of
letter or document -- that is, the document that I just gave out
the number. That is E3/2012. Madam Witness, can you locate that
document -- that is, E3/2012?
A. No, I cannot locate it.
Q. Madam, can you find it?
A. No, we haven't located it yet.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Mr. President, I don't have the document with me but I think the
document is with the Court officer.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, you can do that. Just locate the document and show it to
her, so that she can examine it.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Mr. President.
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
May I ask my duty counsel to read it to me?
BY MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Q. I may give you a summary of that letter to you. In fact, it
was a letter sent to you from Ta An, requesting you to send
militiamen to arrest two men. Do you recall that event? And in
fact the Co-Prosecutor put some questions to you regarding this
letter.
MS. KHOEM BOEUN:
A. I cannot recall it.
Q. Please examine the document, and whether you recall that you
received that document during the Democratic Kampuchea period --
that document dated 1 August 1977?
A. I cannot recall it clearly, Mr. President. From what I can
see, that letter originated from Krang Ta Chan office.
Q. Thank you. I recall that your response to the last question by
Counsel Koppe this afternoon, that you were sick all year round
during 1977. Can you please tell the Court whether you actually
went to work when you were sick in that year?
A. During that year I was sick, and it happens that I was also
pregnant. For that reason I did not go to work far, and most of
the time I would stay at home, and sometimes I stayed at my work
office. So, allow me to stress that I rarely received any
communications from the soldiers. Although it was addressed to
me, I, myself, did not deal with it as there were men at the
commune who dealt with those matters.
Q. Thank you. Also regarding this letter, did you receive these
kinds of letters -- or whether you cannot recall it?
A. I do not have anything to hide, but I cannot recall whether I
received such a letter or not.
Q. Thank you. Regarding the matter at the sector level, in your
written record of interview at question/answer 59, you stated
that Sam Bit was at the Sector 13 committee for a while, and
later on Ran came to be Sector
committee until the end of the 
          13   Khmer Rouge regime. That's what you mentioned in your Answer 59,
and allow me to provide you with a full quote.
Answer 59: "Yes. Then Sam Bit, who was in charge of the army,
came to govern Sector 13. I did not know which army Sam Bit came
from. Sam Bit was Sector 13 committee for a while, but not all
the way until the end of the Khmer Rouge regime. Next, Ran
(male), came to be Sector 13 committee until the end of the Khmer
Rouge regime. I do not remember Ran's full name." End of quote.
And my question to you, Madam Witness, how did you know -- did
you know whether Sam Bit or Ran were related to Ta Mok?
A. No, I did not know about that, and I did not know these two
men that well.
Q. Thank you. And do you know who was chief of Sector 13 before
Sam Bit?
A. There were many changes and I cannot recall it. And I cannot
recall who was before Sam Bit.
Q. I'd like to ask you about the committee of Sector 13 before
Sam Bit arrived. Can you recall the name of that Sector 13
committee?
A. There were Saom and Mut.
Q. Thank you. This morning in your response to the question put
to you by Judge Lavergne, you said that Prak worked at the
sector. And can you tell us the position of Prak at Sector 13
committee?
A. My apology. I think I was confused. Before Sam Bit, there was
Prak. I did not know his real position, but he was at the Sector
13 committee for a brief period of time.
Q. How brief was it? You mean, in terms of months or year?
A. I cannot recall that clearly, whether he was there only for
months or a year, but to my recollection, he was there for less
than a year.
Q. Do you recall as when Sam Bit came to replace Prak?
A. No, I cannot recall that.
Q. Thank you. In relation to document E3/2048, and that document
was shown to you. And Madam Witness, can you locate that
document?
A. I am looking through the documents.
Q. Madam Witness, do you locate the document?
A. Yes, I located the document, but it is difficult for me to
read it.
Q. That is all right, and I'd like to refer to another document
-- that is, document D157.64, and that document was referred to
by Judge Lavergne. Please locate that document, as I have
questions to put to you in relation to these two documents.
Madam Witness, have you located that document?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. That document is a short one, and please allow you to look at
the bottom part of that document. The document is a report, and
towards the bottom of the document, your name, Boeun, was
mentioned. And in the previous document, your name, Boeun, was
also mentioned. My question to you is the following: Can you tell
the Chamber the word "Boeun" that appeared in the two documents,
is it your name, or is it your signature?
A. It is my name. It is not a signature.
Q. Thank you. So, if you have to sign, you will have a separate
signature? Am I correct?
A. Yes, I would sign -- I would have my signature and I would
write my name. But in these documents, only the names appeared.
Q. Thank you. And Madam Witness, do you recognize the handwriting
on the documents?
A. No, I do not recognize it.
Q. Thank you. Can you confirm whether the handwriting is yours,
or it belongs to someone else?
A. No, it is not my handwriting, and my name here is written
alone. This is not a full name.
MR. KONG SAM ONN:
Thank you, Madam Witness. Mr. President, I do not have any
further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
The proceedings today came to -- comes to an adjournment now, and
we will resume it on Thursday, 7 May 2015, from 9 o'clock in the
morning. On that day we will hear the testimony of a witness,
2-TCW-822. This information is for the Parties and the general
public.
Madam Khoem Boeun, the Chamber is grateful for your video link
testimony as a witness for the last two days. Your testimony may
contribute to ascertaining the truth in this case. And it is now
the end of your testimony, and you may rest, and the Chamber
wishes you good health.
And Counsel Mam Rithea, the Chamber would like to thank you as
well, and you too may be excused.
Security personnel, you are instructed to take the two Accused,
Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea, back to the detention facility, and
have them returned to attend the proceedings on the morning of
Thursday, 7 May 2015, before 9 o'clock.
The Chamber is now adjourned.
(Court adjourns at 1528H)
