P R O C E E D I N G S
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now in session.
In today's session the Chamber is going to hear the testimonies
of witnesses, who are going to testify on the character of the
accused, and there are two more witnesses to be heard and we will
use the remaining time to hear the testimonies of these two
witnesses.  Before the proceedings the Greffier of the Trial
Chamber is now instructed to report the attendance of the parties
to the proceedings, including the witnesses to be called.
THE GREFFIER:
Mr. President, the parties to the proceedings today are all
present, except the civil party lawyers, group 2 and group 4, who
are absent.  Witnesses D5 and D6 are available and awaiting call
from the Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Before we proceed to hear the testimonies of the witnesses the
Chamber would like to enquire the civil party lawyers group 1
concerning the schedule; the schedule to hear the final
statements, the oral statements by the parties to the
proceedings.
On the 27th of August 2009 an instruction or direction on the
submission of the oral submission and the written statement has
already been issued, and that on the 23rd of November 2009 the
hearing is expected -- however, the Chamber has received a
request by the Co-Prosecutors, who asked that the hearing to hear
the oral statement as scheduled be shifted to the 30th of
November 2009.  Therefore, the Chamber would like to know the
position of the civil party lawyers in relation to the request
recently made by the Co-Prosecutors.
MR. WERNER:
First of all we are very grateful to have a date which is -- as I
stated a few weeks ago, a week ago -- very important for us.
We were a bit surprised by the prosecution motion because for all
of us it's going to mean quite a lot of flexibility and
arrangement, however, we take no position on that matter and we
are in your hands.
The only thing we would say is that we would indeed need a
decision on that matter one way or another, whatever the date is,
because again all of us will have to come back and it's quite
important for us to know as soon as possible.
But we are in your hands on that matter.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The civil party lawyers group 3, would you wish to make any
observation in relation to the motion by the Co-Prosecutors in
relation to the schedule of the hearing?
MS. MARTINEAU:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.
This date change does not basically bother us.  And I support
what my colleague Mr. Werner said.  We would like, however, that
the date be set in a final way because we have to indeed organize
ourselves.  Thank you, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The defence counsel, would you wish to make any observation in
relation to the request made by the Co-Prosecutors in relation to
the date to hear the final statement raised by the Co-Prosecutor?
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, as to the motion by the prosecutors to shift the
oral hearing from the 23rd of November to the 30th of November,
the defence counsel does not object such motion because we can
see that it is only to make it more convenient for the parties to
the proceedings, and it is not an intention to extend hearing
dates.  So we are happy that as long as the proceeding is
expeditious.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, civil party lawyers, both groups, and the defence
counsel for your observations in relation to the said schedule of
the hearing.
The Chamber would like to inform the parties to the proceeding
and the public that after hearing the testimonies of these two
witnesses who are going to be called to give testimonies in
relation to the character of the accused in a moment, the Chamber
then continues its proceedings to put questions to the accused
concerning his character.
The Court officer is now instructed to call witness Hun Smirn
into the courtroom.
(Witness enters courtroom)
Good  morning, Mr. Witness.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Hun Smirn?
A. Yes, it is, Your Honour.
Q. Mr. Hun Smirn, how old are you?
A. I am 60 years old.
Q. Mr. Hun Smirn, where do you live and what do you do for a
living?
A. I live in Stueng village, Rolous commune, Svay Chek district,
Banteay Meanchey province.  I am a pensioner.
Q. According to the report of the Greffier reported to the Court
yesterday. that you have no relation or affiliation with any
parties to the proceedings and that you have already taken an
oath.  Is the report correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Now, the Chamber would like to proceed by informing you the
rights and obligation as a witness.
As a witness, you have the right not to self-incriminate
yourself.  And as a witness, you shall only tell the truth,
nothing but the truth.
Mr. Hun Smirn, have you known the accused, Kaing Guek Eav alias
Duch?
A. I have not known Kaing Guek Eav, I only have known the person
named Hang Pin.
Q. Could you  please look at the accused and please respond to my
question whether the person you called Hang Pin and the accused
who is present in the courtroom is the same person or is he
different from Hang Pin?
A. Your Honour, he is the same person.
Q. The accused may be seated.
Could you tell the Court how did you come to know him and where?
A. Your Honour, I knew Hang Pin in 1996.
It was in October of that year and I knew him in my capacity as
the director of Svay Chek High School, and at that time there was
shortages in relation to the teachers, so that's why we hired him
to work for our school.
Q. You stated that Hang Pin was recruited as a teacher, a
schoolteacher.  What kind of subject did he teach and how long
had he taught at that school?
A. He came to work with our school and he was assigned to teach
French language.  He started his work in 2006 and 2007, the
academic year, but he started at the beginning from the 28th of
October 2006 and finished his teaching at our school by the end
of March or February, probably, because I have not got the
document to support this, and by then he already left the school.
Q. You said 2006-2007.  Was it mistaken because you also
mentioned 1996 and 1997, so which would be the accurate date that
you refer to?
A. My apology, Mr. President.  Actually, he started working with
us on the 28th of October 1996 and he was assigned to teach
French.  And in late February or early March 1997, he already
quitted the assignment of the work at the school.
Q. Mr. Hun Smirn, could you please tell the Court by describing
the character of the accused you have known as Hang Pin because
since you had been encountered with him for some years during the
time you worked together with him in your capacity as the
director of Svay Chek High School and while he was a teacher, so
you may be able to tell the Court of your impression in relation
to his character?
A. Mr. Hang Pin, when he was working at our school, was a gentle
person.  He was not the person who liked talking much.  He liked
reading books and liked isolation.
When he came to school, sometimes he came by motorcycle,
sometimes he walked to school, because the location where he
stayed was not far away from the school.  It was about 500
metres.
And he seemed not to like talking or sharing conversation with
the colleagues at the school because after he finished his
teaching duty he would be sitting alone reading books.
And in his teaching, he was a senior teacher and he was
well-educated in French language, and I don't know what would be
his previous specialty or specialized field, but I noted that he
would be well-qualified to teach French since his French is very
good.  That's why he was asked to teach French.
Q. Are you certain that when you recruited Hang Pin as a teacher,
in which school was he assigned to work for?
A. When he was employed to work at the high school,l he had
worked at the educational office of Svay Chek district.
Q. Do you know how long had he been working at the educational
office of Svay Chek district?
A. I'm afraid I cannot really remember this, but before 1996 he
was seen working at this educational office of the district
already and that my colleague, who had been teaching French but
then passed away, then we had no-one to replace him and that we
noted Hang Pin who could help.
Q. What grades did he teach his French to the students?
A. He taught at grade 8 and grade 9.
Q. You indicated just now that the accused liked being isolated
and that he liked reading and did not like talking much.  So can
you tell the Court whether it is his natural character or because
he wanted to hide his acts by not socializing himself with the
colleagues at school?
A. I'm afraid I don't know.
Q. Could you also tell the Court about his interactions with the
students and the other teachers at the same school and the
educational staff at the school that you were the director?  How
was his interaction with the people in the community?
A. It was normal.  It was the normal way of contact.  There would
be times when people could talk to one another in a normal way.
Q. Did he ever show any kind of inappropriate attitude that hurt
the mentality or the state of minds of the students or the
teachers at his same school?
A. I did not see that.
Q. When he went to taught at that school, where was his family?
Did he bring his family to live with you over there?
A. He only brought his children with him when he went to teach at
that school.
Q. You said during the time of his teaching -- of the time that
he taught there, it was not long and up to the 28th of February
or March, so it means he only taught for four or five months and
then he give up his teaching career at that school.
What do you mean by "giving up"?  Did he quit teaching or he quit
temporarily and went to work somewhere else for another reason?
Can you explain to the Chamber?
A. In late February or early March, he disappeared from the
school and only later on we heard that he went to work at
Samlaut, and I did not see the assignment for him to work there;
I did not see anything on paper.  I only heard through other
people.
Q. So you did not know anything else about him quitting the job
and accepted another job in Samlaut or that he was transferred
from that current job to work in Samlaut.  Is this correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. What about his interaction with other groups besides the
teachers and the students at that school, did you observe his
interaction with other groups within the community at the
location of his residence?
A. During the time that he worked and stayed there, it was quite
short and I did not fully observe his way of living, and his
residence was far from where I stay so I could not grasp this
situation well.
Q. What about his religious observance?  During his teaching
tenure at that school where you were the principal, during that
four or five months period, did you observe which religions that
he practiced?
A. It is my understanding and my observation that he was a
Christian.
Q. When he quit his teaching career from your school, did he
inform you as a school principal or did he inform the district
education department of giving up his job as a teacher?
A. When he quit teaching, my school and the department did not
know anything about that.  He just simply disappeared.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, do you have questions to be put to this
character witness?
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the
Co-Prosecutors to put questions to this character witness if they
so wish.  The Co-Prosecutors have 10 minutes.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Smirn.
Did you know Duch's performance as a teacher?  Was he a
hard-working teacher, meticulous and always fulfilled his
assignment?
A. From the beginning, during the first two or three months, his
work performance was excellent and we, as the management
committee, even if sometime we forgot to ring the bell, he had
his eyes on his board and he did this work as well, so it meant
he was very attentive to his work and very punctual.
Q. Thank you.  Did you ever observe or see Duch slip his tongue
that he was the Chairman of S-21 and that he was the closest
associate to Son Sen or the reason for him to be a teacher at
your school, and it was in order to avoid being arrested by the
authority?  Did he ever slip any of these lines to you?
A. No, I did not hear that.
Q. Thank you.  Did you also know of his relationship with the
Khmer Rouge leadership?
A. No, I did not know that.
Q. Did you also know whether the Khmer Rouge leadership or the
Khmer Rouge soldiers were looking for him during the time?
A. No, I did not know any of these things.
Q. When he was teaching at the Svay Chek School, if someone were
to tell you that Duch was the chief executioner at S-21, would
you believe that?
A. If I knew or if I were told that, I would not believe it,
based on what I could see through him at the time.
Q. So you believed that he played his role very well, to be
observed as a sincere and honest person?
A. Through his activity, he was shown to be a good and friendly
person.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
I do not have any more questions for this and I would like to
give the floor to my international Co-Prosecutor.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you take the floor.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Mr. Witness, good morning.  I would like to know whether
during the period where he was teaching in your school, were
there any rumours concerning the past of Hang Pin alias Duch,
under the Khmer Rouge?  Did some teachers receive information
concerning his past?  Would they have spoken about it within the
school and would you have paid any attention to this information?
A. I, myself, did not hear and did not know anything regarding
what you have raised in your question.
Q. When he was detained there for a very short period and you
were therefore able to see just a few things, you said that he
was quite solitary, and I just want to delve a little a bit more
on his character.
According to you, was he somebody who was comfortable in his
shoes?  Was he happy to be alive and joie de vivre or did he look
tormented, worried and depressive?
A. During his time teaching there, I did not pay much attention
to his personal character.  At that time, he had just suffered
the robbery and that his wife was killed during the course of
that robbery, so he fled to Svay Chek and he served as a teacher
in that school and, of course, he suffered because of the loss of
his wife.
And through his teaching activity, I would not have believed that
he used to be a senior person.  I only thought of his
circumstance of his relocation due to the robbery and the loss of
his wife.  That is all.
Q. So all of these are suppositions that you make because there
was this event, but did the accused himself talk about to you
about this event, the death of his spouse?  Did he show any
feelings with regard to this event or did he hold it as a secret?
A. Regarding the loss of his wife, I learnt of it before he even
came to work at my school, and when he came to work at my school
I only knew well of what happened to him; that is, regarding the
loss of his wife.
Q. Did the accused tell you or to his other colleagues what he
had done under the Khmer Rouge?  I know that you don't know
anything about his past, but did he himself talk about this
period to try and justify what he had done during this period;
and where he was, where his family was?
A. He never said anything about his past to me.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
I have two last questions, Mr. President.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. With regard to his students, how would you qualify his
teaching?  As a principal, you were able to attend some of his
classes.  Was he authoritarian?  Did he tolerate debate and
discussions with his students?  Did he tolerate a certain amount
of disobedience from his students?
A. In his teaching performance, it was excellent, and the
students referred to him as Grandpa Teacher, and this signified
the excellence in his teaching career.
Q. To come back to one of the questions of my colleague, when you
learnt that in reality Hang Pin was Duch, responsible for so much
crime, did you feel afterwards that you'd been deceived by this
person?  Were you shocked that a man responsible for so much
torture and execution of men, women and children had been able to
share with you four years of his life -- of your life -- and that
he had a normal attitude at that time?
After that exposed, when you learned this, did this shock you?
Did this scare you?  And did you wonder what kind of a man could
act in this way and be able to dissimilate his criminal past so
well?
A. Through his teaching activities at my school, and that later
on, I learned of his criminal past.  Even at present day it is
extremely hard for me to take it that he involved with so serious
crimes in comparison to his teaching career at my school.  It was
a complete opposite.  In his teaching career, he was so perfect.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have no more questions for the
witness, whom I'd like to thank as well.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber would like now to give the floor to the defence
counsel to put questions to this character witness if they so
wish.  The defence counsel has 10 minutes.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Mr. Hun Smirn, I would like to ask you a few questions.
When Hang Pin was your staff at the Svay Chek School, did you
satisfied with all the tasks completed by Hang Pin?
A. Through his activity and his teaching performance it was the
most excellent work at my school.
Q. Thank you.  So you were very happy with every aspect of his
work?
A. Yes.
Q. Thank you.  So from what you knew, Mr. Hang Pin, can you tell
us about his feeling?
A. During his teaching tenure there he was generous, kind,
friendly, and he had good relationship with staff, with the
management committee as well as with students.  There was no
dispute or conflict at all.
Q. Thank you.  From the beginning you said he was observed to be
alone frequently.  Did any of your staff or within the group of
teachers or students -- did any one of them ever criticize him
for being alone or being smug and did not want to join the group?
A. No.
Q. Thank you.  So can we say all the staff and all the teachers
under your supervision, they all liked him very much?
A. Every one of us was alike, we befriended with him.
Q. Thank you.  When teachers met, they would talk about this or
that.  So during such meeting, sometimes they talk about
politics.  Did you ever hear Hang Pin say anything regarding
politics?
A. It is possible that they might have talked about the politics.
During teachers meetings we talked on several topics and it might
include the politics.  However, during such talking he would
listen to those people and he would not use any inappropriate
words to anyone talking about politics during such meeting.
Q. Thank you.  Just then you told the Chamber that his family was
robbed.  Did you know whether the robbery took place by the real
robbers or the situation took place because of those Khmer Rouge
people or group or cadres who wanted to kill him and his family?
A. Regarding the situation surrounding robbery, I was not really
sure.  Maybe the next character witness would be able to shed
light on this issue.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Hun Smirn for your testimony on the accused's
character.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President, I do not have questions for this witness and if my
colleagues have questions, then please allow him to do so.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international defence counsel, if you have questions you can
proceed.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you.  Good morning, Mr. President.  Good morning, Your
Honours.
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. Good morning, Witness.
You have said almost everything in answering to the different
questions that have been asked of you.  Just one or two
clarifications.
At what time exactly, when exactly did you learn about Duch's
arrest -- that is what he is called at that time -- when did you
learn about his arrest?
A. I learned of his arrest on the radio broadcast and I saw it on
the news on the television.  And when Hang Pin was arrested I
learned of other names, Kaing Guek Eav or Duch, but when I saw
his face on the television I realized it was actually Hang Pin
and I believe it was in late 1997.
Q. You are probably mixing the dates.  It was in 1999, Mr.
Witness, just to remind you.  So it was on television that you
discovered that your former teacher is actually Duch.  Is that
correct?
A. I apologize.  I think I got confused with the year.
Q. So you answer to the Co-Prosecutor that it was then difficult
for you to understand.
I think there may be a problem with the microphone.  Does the
interpretation hear me? Yes.
So as I was saying, it was difficult, you said, for you to
understand how Duch could have been Director of S-21 in the past
but also the excellent teacher that you knew.  Is that correct?
A. Could you please repeat your question?
Q. Forgive me.  We were interrupted.  I was saying that you
answered to the Co-Prosecutor that you were extremely surprised
upon learning this news and that it was difficult for you to
understand how Duch had been the former Director of S-21 in the
past while at the same time he had been -- at another time,
rather, had been an excellent teacher.
You found it difficult to understand this.
A. According to his activities at the workplace under my
supervision, I could observe that he could not have been such a
person because his activities when he worked with me, did not
reflect that he was a cruel person or a drunkard.  I could not
believe that he ended up being such a person after all.
Q. And this is why, therefore, you came today before this Court
in order to explain to this Court that you had known Duch as an
excellent teacher?  This is what you came to tell us today; an
excellent teacher who did a perfect job.  This is what you said.
A. Yes, it is correct.
Q. Mr. Witness, thank you for having travelled all the way to
this Court in order to provide your statement.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Chamber is grateful to Mr. Hun Smirn for his testimony before
the Trial Chamber.  The proceedings to hear the testimony of Mr.
Hun Smirn concerning the character of the accused has now come to
an end.  The witness can join the public to observe the
proceedings or he may choose to go back to his residence if he
wishes to do so.
The Court officer is now instructed to make any necessary
arrangement so that Mr. Hun Smirn can be assisted and that
another witness is called into the courtroom.
(Witness exits courtroom)
(Witness enters courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good morning, Mr. Witness.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Is your name Peng Poan?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. How old are you?
A. I'm 57 years old.
Q. Where do you live and what do you do for the living?
A. I live in Phkoam, Svay Check, Banteay Meanchey, and I am a
teacher.
Q. According to the report by the Greffiers of the Trial Chamber,
you have no relationship or affiliation with any parties to the
proceedings and that you have already taken an oath before you
are called.  Is it correct?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. The Chamber would like to proceed to notify you of your rights
and obligation as a witness.  As a witness, you may decline to
respond to any questions that you are afraid that the testimony
could self-incriminate you, and that as a witness you shall tell
the truth, nothing but the truth.
Mr. Peng Poan, do you know the accused, Mr. Kaing Guek Eav alias
Duch?
A. I never know Kaing Guek Eav.  I have known Hang Pin.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, could you please rise?
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. The witness, could you please look at the person who is on his
feet now.  Is this the person you refer to as Hang Pin?
A. Yes, he is.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The accused, could you please be seated.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. Could you please tell the Court in what capacity did you know
that person and how did you come to know him?
A. I had known him because he would want to work as a teacher at
my school.
Q. Could you please tell the Court in which school did he ask you
that he could be teaching?
A. At that time because the school was new and that I am the
person in the local community who was promoted to oversee the
school temporarily and having noted that we need a teacher, so we
recruited him in 1993 or 1994.
Q. What was the name of the school you worked at and he taught?
A. It was Phkoam High School.  It was located to the north of the
Phkoam village in the territory of Phkoam village, Svay Chek
district.
Q. Could you please recollect the exact date when he asked you
that he could become a teacher at that Phkoam High School?  How
long had he been teaching at the school and when exactly was it?
And when did he leave Phkoam High School to work elsewhere?
A. He started work with me, as I already indicated, in 1993 and
1994.  He worked with us until 1995, when he was transferred to
work at the educational office.
Q. Could you please be more precise about the date, and this date
is very important to be verified?
There have been some facts which are related to the accuracy of
the verification of the dates because the parties would put
questions in relation to these actual dates concerning the
accused's character.  So could you please restate your statement?
A. My apology, Mr. President.  I may not have made myself clear
but he did work with us from 1993 to 1995 when he moved to work
at the educational office of the district.
Q. Mr. Peng Poan, could you please tell the Court about the
character of the accused Kaing Guek Eav alias Duch, although you
have known him as Hang Pin?  So since you had been encountered
with him at the Phkoam High School then you could shed light on
the character of the accused now.
A. Mr. President, when he worked with me as a teacher, he was
like a normal teacher, however, I have noted that he was very
strict to his assignment and work.
Q. Could you please elaborate further on his character; was he an
aggressive person, cruel, gentle?  And how was his interactions
with the students, the teachers and people in the community,
based on the best of your recollection?
A. Having noted his performance at Phkoam High School, I noted
that he did not show any signs of abnormality because he taught
students like the way the other teachers taught students.  It's
normal.
Q. What subject was he assigned to teach at Phkoam High School?
A. Since the school needed teachers in chemistry and physics, so
he were asked to teach these subjects.
Q. Which grade did he teach?
A. It was the new school and there were no students of higher
grade.  There were five, six and seven grades, so he were asked
to teach grade 7 and grade 8 students.
Q. When he was recruited to teach at Phkoam High School, was he
the staff member of the government?  If he was the employee of
the government, to which institution did he belong?
A. When he worked at our school, he did not belong to any
particular institution, yet -- or he was not paid so he was not a
government employee.
Q. So he worked on a voluntary basis.  So was he offered some
kind of assistance or incentive?
A. He volunteered to work for us and the schools did not have any
reward to him, although we assured him that we would do our best
to help him obtain the official post and, during that time, it
was under the conflicts and it was difficult to get any financial
support for any teachers at the school, especially for him.
Q. When he volunteered to work at the Phkoam High School, where
did he live?  Was his residence located next to the Phkoam school
or was it far located?
A. After he started working at the school, he started to build a
small house near the school, which was about 100 metres from the
school.
Q. Do you know where he came from and how he could teach -- what
kind of specialty or field of education he obtained at school?
A. I don't think I know about this but at that time people at the
refugee camps were repatriated.  In light of that event, then he
also came and I could not really have a good grasp of his
biography.
Q. Did you liaise for his recruitment at the school or was he
introduced by another individual so that he could volunteer to
teach at your school?
A. I learned from Lat Ngat, who told me about the background of
Mr. Hang Pin because Ngat would tell me about his previous
profession as a schoolteacher, even from the Sangkum Reastr Niyum
from the Prince Sihanouk regime.  And then I recruited him.
Q. You indicated that he worked at the school on a voluntary
basis.  How long did he work at the school before he was employed
officially by the government?
A. It had been long before he was employed officially.  It was in
late 1995 already and then he was employed officially by the
Ministry of Education.
Q. During the time when he assisted you at the Phkoam School,
could you tell the Court of his work performance and his
teaching?  Was he a punctual person or committed person, or was
he at the school to only show off that he was good enough to be a
teacher and that you could grant him the full employment,
official employment so that he could become a government
employee?
A. He could be seen coming to the school regularly, only when he
had some personal and family problems that he would seek leave.
Q. Did you live next to the place where the accused lived at that
time?
A. My home is not far from the school.  It is about 800 metres
only.
Q. Can you tell the Court why he changed from his teaching
position at the Phkoam School to the educational office at the
district, because he was promoted or because of what other
reasons?
A. Actually, he had his personal and family problem because his
family was robbed.  His wife was killed during the incident and
he got injured himself.  And we took him to the hospital and
after he was discharged from the hospital he asked whether we
could help him to avoid facing the same incidents.  And then we
proposed to the educational district office and that they agreed
to save him for security reason and that he was transferred to
that district office in late 1995 in light of that.
Q. After he departed from Phkoam High School and started working
at the educational office at the district, do you know how long
had he been there before he moved further?
A. I'm afraid I don't know because it was under the supervision
of the district office when it comes to his performance and
duration of his work.  And I lost touch already when he was out
of my sight.
Q. Did you know that he disappeared after some time?
A. I have no idea because I was far from the district office
because it was about 30 kilometres from my home.  It was so far
to know what happened there.
Q. Can we move back to the robbery, the episode in which his wife
was killed?  Do you recall when exactly was it?
A. I don't remember when but I believe it could have been in 1995
the incident happened.
Q. As a colleague, what is your impression in relation to the
robbery and the incident that led to the execution of his wife
who was killed by a stabbing of the bayonet of the weapon?  So
can you tell the Court of your impression in relation to this
matter?
A. I don't know for sure because it was at that location -- it
was in the very unsecured zone and there were several villagers,
newcomers and it was hard to control.  And instability was
widespread in the local community.  So I may not be able to tell
the Court about this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, would you wish to put questions to this
witness?
Now the Chamber would like to give the floor to the prosecutors
to put questions to the witness.  The Prosecutors have
minutes           10   to do so.
Could you please be reminded to avoid using or putting
hypothetical questions or repetitious questions and that avoid
putting questions that lead to the witness to give his assumption
in his testimony.
MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Thank you, Mr. President.
QUESTIONING BY THE CO-PROSECUTORS
BY MR. SENG BUNKHEANG:
Q. Mr. Peng Poan, have you been close, in terms of relationship,
with the accused?
A. Having worked as colleagues for a certain period of time, it
can be arguably said that we had been close because we had good
communication.
Q. When he started working at your school, did you ask him to
produce his biography?  If you can recall this, so can you also
tell the Court what would be the content of the biography?
A. He wrote briefly in his biography.  He said that he was the
former school teacher during the Sangkum Reastr Niyum regime.
Q. Do you know that during the time when he worked as a teacher
at your school, did he manage to keep good contact with other
Khmer Rouge leaders?
A. I don't know because I have not noted that.
Q. Thank you.  You never seen it but did you know that, or did
you observe that some Khmer Rouge soldiers were searching for his
whereabouts?
A. No, I don't know, or I didn't observe it.
Q. When did you get to know that Duch, the accused, was the
Chairman of S-21?
A. I only learned of this information when he arrested and his
information was broadcast.
Q. Having learned that the accused was the Chairman of S-21, was
you disappointed or shocked to hear that?
A. Having learned that, it was interesting because I didn't
expect that he could have been the Chairman of S-21.
Q. Thank you, Mr. Witness, I have no further questions but I
would like to share the floor with my international colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The international Co-Prosecutor, you may proceed.
MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Thank you, President.  Good morning, witness.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. Witness, we don't know much about your past because there is
nothing in the file concerning you, except for some indications
of the defence.
I would like to ask you one or two questions about your personal
past and first of all, Mr. Witness, do you know Chou Vin and Hun
Smirn -- the two persons who go by these names?
A. Yes, I know these two persons.  They were the former teachers
since the regime of the State of Cambodia.
Q. Can you tell me where these two persons worked at the time
when you were principal of the Phkoam school?
A. Chou Vin was a deputy director of the district education
department of Thma Puok, and now he is the deputy director of the
Svay Chek district education department.
Q. And Mr. Hun; you didn't answer the question concerning Mr.
Hun?
A. I knew him, but his workplace was far away from where I
worked, so I cannot tell you much.  He worked at the Svay Chek
School and I only knew him when he was provisionally promoted as
a deputy principal of that school.
Q. Very well.  Can you then tell the Chamber whether you have met
with these two persons recently and under what circumstances?
A. Are you talking about the meeting before I came to provide the
testimony or the meeting at our location at the school?
Q. Just asking you to answer -- tell us when you met them.  Was
it recently, in the last few days, the last few weeks?  Did you
have the opportunity to talk about the coming trial?
A. I have not met them until I was called by the representative
of this Court.  And for Mr. Chou Vin, we work together at the
office, so I meet him every day, but I have not met Hun Smirn.
Q. Thank you very much.  Mr. Witness, can you tell us in a few
words what you did between 1995 (sic) and 1979 under the Khmer
Rouge?  For example, were you displaced, were you forced to work,
were you a soldier, or did you occupy any other function?
A. During the Pol Pot regime, I was a rice farmer.  I was in a
mobile unit.  I was assigned to build dams, to work in the rice
fields, et cetera.
Q. In 1994, do you remember whether the teachers from your
establishment, from Svay Chek, had been to Phnom Penh to undergo
a training session?
A. Could you please repeat your question?
Q. In 1994, some of the teachers who were your colleagues or
yourselves or members of the management of the school -- or of
the Svay Chek School -- did they come to Phnom Penh to undergo
training -- teacher training?
A. In my Svay Chek School, I do not believe that we were sent for
teacher training in Phnom Penh, no.
Q. Very well.  To be perfectly clear concerning Hang Pin's
character, at any point in time did you hear some of your
colleagues -- colleagues from your school or from your region --
talk about him as possibly having been a cadre of the Khmer Rouge
and having played a role in the crimes committed between 1975 and
1979?
A. From what I know the people living there, including myself,
did not know of his past.  Only after his arrest and when it was
made public then we were aware of his past.
Q. According to you, in his years when he worked with you, the
accused, did he believe normally, as you said?  Was he somebody
who was happy, made jokes?  Was it fun to be in his company?
A. During the time that he worked there, he did not seem to joke
around much.
He was a gentle and quiet type of person and he seldom made a
joke.
Q. Can you say that at that time he wanted to please everybody,
he wanted to please his people, his colleagues, the management?
Did he do everything that he could to be considered as being well
integrated?
MR. PRESIDENT:
I notice the defence counsel on his feet.  You may proceed.
MR. ROUX:
President, you reminded us that we were not to ask questions of
the witness on his suppositions.  Asking a witness whether he
supposes whether the attitude of the accused was to please is a
supposition.
So, President, may you kindly remind the prosecutor to respect
your indications?
MR. PRESIDENT:
The observation by the defence counsel is appropriate.
The witness, you do not have to answer these questions.
The Co-Prosecutor, you're reminded that the time for your
questioning is running out.
BY MR. DE WILDE D'ESTMAEL:
Q. I have one last question.  My colleague asked you awhile ago
what was your reaction when you learned that Hang Pin, whom I
believe you admired and appreciated at the time, was in reality
Duch, responsible for a very large number of crimes, as you know
now.  Did you feel betrayed when you learned about this?  The
consideration that you had for Hang Pin was that affected in any
way?   What was your reaction?  What did you think when you
thought back about the years that you had passed with Hang Pin
and his attitude?
A. As I said earlier during his time that he was with us his work
was remarkable and his relationship with other people was
excellent.  We would not have known that he was a senior leader
of that regime.  And upon learning the news I was shocked.  I was
really shocked.
Q. Did you then have any nightmares about having met with
somebody, trusted him, knowing afterwards all the crimes that he
was able to commit during the Khmer Rouge period?
A. I had that feeling and today when I thought back of the regime
that a lot of Cambodian people died and that now people are
disgusted with him I still have the feeling of fear within me,
and also I am quite concerned with my personal safety.  Even at
the present time at the location where I stay, although safety
seems to be ensured, I am still pretty concerned with my own
safety.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Co-Prosecutor, your time is running out so you are not
allowed to ask anymore questions to this witness.
The DVD for recording the proceeding is also running out,
therefore, the Chamber will adjourn for 20 minutes and it will
resume at 11 a.m. to continue our proceeding.
Court officer, can you provide necessary refreshment to the
character witness and invite him back into the Chamber before 11
a.m.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1045H to 1106H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
Next, the Chamber would like to give the floor to the defence
counsel to be able to put questions to the witness if they so
wish.
MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Mr. President.  Thank you, Your Honours.
QUESTIONING BY DEFENCE COUNSEL
BY MR. KAR SAVUTH:
Q. Mr. Peng Poan, good morning.  Could you please clarify for us,
besides being a teacher at Phkoam School, what did Mr. Hang Pin
do for a living?  You already indicated that he volunteered to
teach at your school and that during 1994 and '95 there was not
any financial support to the teachers, and I am interested and
the Court is interested to know also what kind of occupation he
would have besides being a teacher -- just to live on?
A. I noted that he did farming; at the same time he taught, and
at his home he sold grocery.
Q. Thank you.  You said that at that time in your area there were
a lot of robbers.  Can you please tell the Court whether in each
robbery case then killing would not be avoided?
A. There were some robberies previously, but only that the
victims were tortured or beaten but they were not killed.  But in
this latest incident that happened to his family, his wife was
stabbed to death.
Q. My question is that normally the robbers would just beat the
victims and they did not kill the victims, but then when it came
to the family of Duch then his wife was killed and he got injured
by the robbers.  So do you think that this kind of robbery was an
abnormal or very unusual robbery?  Do you think that this kind of
robbery was contributed to the revenge started by the other Khmer
Rouge soldiers towards his family?
A. I'm sorry, I cannot really tell you about this.
Q. Thank you.  So based on your knowledge from 1993 to 1995, Hang
Pin was the staff member under your supervision.  Can you tell
the Court about his treatment toward the students and the
teachers and the people in the community?  And if possible, can
you please also tell the Court of the reactions of the people in
the community towards him?
A. Now, I am only talking about the relationship between the
teachers and students.  I have noted that a lot of students loved
him.  They even called him Grandfather Teacher or Master because
of their appreciation of his talent and they really loved him and
he had a very good communication with the other teachers at
school.
Q. Thank you for sharing this with us.  I have no further
questions but I would like to share this floor with the
international co-colleague.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. François Roux, you may now proceed.
MR. ROUX:
Thank you, Mr. President.
BY MR. ROUX:
Q. Good morning, Mr. Witness.  I am not going to have you repeat
what you already said but I understand, of course, that you
thought that Mr. Hang Pin was doing a good job in your school and
that you had good relations with him.  Isn't this what you said
to the Chamber?
A. Yes, it is correct.  I did indicate that.  I did say that he
did quite a good job and I did have good relations with him.
Q. And when you were answering a question that was put to you by
the Co-Prosecutor you said that during his arrest you were
completely shocked.  You were completely shocked when you
discovered that Mr. Hang Pin was the former director of S 21.  Is
that so?
A. Yes, it is correct.  It's surprising and I couldn't believe
it.
Q. May I therefore say that you were disbelieving because, in
relation to the man that you had known previously, it seemed to
you impossible that this very same person could have been the
Chairman of S-21.  Is this what I must understand?
A. Could you please repeat your question?
Q. Please forgive me.  You were shocked, you said, because it
seemed to you impossible that this man that you had known as a
teacher had been previously the Chairman of S-21.  This seemed to
you to be completely impossible.  It seemed to you to be
impossible that it had been the same man who had been in these
two different functions.  Was that the reason for your surprise,
for your shock?
A. Yes, I was shocked to learn of that news because he could not
have been the Chairman of S-21 because he worked as a teacher and
he was normal.
Q. And you also said to the Chamber, after having explained that
you had been shocked -- you also said to the Chamber that today
still you are still afraid when you remember this regime.  Is
that so?
A. It is quite normal that the person the same age as me would
have experienced such a regime and we are still terrified.
Q. And am I right in saying that you were able to overcome this
fear in order to come today before the Chamber to provide your
testimony?
A. Yes, it is correct because although I am feeling terrified but
I feel compelled to ascertain the truth before the Chamber, and
I'm shocked.  I still feel fear.
Q. Well then, Mr. Witness, I wish to thank you.
MR. ROUX:
And I have no further questions, Mr. President.  Thank you.
Thank you for having travelled here.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Peng Poan, the Chamber is very grateful to your assistance
and presence in this Court as scheduled.  The hearing proceedings
to hear your testimony has already come to an end.  Therefore,
you now may travel back to your hometown or you may choose to
follow or observe the proceedings and you are allowed to sit in
the public gallery to do so if you so wish.
(Witness exits courtroom)
MR PRESIDENT:
The Court officer is now instructed to take him to meet the WESU
unit to coordinate his travelling back to his home town.
Next the Chamber is proceeding to put questions to the accused
concerning his character.  The detention security personnel are
now instructed to take the accused to the dock.
Before we proceed with the questioning to the accused concerning
his character, the Chamber would like to give the opportunity to
the accused to make his observation in relation to the
testimonies of the witnesses who have already been called and
heard before the Chamber.
The accused has already been notified of this, so if the accused
now would wish to make such observation, you may proceed.
THE ACCUSED:
Mr. President, first of all I would like to just indicate that I
concur with the testimonies of the six previous witnesses and
next I would like to classify these witnesses into three groups.
First, there was only one person, named Sou Sath, who is the most
senior person who has lived through several regimes.  And there
are the two people who were my students, in the next group, and
followed by the three-person group, including my colleagues who
are senior, who have lived in their community for a long time
already.  They have started their work for the government since
1979.
So their statements reveal their will and their impression in
relation to the observation on my personality.  And that's all,
Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The next proceeding is about putting questions to the accused
concerning the character.  The accused already had an opportunity
to tell the Court of his full account of his biography and
background.  Since we ran out of time actually during the time
when the accused was given opportunity to tell the Court about
his biography, then it is now time to put more questions to
follow up.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. May I ask what reasons that made you to change your name,
revolutionary name, from Duch to Hang Pin?
The accused can be reminded that since the proceedings will last
long, so you may be seated.
A. Mr. President, in 1985-'86 I was teaching at the primary
school at Samlaut.  I taught students and my children.  In June
1986 my superior advised through Sou Met to ask me whether I
would prefer working at Samlaut or moving to K-18 with him.  If I
chose to go to K-18 then my superior asked that I change my name,
and I told Sou Met that I would prefer going to that K-18 and
that I passed on this message through Sou Met to my superior, Son
Sen, that my name Duch could be changed to Hang Pin.
I would like to also emphasize that previously I used the name
Duch to refer to a very good student, but Pin referred to a very
lazy student, so this time I chose a lazy one.  But Pin here in
Khmer dictionary of the Buddhist Institute -- or people know this
dictionary as the Samdech Chuon Nath Dictionary -- Pin refers to
the top or superiority.
And I had to be very mindful with choosing the surname for my
children.  I did not pick up Meah as the surname for my children.
That's why I chose my clan's family name, Ang, the Chinese.  And
with different Chinese dialects, Ang can also be called Hong, but
I did not really use Hong accurately; I used Hang instead.
That's why Hang Pin finally became my name.  And this name was
chosen only on the occasion when my superior asked me to teach
Khmer literature to the Chinese students.
Q. My. Next question is that other witnesses have not made it
clear yet in relation to the date you started work as the teacher
at Phkoam High School and the date when you quit your job at that
school, at Svay Chek district.
Since it is now time you are here before the Court, can you
please tell us when exactly did you start working on a voluntary
basis at Phkoam High School and how long had you been working
there before you were allowed to move to the education department
at Svay Chek district?
A. Mr. President, when I applied to be a teacher, and at first I
studied as a voluntary teacher without salary, from my
recollection it was in 1993.  I can also recall that I think the
timeline of registering my name as a teacher was moved back to
August 1992.  That is the first issue.
The second issue regarding the date, when my family was robbed --
we can say we were robbed -- but later on with my analysis it was
to the contrary, it was not actually a robbery at all.  When my
wife was stabbed to death and that I was also stabbed, it was on
the 11 November 1995, and my wife passed away and I was sent to
the referral hospital of Thma Puok district to receive treatment.
I was discharged four nights later, and with the assistance from
Mr. Peng Poan, from Soem Poeun, the chairman of the district
education office, and from Chou Vin, who testified yesterday, I
was assigned to the Svay Chek district to settle there.
So the movement from Prey Phkoam to Svay Chek was after the event
of robbery.  Likely it was around the end of November 1995.
The date that I left the district education office to teach as a
French teacher at the Svay Chek School, Chou Vin and Hun Smirn
could recall the better date, the exact date, and I cannot recall
the date.  And I acknowledge the dates that they provided; it was
the 28th of October 1996.  And I left Svay Chek for Samlaut, from
my recollection it was in June or July.
So this is my confirmation of the dates of my relocation to
various places, Mr. President.
Q. Can you recall, when you became a teacher -- and you started
as a voluntary teacher -- the way you tried to be recruited as
the official of the education office, what did you tell the
district education office?  Did you tell them of which political
faction you came from amongst the four political factions; that
is, the tripartite faction and the government force?  Did you
ever tell the district education office regarding this issue or
what did you tell them when you applied to be a teacher at that
school, at the Prey Phkoam High School?
A. Mr. President, in the beginning I was assigned to Phkoam by
Son Sen in order to organize the economic base for the line.  In
their theory, after the Paris Peace Agreement, there would be an
election therefore the lines would be split into two; the
economic line, that is for the people and to educate the people,
and the second economic line is to support ourselves, to support
the people within the line, and I was assigned to work at Phkoam.
And regarding the time that I applied to work as a teacher at the
Ministry of Education through the district education office of
the State of Cambodia regime, that was the time when the
reintegration was happening, and with the assistance from people
who were close to me, like what was raised by Peng Poan and what
Ngat and another person who initiated the assistance.
So I was encouraged to meet Touch Lun, the head of the district
education office.  He was from the Son Sen party.  So it was
under favourable conditions by Mr. Lun that I was recruited as a
teacher and, later on, after my name was approved by the
department then I started to receive allowance for my teacher
career.
Q. When did you give up your teaching career?  After you tried
very hard and you started as a voluntary teacher and later on you
became a full-time teacher with a proper allowance and other
benefit, but later on you gave up all those wages and the
allowance and your profession that you started not long ago.
What was the reason behind this abandonment and when did you give
it up, and after that what did you do?
A. It's quite a long story, Mr. President.  It is within the
political context of the four political parties at that time.
I came from the Democratic Kampuchea faction and to be stationed
in Phkoam in order to manage and establish an economic line for
the people and for ourselves after the election took place.
During my station there, and not for long, there was a
disagreement between the Khmer Rouge faction and the others.  At
that time, the Khmer Rouge refused to lay down their weapons by
UNTAC based on the spirit of the Paris Peace Agreement.
My superior asked me to station at Kdoeb Thmor village in the
Phkoam area.  It was near the Chhat Mountain.  In such a remote
location and in such a situation, I believe the Khmer Rouge was
not able to recover their defeat and I was trying to seek a way
out.
However, within the political conflict amongst the four parties,
I needed to protect myself too and I did not want the Khmer Rouge
to see me as betraying them and, secondly, I did not trust
anybody at that stage.
And indeed it was my observation that as a combatant in the
battlefield, the State of Cambodia soldiers were well-disciplined
and they listened to the orders of their commanders.  And those
people who used to serve for the People's Party, like Lay Hon,
Lat Ngat and Touch Lun, whom I knew later on, they were
individuals whom I trusted them and they trusted me.  But above
them, I did not understand the political line of the Cambodian
People's Party and whether they would be kind to the former Khmer
Rouge people and that they would be kind to me as a former Khmer
Rouge soldier.
So my feeling at that time was uncertain and when I entered into
the education office, I tried to maintain my firm stance and not
to risk my life but, unfortunately, an event took place and I
lost my wife.
And when I moved to Svay Chek in 1996, it was around June.  At
that time, I believe I was not yet injured -- oh, I apologize,
actually I was injured -- and Ieng Sary actually was reintegrated
into the government and I wanted to do so but, at that time, I
did not know Ieng Sary well and I could not find him in order to
make myself reintegrated in the process.
So this is one segment of the event and in 1997, when I was
teaching, my younger sibling from Samlaut, from the Sou Met
controlled area, they reintegrated with the government force, and
my younger sibling knew that Sou Met was recognized and accepted
by the Cambodian People's Party, so I believed now there would be
a way out for me through Sou Met.
So then my brother took me from Svay Chek to Samlaut to meet Sou
Met, and Sou Met accepted me and he made an arrangement for me to
meet with the leader of the Cambodian People's Party, but then
suddenly Ta Mok rebelled and took people from Samlaut to live at
the Mak Mun camp and only later on in late 1996 -- '98, I
returned.  But when Sou Met arranged for me to meet with the
representative of the government, I was detained and placed at
the Military Court to be for the prosecution.
So that was the process and I firmly believe nothing can be kept
secretive for long.  Something can be kept as a secret for a
period of time, but it cannot be kept for long, and that was the
time when I went to Samlaut to seek a way out.  And this is my
response, Mr. President.
Q. Can you recall, when you gave up your work at Svay Chek and
moved to settle and work at Samlaut, what was the exact date of
this event?
A. Mr. President, I left Svay Chek for Samlaut.  I cannot recall
the exact date, but I recall a few days after I arrived at
Samlaut there was an event of a coup d'état by Prince Ranariddh
against Hun Sen.  I cannot recall the exact date of the coup
d'état, but probably this is a main event we can use as a base to
see or to adjust the date of my arrival at Samlaut.
Q. So you went to Samlaut after the Khmer Rouge forces started to
reintegrate with the government in large scale.  That was the
first large-scale integration, which happened in June 1996.  Is
this correct?
A. Mr. President, that is true.  I left Svay Chek in late 1997.
Q. During the Second Detachment attempt in the Fifth Zone, as you
said regarding the Meah Mut's force and some former Khmer Rouge
cadres who created a control area in Samlaut, where were you at
that time?  Can you recall that event?  That is the Second
Detachment of those forces.  Where were you and what did you do?
A. Mr. President, when I went to Samlaut, I had two places to
stay.  I did not go and settle with my younger sibling, but I
went to reside with my in-law's nephew -- sorry, in-law niece as
her husband was a messenger of Sou Met.  So that was the location
where I stayed.  This is my response, Mr. President.
Q. We are not still clear when the Second Detachment of the Khmer
Rouge force and they created a control area in Samlaut; were you
in Samlaut at that time or you went to Samlaut after the event?
That is the event of the Second Detachment of the former Khmer
Rouge force to create their own zone.
A. Mr. President, when I arrived there I stayed at the house of
the messenger of Sou Met and the news that Ta Mok went to trap, I
learnt of that news, but Sou Met himself said that everything
would be okay and that I should just focus on my work, and I
believed him.  And the Samlaut district chairperson told me that
he would go to Battambang to pick up his wife and children and
then that he would return and that I should not go anywhere.
So I stayed there, as I was instructed, but next morning the Meah
Mut force gathered people and moved them from Samlaut to two
refugee camps.  It was at Mak Mun village and for those from Koh
Kong were placed at Sal Chao village.  So during the Meah Mut's
rebellion, based on the order of Ta Mok in the Second Detachment,
it existed after the coup d'état attempt by Prince Sihanouk
against Hun Sen.
So I believe it was in August or September when I went to Mak Mun
and it was in 1997, Mr. President.
Q. So you left Svay Chek for Samlaut before the event of the
Second Detachment of the former Khmer Rouge force.  Is this
correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. When you went to live at the refugee camp, as you was guarded
amongst other people after the event of the Second Detachment of
the former Khmer Rouge soldiers or forces, how long did you stay
at the refugee camp and when did you return and upon your return
where did you settle?
A. Mr. President, I arrived at the Mak Mun camp in September 1997
and I returned in 1998.  It was between July or August; I cannot
recall it clearly.  I think it was in July.  It was the first
repatriation of people from Sal Chao and Mak Mun camps and I
cannot recall the exact date.  So it was either in July or August
in 1998.
Q. So for the repatriation, where did you settle?
A. I went to stay with my younger sibling's house at the Ou
Tontim Village, Ta Sanh subdistrict, Samlaut district.  It was
near the district's office.  It was just across the creek where I
stayed and I did not go anywhere else.  I stayed at that
location.
Q. Now let me talk about your personal religious observance from
your childhood until the time you joined the revolution in the
late 1960s until a later date.  Which religion you observed and
practised during that period?
A. Mr. President, my grandfather on my mother's side was a
Buddhist follower who was respected -- well-respected -- by his
villagers.  I think I might touch on the topic of superstition
now.
The abbot of the Pov Veuy Pagoda passed away in 1993 and my
grandfather passed away in around 1955, I suppose.  When my
grandfather passed away, the elders in the Pov Veuy village
dreamed and saw at night a light at the pagoda temple and they
believed that was a sacred thing that the Pov Veuy Pagoda needs
to be protected by the spirit of my grandfather and of the abbot
and I was influenced by the superstition and belief.
And later on when I received education -- especially when I was
at a literature class -- I analyzed the Buddhist religion and I
saw three main core points.  That is the philosophy; the Buddhist
philosophy, or in French l'canon Bouddhique, and when there is a
religion, then there would be an organization and then there
would be a summit of the religion and then there would be another
group, the followers.  And there had to be discipline.  So based
on this view, we can say Buddhism is a type of a religion.
From another perspective, the Buddha himself never said he was a
god, although in his background it was believed that he was a god
who came down to earth from heaven and to be born as a human
being.  And when the Buddha passed away he instructed his
followers that they should study their bibles, the Buddhist
bibles, and rely on the bibles.  So all the followers and the
researchers believe that Buddhism has a particular, interesting
perspective as it is scientific based.
On another point, other religions including the Pream (phonetic),
they use the Vishnu and the Buddha and another figure as the
three figures of their respect.  And in Christianity it was the
father and the son and another figure as the main figures as
well.  And the Islamic religion, Allah was the biggest god and
then there was another god who was only disseminate the
information from Allah.  And that was my understanding through my
study of religions.
And when later on I decided to join the revolution because I
studied a book of philosophy, as I reported to the Chamber, that
was the preliminary philosophy book.  The primary principle of
philosophy regarded material is the main core and it is also a
combination of all the philosophies around the world.  And they
dismissed any sacred objects or belief in sacred objects or
religion.
And when I was so absorbed in this philosophy in dialectic
materialism, I was so absorbed in the Mao Tse Tung's doctrine.
His first theory was that there would be no view without class,
and in French that's what he said "Aucune conception sans
empreinte (phonetic) de classe".  I was interested that this is a
good view and later on Mao Tse Tung also said, "True love for
people was to be authoritarian and the power should be granted to
the proletarian class."  And I believe this is a good philosophy
in order to sustain and resuscitate the situation in Cambodia and
to assist the Cambodian people.
So I dismissed all the beliefs that I had in the past and I only
hang on to this philosophy.  But later on I was still thinking
and I was pondering myself of the fact that people who were let
out by the Party at the same time in 1967, some of them went to
Ratanakiri.  And why I was disconnected and only assigned to stay
at Chamkar Leu and later on I was arrested by the government and
detained.
And during my imprisonment, how come the prison officers could
not locate me and execute me and instead two people were
executed, including Lao San the teacher, and Chhien Hok a farmer?
They were led out and executed from the Prey Sar Prison without
any trial.  And I was wondering myself why I was not executed.
This problem actually surprises me, the materialism concept.  As
I already said earlier, Indonesia had a huge population of
Muslims but the majority of them was falling into the ruling of
Communism.  And in 1966, Suharto took full control of the
country.
Later on I made a decision that it would not be good to really
follow such a revolutionary because later on I noted that other
peoples were also put on trial by the full clique of the cultural
revolution clique and that's why I changed from the Communism to
the idea of Christianity.  And the reason I converted my religion
because I believed that the love to the people of the Communism
is to give the absolute monopoly to the proletariat class.
And I already reported to the Court about the Buddhism, the
principle.  It states that everyone should not really take
revenge against one another in order for us to live in harmony.
So however, this kind of philosophy was not really convinced.
This kind of philosophy is in favour of the classless society.
However, having avowed the philosophy in Christianity, it advises
us to love the neighbours like our relatives.
However, it is contradictory when people are supposed to love
their enemies also.  And by having this kind of new notion and
having observed this Christianity and its new notion, I believe
that it's good that I can convert to this religion because we can
also love our enemies.  And I have compared other religion also,
the concept including Islam and I believe that Islam is a
religion that really advises people to love or treat one another
fairly.
But I want to make sure that I want to follow only the religion
that treats people equally without any class.  And I believe that
Christianity would be the ideal religion.
And having noted that my wife was killed by the robbers, and I
could also see that if my children were also killed, what would
happen to me?  So then when I converted to Christianity, I could
baptize my children and even I later died, then my children would
be under the good care of the people at the church.  And none of
my daughters would end up being a whore.
So that's why I think this is the notion I picked because I
wanted to make sure that my children would also be taken care of
if I passed away.  And I am not in the position to join the new
religion to challenge any religion including the Islam, for
example.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since it is now time to take the adjournment for lunch, we will
now take the adjournment and resume the session at 1.30 p.m.
The security personnel are now instructed to take the accused to
the waiting room and bring him back to the courtroom by 1.30.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1206H to 1334H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Court is now back in session.
Mr. Alain Werner, if you attempt to talk about the same matter
then you would not be allowed to get the floor.
MR. WERNER:
Mr. President, I just wanted to inform you that I was requested
by my colleagues from groups 2 and 4, in particular Mr. Hong
Kimsuon and Mr. Kong Pisey, and to inform you that the reason why
they are not here in the hearing since Monday is that they are
trying to obtain documents to support the cases of their civil
parties as this was indicated last week.
And this is why they are not here with us today.  And this is
also the reason why they were not with us neither on Tuesday nor
on Monday and they asked me to let you know this.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Alain Werner, for giving this information to the
Court.
The security personnel are now instructed to take the accused to
the dock.
BY MR. PRESIDENT:
Q. This morning you gave us full detail in relation to the reason
why you converted your religion and finally you chose to be the
follower of Christian religion.  Can you tell the Court when did
you start to practise this new religion and where would you go to
the church?
A. I was baptized on the 6th of January 1996 at Sangkae River
under Mr. Christopher Lapel's supervision.  Christopher D. Lapel.
And pastor Daniel Ellis.
I attended an annual workshop at the Christian Association at
Chumkar Samroang too.  In Cambodia we would refer to this
location as the church, and when I approached Samlaut, my contact
with the church was far apart and that when I was detained at the
Military Court I found it difficult to continue practising the
religion.
However, when I came to the Court, the ECCC, Mr. Christopher D.
Lapel could pay a frequent visit to the detention facility and I
also could practise this religion with Father Robert Piche once
every month.
Q. When you returned after the Khmer Rouge forces took -- or
gathered all the villagers to the camps and then later on the
people were allowed to repatriate, can you please tell the Court
after the second repatriation, what kind of job did you have?
A. The territory committee at Samlaut and the supervision of Sou
Met and Sophal, the former Samlaut governor, and General
something Kong, and they had a discussion and made a decision to
delegate the duty as the chief of the educational department of
the district, and I had to prepare myself well to make sure that
I could be promoted to that position.  However, everything was
compromised when Nic Dunlop found me, and later on I was arrested
and put onto detention at the Military Court on the 10th of May
1999.
Q. Do you still recall the date when the two journalists, as you
mentioned, Mr. Nate Thayer and Nic Dunlop, who came to discover
you and interview you; when was it exactly?
A. I don't remember the date, but I may perhaps give you some
brief information.
First, Nic Dunlop went there alone and he said that he met me by
accident.  It was not correct.  He was searching for me when I
was prepared to become the chief of the district educational
department.
And, later on, he obtained my photo and then he presented the
photo to Nate Thayer, and then the two of them came to me.
First, I met only one of them but then later on that both of them
came to me and presented me some document with the presence of
Nate Thayer.  And having seen the photo, I just told them that it
was me and I was the Chairman of S-21.
I had been hiding this information for long because of my
security reason, personal security, because Pol Pot, Nuon Chea,
Ta Mok, they tried to tell that S-21 was established by the
Vietnamese or it was the crimes orchestrated by the Vietnamese.
So after that, I was rather worried and Ta Mok was already
arrested on the 6th of March 1999.  And they interviewed me
without telling me that my interview would be tape recorded, and
the other guy who came along with them were taking the record of
my interview.
Then Mr. Christophe Peschoux took me to the Monorom Hotel in
Battambang where they conducted an interrogation, and on the
night of the 3rd of May 1999, the interview completed.
So first I met Nic Dunlop, later on Nate Thayer and Nic Dunlop
all together and there was another (indistinct) national who was
the cameraman.  Then I was taken by Mr. Christophe Peschoux and
Heng Hamkheng and another woman.  They took me to this Monorom
Hotel.
I would like to apologize for mixing this event up.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judges of the Bench, would you wish to put questions to the
accused?  If so, you may now proceed.
Judge Silvia Cartwright, you may proceed, please.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, President.
BY JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Q.   Kaing Guek Eav, the purpose of the questioning concerning
your character is to ascertain relevant information which can be
used if you are convicted of offences with which you are charged
at sentencing.
You understand that?  Do you want me to repeat what I said?
A.  Thank you, Judge Cartwright.  I think that has been not
properly translated.  I think this moment is of course for me, as
I understand, is the time that I can be here to have my crime or
sentence reduced.
Q. Yes.  I need to make the point that you are not yet convicted
of any offences.  As a consequence, this examination of your
character will be useful if you are convicted and for the
purposes of any sentence that is imposed.  Is that more clear
now?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you may proceed.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
If I may, I believe -- as you see I have a dissident problem in
relation to the questioning here relating to the sentence.  What
seems important to say that as far as I'm concerned the
questioning regarding the character of the accused is not limited
to the problems -- to the issue of determining the sentence, but
that it is destined to partake in a proceeding with the aim of
ascertaining the truth and also to know who the accused is.  And
this question of knowing who the accused is must allow us to
understand the reasons behind the facts that are held against
him.  Now, as far as I'm concerned, I am letting you know that
the questioning on character is not only limited to an issue of
determining the sentence.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, Judge Lavergne.
BY JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Q. I have a first question of you, Kaing Guek Eav, and it's
preliminary to my other questions.  Last week part 3 of the
Closing Order was read out and this was done before the testimony
of the experts began and before character witnesses were called.
I just want to clarify now if you have any further comments in
relation to the summary in the Closing Order concerning your
character.
A. Your Honour, the substance of the Closing Order or the
indictment is not challenged by me but there is a minimal
technical issue probably of mistyping.
My youngest son, who was born on the 30th of July 1977 -- I'm
sorry, the third child was not a daughter, he is my son.
It is just a very minimal typing mistake but in general I concur
with all these statements.
Q. Well, in order to correct that matter, are you saying that
your third child was a boy born on which date?
A. I think the only problem is the gender issue because the date
of his birth is correct, except that he's a boy.
Q. Well, currently the Closing Order says that you have four
children:  a girl born on 27 April 1977 -- is that correct?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. A boy born on 14 December 1978 -- is that correct?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. And you say a boy born on 30 June 1981?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. And your last child is another son, born on the 28th of
October 1985.  Is that correct?
A. (Microphone not activated)
Q. So you have three sons and one daughter?
A. Your Honour, I got three sons and one daughter.
Q. Thank you.
Now, in addition to the Closing Order concerning your character,
there were comments in the Closing Order about your psychiatric
and psychological profile which have been greatly extended by the
oral testimony of the two experts, Professor Ka Sunbaunat and
Françoise Sironi-Guilbaud.
Do you have any further comments that you wish to make in
relation to their testimony?
A. The report of both experts was already commented by me in the
Chamber and I would stand by the statement I made earlier.
Q. In addition to those comments and the comments of the
character witnesses called over the last two days, other people
have made observations about your character.  Many of those have
been in books published about the Khmer Rouge regime and are on
the case file.  I would like to ask you some questions concerning
the observations about your character and personality in some of
those books.
The first is in Elizabeth Becker's book, When the War Was Over,
ERN in Khmer 00237694 to 00238316, and in English 0023197 to
00232710.  At  of the English text she says this:
"Duch oversaw a precise department of death.  Duch even set aside
specific days for killing various types of prisoners:  one day
the wives of the enemies, another day the children, a different
day the factory workers.  Such attention to detail had become a
signature of Duch during his rise through the Party ranks."
Do you agree with that assessment or have any comment to make on
it?
A. S-21 is a criminal mechanism.  The detainees, including the
male, female, young, old and children, were all victims of it and
these people included the workers and cadres of the Party Centre
and intellectuals.  So to be consistent with the statement by
Elizabeth Becker, I hope this is the statement I can emphasize.
Regarding the right delegated from my superior, I have already
indicated at this Court that this right derived from the statute,
Article 8 of the Party Statute, and that the decision was made
based on the document dated on the 9th of October 1975.
Q. I am interested to know if you agree that part of your
character or personality is to pay great attention to detail, as
suggested by Elizabeth Becker.
A. I believe your question means that I respected the superior
and indeed I respected my superior unconditionally.
Q. I believe the point that Becker is attempting to make is that
in your work you paid great attention to detail.  You were very
efficient at it.  Do you agree with that?
A. Yes, I fully agree on this topic.
Q. She goes on to say:
"Duch ultimately became one of the half-dozen most important
leaders in the country as Tuol Sleng became the nerve centre of
the system of terror."
Do you have any comment to make to the suggestion that you became
one of the half-dozen most important leaders in the country?
A. It is my analysis who knew the true nature of the Party.  The
people who had the authority would be the members of the Party
Centre and, as I submitted to the Chamber before, there were four
levels of the Party Centre; that is the Standing Committee
members, both full rights and candidates, and the full rights and
the candidates for the Party Centre members.  What I say is not
for me to avoid the criminal responsibility but it is what's
stated in their statute, based on their structure.
Q. She goes on to explain that comment by saying this:
"Duch helped concoct --"
-- that means make up:
"-- the evidence against suspects.  By controlling confessions of
victims, hence the evidence of crimes, he was gradually able to
manipulate the Party leaders and point to unsuspected enemies."
Do you have any comment to make on that assessment?
A. Your Honour, I reported to the Chamber already regarding the
crimes.  First I believed the serious crime was the establishment
and the building of cadres.  The more cadres they would make, the
more force they would have.  And that is the core issue.
Regarding the crime of interrogating prisoners or annotating on
the confessions are indeed my personal criminal activities and I
acknowledge that.  This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. You heard David Chandler's evidence and have heard portions of
his book Voices From S-21 read out in Court earlier.  I want you
to comment on a statement that Professor Chandler made in Court
and I will summarize it.
He said you wanted to excel at your job at S-21, that you thought
you were doing an excellent job, that you wanted to excel right
throughout your career from the time you were a student; you
wanted to serve your superiors with enthusiasm and skill and you
wanted to be proud of your work.
Is that a fair assessment of your character?
A. Your Honour, talking about wanting to be in that role indeed,
yes.  But I do not want to say the reason for my wanting to be
such a person at this stage.
Q. Would you agree with this summary?  You are intelligent,
well-educated; you work hard and you work enthusiastically.  You
would like to please your superiors.  You wish to be professional
in everything you do.  You are meticulous in your work, pay
attention to detail, keep very good records, and are
well-organized.  And in general, you are proud of the work that
you have done.
Is that a fair summary or do you have any comment?
A. I do not object to that statement.
Q. The two experts emphasized that during your work at S-21 you
were driven by the fear of being killed.  However, Chandler
during his evidence before the Chamber commented on the hundreds
of annotations on the confessions, annotations that you wrote.
He said you would frequently correct and criticize what the
prisoners had confessed.
You would suggest beatings and torture.  You would urge
interrogators to unearth the buried truth and you would suggest
fresh lines of inquiry.  Is that a fair comment by Chandler on
the annotations on the confessions at S-21?
A. The evidence is still there and nobody can deny the evidence
that I indeed annotated and I worked hard to annotate on those
confessions in order to push forward the interrogation so that
the superiors would understand the process.  And the reason that
I did is different from the rationale provided by David Chandler.
It is in my opinion that I have a philosophy, trying to work is
for two reasons.
First, to try to do the work to the best ability in order to
survive; and second to do work to the best of ability for another
reason.  And in my case, working to the best in order to survive
is in contrast to another person's view based on my actual work
that I did, because I was scared or fearful to be killed.
Q. Well, I have noted that you were afraid of being killed, but
both Chandler and Becker suggest that you did more than was
necessary to survive in your work at S-21.  Do you have any
comment to make on that?
A. Your Honour, the work at S-21 was overloaded and I could not
complete them on time.  I did not have time to annotate on
certain documents and for other documents of the important people
I contacted my superior by the telephone.
If you think this is more than necessary, it's incorrect.  I
overworked between 10 to 14 hours a day and I even could not
catch up with the work that I was responsible to do.
Q. I don't think that the comment was intended as a criticism of
your work so much as suggesting that you were more enthusiastic
than you needed to be.  In other words, you did more than you
needed to do to stay alive.  Do you have any comment on that?
A. Your Honour, I would like to frankly respond to your question.
I stated earlier I tried very hard in doing my work and I still
could not meet the need of my work.  And the question is that
what I work was unnecessarily more than I was required to
survive.  What is the catalyst to measure this performance?
The Communist Party is a paranoia regime.  They are always
paranoid.  They suspected on everything and they have a view that
everybody was somebody who could be a traitor and there is no
catalyst to measure what is within a framework of acceptable
performance and what is not.
So this is my frank response to your question, Your Honour.
Q. My observations of you during trial, which are supported by
expert and other testimony, suggests that you are ready to accept
information or evidence only when it is in writing.  Is that a
correct observation?
A. Your Honour, the statement is almost complete 100 percent but
for certain issues that I clearly know, I don't need evidence to
prove them.
For example, in the case of Chum Mey, previously I did not know
him and in February 2006 I learned of him.  Chum Mey was
interviewed with a French international program and he talks
about his imprisonment that he had a glimpse of me at the
workshop.  And I immediately knew that he was a survivor of that
S-21 because I went there for a short period of time and I
acknowledged his presence there during the time at S-21.
So this is my response to you, Your Honour.
Q. When you joined S-21 as deputy chair, were the systems and
procedures fully developed under Nath or did you, using your
management skills, develop them further?
A. Your Honour, I entered S-21 as a deputy chair and I developed
the system in the interrogation area by training those
interrogation cadres how to interrogate.  And later on while I
was accompanying Nath during the interrogation sessions I
observed the practice they used and I used that one with my
experience to further enhance the interrogation techniques.
On the second part of the development, for people whom Nath knew
that I knew those people, then he would send me those confessions
for my annotation and once he received them he would make
additional annotations on those confessions.
And besides these two areas everything remained the same, based
on the existing system which was the practice of the former
Division 703.
Q. At what point did you begin to believe seriously that S-21 was
a criminal organization, as you have said in the evidence?  What
triggered that particular view in you?
A. My view and understanding on the crimes did not start with
S-21.  It started when I was given the responsibility as the
Chairman of M-13.  I knew killing people without any reason is a
crime, but I was encouraged to execute my assignment, that I had
to accept and implement it and that the Party requires their sons
and daughters to fulfill this assignment, and that I could not
avoid it.  And because the Party Centre would be responsible
before the history, and M-13 was only responsible for receiving
the people who were arrested already by the orders of the Party
Centre and it was the Party Centre who would be responsible
before the history.  And I responded the same when I met Peter
Leuprecht at the Military Court.  With the Investigating Judges
of the Military Court I responded the same and when I met my two
lawyers, after my consultation with them I agreed that this work
was not a responsibility of the government, because the
government would not be responsible for criminal acts, and it was
the individual who would be responsible for his own criminal act.
But in my mind I was still believing that I was a policeman who
was carrying out the order assigned to me by the superior and
this is how I developed my mentality regarding the crime and
criminal responsibility, Your Honour.
Q. If you first began to believe that this was a criminal
organization while you were Chair of M-13, did you ever give any
thought to leaving the Party at that stage before the 17th of
April 1975?
A. Your Honour, indeed I wanted to find a way out but I could not
do it.  The important event for me to find a way out was when the
prisoners caught or got a gun from the guard in 1973 near the Pis
Mountain.  Thirty or forty prisoners escaped and three or four
guards were shot and injured, and that was an ample opportunity
for me to request Vorn Vet to remove myself or to demote me from
my rank so that I could leave that position.  As I informed the
Chamber previously, I begged him to punish me but he turned his
back to me and I could not leave it.
And after the 17 April '75 I attempted again to leave that role.
As I told the Chamber, I wanted to go to the Ministry of Culture.
I failed, then I attempted to go to the Ministry of Energy and I
failed again.  Cheng On would not accept it and he denied my
request.
Q. Returning to your time as Chair of S-21, did you reduce the
number of annotations that you made on confessions when Nuon Chea
became your superior, when he was less interested in your
analysis than Son Sen had been?
A. Your Honour, first I did not reduce the number of annotations.
Later on I noticed that Nuon Chea did not pay much attention to
annotations, so I reduced the number of annotations.  I talked to
him and that I did not really -- that I was not really
comfortable with the documents, but he said that they knew how to
work with the documents.  So for the S 21 document, with or
without my annotations it would be decided by the Party Centre.
So during the initial stage of my working there when Nuon Chea
came to replace Son Sen the work was still with Son Sen.  So
after Son Sen returned from the battlefield he would review those
confessions.  For example, on the 15th of August '77, I believe,
there was a document dated 11th of November which I attached to
my clarification in relation to the witness Phung Guth Sunthary
Son Sen annotated on the 11th of November '77.  So this is my
response.
I did reduce the number of annotations but the work and the
decisions were still done by my superior.
Q. Did you ever think that if you had been less conscientious in
your work annotating the confessions that fewer people might have
died?
A. Some people even died without being interrogated.  Therefore,
during this time I would like to take this opportunity to say
that the prisoners who were interested by the Party Centre, I
would be instructed to do the follow-up on those prisoners.  And
for those the Party Centre did not pay much attention, regardless
of their confessions they would be executed.  So the weight was
not on their confessions and that was the practice at the time.
Q. I'd like to turn briefly to your family life during this
period.  Apart from your brother-in-law who died at S-21, did
your immediate and extended family remain intact?
A. Your Honour, first my brother-in-law who died at S-21, yes
indeed, there was one but at Kampong Thom there was another one
whom the Party Centre asked the North Zone to make a decision on
his fate without informing me.  And my mother was extremely
shocked that if I was gone then all the family members would be
gone.  She was very fearful that if I slipped from my position
then the whole family would be gone.
And the rest of the family members were also shocked and not
because I could not defend or protect my in-law but it was the
situation for all the family members.
Q. Your immediate family -- your wife and your first child and
then later, towards the end of S-21, your second child -- nothing
happened to them during this period, did it?
A. Your Honour, first I would like to say that I would talk about
the view of the Party Centre towards children as a whole.  They
regarded children, or the children of the cadres or the peasants,
as the property of Angkar and Angkar were their parents.  That's
the way they considered the children.  And for those children
whose fathers or mothers were arrested, they would be taken
along.  This is to avoid vengeance or revenge at a later stage.
Therefore, regardless of their status, whether they belonged to
my family or to the family of other cadres, they were regarded as
the children of Angkar.
A child of Huy Sre, before he was arrested, was also considered a
child of Angkar, and when Huy Sre was arrested the child died
along with him and his wife.
And if I were not yet arrested then my children were considered
the children of Angkar.  This is the way of the perception or how
they thought about the children.
Q. However, as a family unit you were able to live together.  Is
that correct?
A. It happened only ultimately.  Having looked from a distance
then people can see that our family could live together.
However, after there were some implications; Son Sen removed my
wife from the hospital to S-21 so people could see that I could
live with the family happily.  However, it was more like our
rights have been already removed because the Party did not trust
us.
Q. So you are saying that it appeared like a normal family on the
surface but it wasn't really like that; you were still under the
control of the Central Committee?
A. All levels of cadres of the CPK were under the immediate
supervision or the indirect supervision of the Party Centre.
S-21 was under the immediate supervision of the member of the
Party Centre, Son Sen.  Later on it was under the supervision of
Nuon Chea.  Later on it was under the surveillance of Chhim Sam
Uk, alias Pang, and Comrade Lin.  Obviously at the beginning it
was under the immediate supervision of Son Sen, although at the
later stage there were other people who would be supervising the
facility.
Q. However, the fact that you were able to live together as a
family unit was in sharp contrast to the people, including the
children, who were detained at S-21; people you saw every day.
Is that correct?
A. Yes, it is, because enemies were classified differently from
the friends so comrades, cadres were friends while the detainees
were enemies.
Q. As you went between your home and your work did you ever think
about the differences between your family life and the lives of
the detainees at S-21?
A. Your Honour, it is a classic situation.  It happened even at
M-13 and we had to implement the policy.
Q. I asked whether you ever thought about the contrast between
your family life and the lives of families at S-21.
A. I did think about this and I had the thought even when I
worked at M-13.  However, there has been a clear explanation
between the term "enemies and friends", and we were indoctrinated
this ideology.
Q. Was it your decision not to list the names of children at
S-21?
A. I may have already indicated earlier on that S-21 has been
passed down from Division 703 and the names of the children would
never be included, even previously during the supervision of 703.
And there were only about four names of the children that were
registered; the children of Ta Chea.  The rest of the children
were smashed without having their name registered.
Q. Was it part of the policy then that children were not
sufficiently important to be listed?
A. I do not grasp the complete information all across the
country.  But what happened at S-21 it is true that this is how
things worked.  When I started working at S-21 we have been
imposed the policy that the children of the enemies were also
enemies, so they too shall be smashed.  And the problem is that
we failed to have their names registered in our implementation of
the policy.
Q. A great deal of emphasis has been placed on your love of
teaching, your skills as a teacher and as a student, your concern
for students, particularly those who were poor.  Do you agree
with that general summary?
A. I do agree with that.
Q. I'm interested then in your views on education during the
period of the Khmer Rouge regime.  It was obvious to me that
former students who came to give character evidence respected you
as a teacher and indeed you have made it clear that you respected
your teachers.  Professor Ka Sunbaunat put this into a cultural
context when he gave his testimony.
Can you explain then the policy that you implemented at S-21 that
children would not be educated?
A. As to the education of the children, after 1975 children at
S-21 were not taken care of when it comes to education, and
children all across the country were not provided this kind of
education either.
And as I already indicated, that all teachers were taken and
moved to the paddy fields and the educational system was changed.
And books were being developed and books were developed -- one
book only was published at the office of teacher Yun Yat, and for
that reason none of the students across the country could attend
school or receive any education.
Siet Che alias Tom introduced education and for that reason he
was accused of being revisionist and it was heard from Son Sen
through telephone, because of his act the Party accused him of
being the revisionist.
And during the Khmer Rouge regime, all forms of education in the
previous regime was abolished and they would like to introduce
new educational curriculums, and that at S-21 no education was
ever given to any children.
Q. What did you think of the policy of sharply changing education
for young people during the Khmer Rouge regime?
A. That is the policy Pol Pot called "the great movement, the
great mass, the great leap forward".  In education system, they
focussed on the very brand new imaginary educational system.
As to the economical system, they focussed on only two forms of
production -- the production that based on communism -- from each
according to his ability; to each according to his need.
And we worked our best, but each meal we were offered minimal
food with cigarette, and clothes were also given to us based on
the need of each individual.  So this is the policy of "the great
forward, the great movement and great mass", while religion was
abolished.  Culture was demolished, and so on and so forth.
Q. (Microphone not activated) knows what you as a skilled and
dedicated teacher thought of the policy that children, including
poor peasant children, did not need an education in the sense of
learning to read, write, and to do mathematical calculations?
A. The educational background required by the CPK was that
everyone had to be truthful to the Party, entirely truthful, and
we have to be absolutely determined to be committed, to be loyal
to the Party.  And that we had to be qualified in the field we
assigned to work.
For example, if the combatant -- they had to be qualified to
become a soldier and those who were put to do farming then they
must acquire some kind of agricultural fields.  And as I already
told you, it was part of their project.
Q. Did you have any views on this policy?
A. As to this policy, although I view as a challenge, difficult
to implement, I had no choice but to implement it.  So I could
not challenge it after all.
Q. So you never communicated you views to Son Sen or anyone else
on the education policy of the CPK?
A. I would not dare do that.  I would like to also refer to
another issue that I've never mentioned in this Court.
There was a song by Pol Pot.  This song was that this policy was
the policy to save people from being exploited and to rebuild new
Cambodia.  The policy that embedded with the Marxist-Leninist
schism and that we had to work our best to be rebuild ourselves
as the great children of the country and that we have to commit
ourselves truthfully, voluntarily, to assist them as they need
us.
So every cadre of the Party had to memorize this song and its
substance, so we had to obey or to be bound by the substance of
the song, and that we had no opportunity to discuss or to
communicate our view to them.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Mr. President, is this a convenient time to take an adjournment?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Since it is an appropriate time to take the adjournment, the
Chamber will take the adjournment and resume at five past three.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court recesses from 1447H to 1507H)
(Judges enter courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Please be seated.  The Chamber is now back in session.
I notice the defence counsel, François Roux, on his feet.  Please
proceed.
MR. ROUX:
Forgive me, Mr. President, but before we actually continue on the
merits I just wanted to inform the Chamber that the defence has
filed to the Greffier a certain number of documents which are
already listed with ER Number E5/9.  It is a list of new
documents that the defence would like to file in the submissions.
We are not dealing with the question now but I just wanted to
indicate to the Chamber that we have already communicated these
documents to the civil parties, to the Co-Prosecutor's Office, as
well as to the Chamber so that the day we actually discuss,
everybody have in their possession these documents.  So I just
wanted to inform you of this.
Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, defence counsel, for your information.
I would like now to provide the floor again to Judge Cartwright
to continue her questioning to the accused.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Thank you, President.
QUESTIONING BY THE BENCH
BY JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Q. Kaing Guek Eav, you have told the Chamber in the past that you
deliberately selected children to guard, interrogate and kill
prisoners at S-21.  As a former teacher did you have any doubts
about implementing CPK policy by using children in this way?
A. Your Honour, this matter was not only about doubt but also
it's about disagreement.  However, it had to be followed without
exception.  It was determined that the children were the children
of Angkar.  Whichever direction Angkar pointed them to they had
to follow the direction.
As I already told Your Honour and the Chamber previously, when
the Chamber was discussing about a person -- I cannot recall the
code for that person -- and we talked about a child I took from
Kampong Thom to be under my supervision and the child had to be
loyal and honest and had to abide by Angkar's instruction without
asking questions, and that individual did not even know me.  That
was the duty assigned to me and to every cadre, to re-educate and
build the children.
So it's not only about doubt but it is about the obligation that
needs to be fulfilled, regardless whether we like it or not like
it.
Q. You have spoken repeatedly of your acknowledgment of guilt and
responsibility for your conduct between April 1975 and January
1979.  Is there any other aspect of this acknowledgment that you
wish to clarify or add to?
A. Your Honour, the acknowledgment of guilt by me for the crimes
committed at S 21, I would like to say that S-21 was a mechanism
where several people, according to the statistics of almost
2,000, participated in that mechanism.  However, those people
were to follow my orders because at S-21 I represented CPK in
that office.  However, the obedience were through the chain of
command.
I was influential over all those staff and that they had to
commit those criminal acts without exception.  Whatever I ordered
them they had to follow them and complete them.  That is one
issue.
And the second issue is that the criminal acts that I personally
committed is my annotation on those confessions, and that is
important.
In addition to that, I taught those people, I eradicated their
proper vision and I indoctrinated them with criminal ideology, as
I informed your Honour already.  My instructions to them on the
18th February '76 were that the people who were arrested by
Angkar, they had to be regarded as enemies.  If you cannot do
that you cannot extract confessions from them.
They were the intellectuals.  When they saw people they would
think whether the person would be the offenders or the people who
make the offence, but if we allow them to think those
intellectuals would form an anti-Party view and if that is the
case then I, who was the top person responsible, I would be
punished with no exception.  So Party-wise I had to instruct
them.
And another criminal responsibility was my overall supervision of
the office.  If I myself was loyal to the Party -- that's only
me, only one, but if I could reveal other people to be loyal to
the Party then the Party would have more strength.
And the term "meticulous, hard-working, striving" which are used
to describe to my character, and if we talk within the context of
a government that loved the country, that loves its people, that
would be my virtue; but on the contrary, the government was a
criminal mechanism, a criminal and cruel mechanism for this
century, so all those words that describe my character are
painful to me in that context.
This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. It has been suggested on the one hand that you remained a
loyal and committed member of the CPK for many years after
January 1979 and, on the other hand, you have said, in effect,
that you were having increasing doubts and that you were a
prisoner of the regime, a term used in the Closing Order.  Did
you ever leave the CPK formally before your arrest?
A. Your Honour, my dissatisfaction did exist.  My willing to
leave did exist.
However, as a human being, I had to weigh the paths I chose to
walk.
There is a Khmer saying, "You only step forward when your back
foot is firm".  If the back foot is not firm, the step forward
would be crumpled.  So I could only live if the situation would
grant me that opportunity and, for instance, when the CPK did not
allow UNTAC to disarm them, it was a complex situation and then,
as a result, UNTAC decided to attack that area and, of course,
they were dispersed although later on, once in a while, they were
conduct sporadic raids here and there.
So before I stepped forward, I had to make sure that my back foot
was firm enough for me to do so, and that was the process that I
outweighed and that I considered before I made my next move
during the process, Madam Judge.
Q. During her testimony, Françoise Sironi-Gilbaud spoke of a
process, a psychological process, that you have been going
through.
At the beginning of this trial, you expressed your remorse for
the suffering of the victims of S-21.  Do you feel any
differently after hearing some of the people who were detainees
at S-21, who worked at S-21, or who were the survivors of those
who had died at S-21?  Did you feel any different sort of remorse
after hearing them?
A. Your Honour, my remorse does exist and it has progressed.
When Professor Sironi could reflect on this or not, I am not
sure, but personally I knew it has progressed of the awareness
and acknowledgment that I committed criminal acts at S-21.
You personally witnessed the fact that the victims point -- they
could point their fingers at me, at my face, and I bowed myself
before them and I would not deny anything.  So that's how
progressed or how developed my feeling of remorse was.
Yesterday, my former friend, Sou Sath, met me.  She pointed her
finger at my face and she said, "You, Eav, you was overthrown
yourself and mad with the ideology of Mao Tse Tung".  I accepted
her speech, but I did not point my finger at her.  I used my hand
to pat on her knee and she continued to say that, "Mao Tse Tung
was wrong and you allowed him to lead you by the nose", and I
told her jokingly that, "How could you say that?  You are not a
politician."  I spoke to her calmly and gently and she also said
it is confusing to understand the attitude of the former Khmer
leaders, and I realized that she was really upset and angry.
So the fact that I was pointed the finger at, I could see the
feeling inside them then of the remorse and the regret that they
had on me on the wrong choice that I chose.  And the remorse and
the regret was as a result of what had been committed.  And as I
said earlier, whatever I am -- I will be punished by the
Cambodian people.  I will not regret that.  I will accept it.
If they open the door for my apology and I would do so; I would
apologize to them.  If they want to point their fingers at me,
either here in the hearing before this Chamber or outside, I
would not mind at all.  I would accept it.
And when the two psychological experts gave their testimony, I
appealed to them.  I appealed for their advice for the human --
for the world to see me as a human again; if they could provide
me with the treatment or any path that I should follow in order
for people to see me as a human being again.
Q. Thank you.
JUDGE CARTWRIGHT:
Mr. President, I have no further questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Judge Lavergne, you take the floor.
BY JUDGE LAVERGNE:
Q. The facts that you are being reproached as they are allegated
are of an unbelievable violence, and I would like you to indicate
here whether in your opinion, in your life course, in your
childhood or later, you were confronted with situations of
violence that may explain your participation as it is alleged.
In your childhood, were you confronted to situations of violence?
How were the relations within your family?  How did they take
place?  Did you suffer violence in school?  Is this something
that you accepted?
A. Your Honour, through my childhood until I was grown up, I did
not ever touch on this issue as it affects the gratitude by me
towards my teachers, as I respected my teachers a lot.
While I was at school, a teacher beat me up subjectively for a
mistake that I did not commit.  In that case, my mother made a
complaint against that teacher, however, later on I had pity on
that teacher.
Later on, he was sick and passed away.  And in my mind I did not
regard it -- regard him as anything else but as my respectful
teacher.  That was the first matter.
And on the second matter, the criminal acts committed by the
politicians toward the country and toward the nation and the
Cambodian people themselves, as I already reported to the Chamber
that the Lon Nol forces went to Samlaut to behead the patients
there in '66.
I then form a view as it was written on a placard.  When a
plastic bomb exploded in the Royal Palace, that grenade exploded
and killed a prince, Meakhavan -- the Prince Meakhavan was killed
in the process of the explosion of that grenade.  The placard
read, "Spare the life of the enemy is like killing your own
people."
In conclusion, despite all these events and despite the song that
I just sang and told the Co-Investigating Judges previously
regarding a contemptible spy and in the CPK slogan it reads,
"Blood will be revenged by blood".
My acceptance of responsibility in the police office starting
from M-13 and onward was within the context that I could not
avoid it.  And it was within the framework that I urged them -- I
appealed them -- appealed to them to leave.  I was -- my appeal
was accepted to the extent that I would not instructed to kill
victims or detainees with my own hands and that I did not have to
request to them to make the arrest of this person or that person
although there were grounds to do so.
And despite all these agreements and acceptance, the crimes that
I committed was my responsibility.  So all my activities between
the 17 April '75 to the 6th of January '79 and starting from the
18 of August 1975 when I was the deputy chair of that office and
from March 1976 when I rose to be the chair of that office, all
these criminal acts were done blindly and I am fully responsible
for them.
This is my response, Your Honour.
Q. Now, getting back to violence again.  You are telling us in
fact that there was --
on the part of certain people and also because of your education,
there were, therefore, people who were allowed to use violence
even if this violence was not justified or unjust.  You said that
your professor, who had beaten you -- that he had beaten you
unjustly, but that, however, you believed that what was -- the
most important thing was the fact that he was your professor.
And could the fact that he was your professor justify violence in
your eyes?
A. What I said was an old story from 1953.
If I think back or in hindsight, my feeling and knowledge, at
that time, was that I was also upset with that teacher.  I was
offended by him.  I knew that he made a mistake.  I knew that he
was mean.  However, I tried to forget all that.  And later on, he
passed away and I could suppress the feeling of that memory.
If we talk about humankind -- humanitarian way, any type of
violence cannot be forgiven, but the CPK had one word --
revolutionary anger or violence, and class anger or class
violence.  That was the philosophy of that regime which was the
most cruel and mean of any Communism.
As I stated this morning, it was contradicting the philosophy of
religions, contradicting the Buddhist disciplines and
contradicting the rules and the disciplines of Christianity or of
Islamic law.  So I could see that in this world no violence can
be forgiven and like the CPK or Communism doctrine which divided
violence into different types -- for example, the class violence,
as I just stated.
Q. Getting back to this same subject of your confrontation with
violence and your personal history -- in your education and
within your family, was there violence or could there have been
violence?
And did you consider this violence as being somewhat justified?
Were you sometimes corrected by your parents?
A. Your Honour, my mother is still living and I actually do not
want to touch on this subject matter.  Every time I did make a
mistake she would beat me or give me one or two lashes.  And if I
did not make any mistake and without even beating me up, when she
blamed me for something I did not do, I would get upset with her.
My mother rarely beat me with anything else but usually she only
beat me with coconut leaf.
Q. If I am not mistaken, you are the eldest child in your family,
and did this position offer you any kind of special position in
your family?  And were you in a position of superiority when you
were in charge maybe of bringing up your younger brothers and
sisters?
And in this upbringing were you also sometimes given the
possibility of using violence sometimes maybe to correct your
brothers and sisters?
A. Of course, yes, I was the eldest son in the family.  However,
as witnesses already made it clear that I focused a lot on study.
My younger siblings were taken care of by my mother.  As to
educating my siblings, I did feel close to my immediate sister.
So this is how my family's life is.
Q. When you were a teacher, in your teaching activities, did it
ever happen -- did you ever use violence in your teaching
activities at any moment?
A. No, I never used any kind of violence during my teaching.
Q. You spoke --
A. Normally at primary school teachers may resort to beating
students but at high school level teachers were not allowed to
beat any student.  And it was the policy -- educational policy
when I was a teacher.
Q. And what about you personally?  Did you believe that violence
was something that was anti-pedagogical?
A. When I was still a teacher I did not pay that deep attention
to this root matter.  I have not taken this into account.
However, some teachers set a good role model for me.  The role
model that without beating the students still loved the teachers.
At the junior high school there was only one teacher in Kampong
Thom who was resorting to violence against students.  By violence
here I mean he tended to threaten the students.  He used big
words, for example, but not beating.
There was only one teacher I knew who could really use strong
words or big words to students.  But I noted that that teacher's
educational background was not high enough.  That's why he
resorted to shouting at students.
The most majority of my teachers never used violence and students
liked their teaching and the students found it easy to follow
their instructions without such violence.  So this is my
observation, the observation I had since I started school in
grade 3.
Q. So even if you hadn't thought about this too much, you did
have some kind of admiration for those who were your role models
and who did not need to resort to violence.  Is this what I must
understand?
A. Yes, it is correct, Your Honour.  Thank you.
Q. Now I would like to bring up another topic which is a bit
different in this history of violence, which is therefore
political violence.  You said that you had been confronted to a
certain number of episodes of violence of this kind.
Can you tell us if at any moment in your personal history if
there was moment when you considered that political violence
could be justified?  And as of when and for which reasons?
A. I talked about the political violence in Samlaut the other day
and I also said the political violence in Indonesia.  And I once
indicated about the crimes of the Clique of Four, the Gang of
Four.  I therefore personally believe that political violence is
vindicated, justified.
Q. I believe that there was a problem in the interpretation.  Can
you please restate what you were saying?  Thank you.
A. Both the political violence at Samlaut in 1966 and at the same
time there was another political violence in Indonesia, and in
the same year there was another political violence in China.  All
these political violences are or were not justified, as I
believe, although the CPK had tried its best to indoctrinate us
that the political violence, the class anger, were brilliant;
perfect.
Q. I believe that in your personal history there is a moment when
you made a choice, when you made a commitment, the commitment to
the CPK.  Did you accept your adherence to the CPK as being
justified?  And did you accept a certain form of political
violence when you adhered to the CPK?  Because there is a big
difference of course between the teacher who believes that
violence has no place in a "civilized" world in which teaching
has its right place.
And then there is a transition, there is a change, and therefore
I would like you to explain what were your reasons, what were
your choices, your personal choices.
A. Honestly, your question is hard to understand but I will do my
best to respond, based on the best recollection of my knowledge.
Temporally, if the response is not that correct to the question
you prefer then I would need to rephrase it.
At that time when I joined the CPK, which was in 1966 -- no, no,
not 1966; 1969 -- in 1969.  And my understanding in relation to
the indoctrination of the policy of political violence was not
yet passed on to me and was not known to me yet.  I did not learn
that political violence was treated by the CPK as the ordinary
soup and rice.
Later on, I learned of this policy when I was forced to become
the Chairman of M-13.
Since my whole life as regarding to the understanding of the
political violence, whether the political violence was consistent
in the humanitarian nature -- may I repeat my statement?
Although the Communist Party of Kampuchea regarded the political
science was excellent, righteous and perfect, I never admitted
that it would be that way, however, I was compelled to adhere to
the policy.  I think I was not alone who was of such opinion.
Other people shared this common sense.
Now, I would like to give you an example of those who shared the
same sentiment.  My wife, her brother was killed by -- was killed
and buried in a pit with other musicians, traditional Khmer
musicians.  My wife was speechless.  She never even mentioned
about this.  She never even referred to the blood for blood.
Even the song that I referred to just recently, my wife never
sang it.  My wife, I would like to emphasize, was good at
singing.
After 1979, she would say that -- she would talk with me that,
by-and-large, we were very sympathetic for our parents because
they tried to bring us up, and then when we're grown up we were
used by the other people, and if they were not satisfied with our
performance then they have us smashed arbitrarily.
I, therefore, believe that both my wife and I knew of the policy
of the CPK and this matter, but we were compelled to adhere to
the policy, and the CPK itself, at the later stage, erased the
slogan, the blood for blood, and this phrase had never been used
again.
So the CPK later on realized that they forced their own members
of the Party to admit, to recognize this philosophy or policy,
but then they noted that they could not win.
In conclusion, I was influenced by a current I call the political
or the violence current, and this kind of policy was so-called
the pure tool for the Party -- pure tool.  However, I never ever
admitted that the political violence was in any form consistent
with humanitarian nature.
I would like to end it now, respectfully.
Q. You say that your commitment to joining CPK dates back to
1969.  Now, unless I am corrected, this is a period during which
you were in detention, 1969.  Therefore, quite obviously, I
believe your commitment to the CPK -- even if at that time you
were not a member of the CPK but your attraction to the CPK dates
back to well before.
And what I would like to know is that as of this attraction, did
you have any knowledge of violent action carried out by the CPK,
and I'd like to know how you judged these violent actions at that
time?
A. Thank you, Your Honour, for describing the date when I joined
the revolution.  Actually, I initially joined the revolution in
1964 in October.  In 1965, I became the focal candidate or focal
person for the Party.  I conducted an induction ceremony in 1967.
On the 20th of July 1969, I was detained in jail and the branches
who in the jail helped me assist with my work.
I remember part of your question that I could respond, but I
forget the last part of your question.  Could you please repeat
it?
Q. First of all -- well, you said that as of 1965 you are a
candidate member, and I suppose your preliminary activity was to
initiate to a communist theory, and in these theories they talk
about a kind of struggle.  Are you interested in the struggle
that you could carry out within the Communist Party?  Are these
questions that you asked yourself?  Are these questions that you
asked yourself?
And, at that time, were there any actions, any specific violent
actions carried out by the CPK in retaliation in response to
other political actions against the regime?
A. I analyzed the CPK history and I could divide it in two parts.
First it should have been from the beginning when the Party was
established until the 1970s' coup d'état.  During this period,
the initial period, the CPK implemented the policy to gather
forces.  They did not dare do anything to cause any harm to the
life of any individual.
From December 1970 onwards the CPK got the Liberated Zone in its
control and the CPK generated more members of the Party.  The CPK
obtained military forces and enforced at that moment that the CPK
exercised or implemented the political violence which caused harm
to the lives of Cambodian citizens.
At this end I would like to also indicate that, so far as I
remember, the date when I started to join the revolution and
became the full-rights candidate or member -- I think what I have
already told the Court is accurate, based on the best of my
knowledge and memory.
Q. You have spoken a lot about the constraint that you found
yourself in, forced to accept this form of violence that you said
you refused, rejected.  Now, despite this, were you not led to
make personal choices?  Were you always forced to or were there
moments where you said to yourself, "I commit myself.  I make the
sacrifice.  I accept"?  What was your vision of things with
regard to this problem?
Or are we, as the experts said, in phenomena such as splitting?
There were things that you refused and, on the other hand, you
had your commitment.  How do you explain this?
A. Your Honour, thank you for raising this issue.  I would like
to make it clear that the aspect, as indicated by the experts and
based on the questions being put in this Chamber -- there has
been impression that I did not admit that I what I had done was
correct, but why I still maintained my job and keep on going --
kept on working with that?
Based on my personal analysis and based on the philosophy I was
taught, as I already indicated this morning, it is called in
French "on note du contraste."  For example, the National Front
of Cambodia; there were people from the royalists, there were
parties from the Communist side combined, so these two parties
were opposing one another but they were united in one front.
Having hated the political violence, having hated the execution
or killing, was part of -- it was a part of my attitude.
However, the Party really educated us to understand this
political violence.  So these two notions are contradictory
already.
Although we opposed the notion, but by the end of the day we were
compelled to follow it, and as time and again I keep saying that
I feel embarrassed or ashamed that I fell into this track, and I
indicated before the Co-Investigating Judges that I was the actor
of the crime of the regime.  I still believe that these were the
two roles I played.  I played two roles.
Number two, I was the actor of the crime, or in French, actor du
crime.  Dr. Sironi-Gilbaud already mentioned about (no
interpretation) in her statement.
I may have to conclude my response to Your Honour now.
JUDGE LAVERGNE:
I believe we'll have to stop now.  I'll probably have other
questions to put to you and we'll see that later, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
It is already an appropriate time to take the adjournment and we
will take the adjournment now.
The hearing will resume on Monday the 14th of September 2009 at 9
a.m.
On Monday we're going to hear the testimonies of the experts
Goldstone Richard but the hearing will be conducted based on the
remote participation and we're going to listen to this witness.
And the remaining time during the week will be reserved to
question the character of -- the matter on the character of the
accused.
Detention facility personnel are now instructed to take the
accused to the detention facility and bring him back to the
courtroom at 9 a.m., Monday the 14th of September.
THE GREFFIER:
All rise.
(Judges exit courtroom)
(Court adjourns at 1623H)
