P R O C E E D I N G S
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The session is called to order.  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Mr. Witness, Mr. Pognon is going to continue with his cross-
examination this morning.  Please proceed, Mr. Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
Thank you, Madam President.  Madam President, Your Honours, good
morning.
WITNESS CNJ
CROSS-EXAMINATION (continued)
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness CNJ, good morning.
A.   Good morning.
Q.   Yesterday, before we rose, we were dealing with your statements that
you made in the year 2000, and I was reading a document you had
written saying you had gone to negotiate with Seromba and Kayiranga.
Now I want us to continue in that line.  I want you to tell us,
please, how many people in total did your group of eight kill?
A.   With the exception of those who were killed in Nyange, we killed 11
people in our secteur.  Now, for the victims that fell at Nyange, we
killed, together with the other assailants -- I wouldn't be able to
tell you the exact number of people killed at Nyange, but those who we
killed in the countryside came to 11.
Q.   So you are admitting that at the Nyange church you and your group,
together with other attackers, you killed a number of people?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, Your Honours, I am still at page K0335041, same page
where we were yesterday.  We are dealing with the confession statement
of the 21st August 2000.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   And you said, "I myself with the people in my group, together we went
back home and we came back the following morning.  When we arrived at
the location, the church was in the process of being destroyed by the
use of mechanical shovel from the Astaldi company.  People were
getting into the church and were finishing off those who had not yet
died."
This is your second statement and the first was a supplementary
statement.  And this one here -- let me read you the title of this
letter, or subject matter, if you will:  "Confession, guilty plea and
request for forgiveness."  Now, between this statement you are making
on the second occasion, you say that when you got to the place, the
church was being destroyed using the Astaldi company's technical
shovel.  You've said this earlier and you described to the Prosecutor
what happened at your arrival, upon your arrival, and also what
Seromba was doing.
A.   Thank you.  Thank you, Counsel.  I think that Kinyarwanda isn't
understood in the same way.  It depends on who is listening.  We went
back home, and the following day we came back and the church was being
destroyed and the attackers were getting into the church to finish off
those who were not dead.  There are a number of facts which I have not
mentioned which took place a long time ago.  Even yesterday, I said
that through my confessions I was only providing an indication, and I
did not relate all the facts.  And this is why today, and even
yesterday, I am here to explain to you things as they happened.
Q.   Let me remind you, do you mean to say that for you to have added to
your statement of
**************** 1998, that when you reached the place, the church was
being destroyed?  And this is you writing.  Once again, you added to
your statement -- and this was on the 21st of August 2000 -- you say
then that when you arrived, the church was being destroyed, and you
are now stating that, although you are asking for forgiveness,
although you are making a confession, you didn't state exactly what
happened at your arrival.
A.   Madam President, Your Honours, I would like to provide explanations
regarding the two letters.  The confession, the guilty plea, and the
request for forgiveness are very important documents.  And as I said
even yesterday, I wrote these documents at a difficult period of time,
and I didn't mention the events in Nyange because Nturiye's and
Kayiranga's cases were ongoing.  I didn't want to testify in those
cases.  I didn't want to be associated with those trials because
people were still under shock.
In the interim, I am requesting the Tribunal to accept that if I say
that I arrived at the church when the church was being destroyed, that
is not a fact which contradicts what I have already stated.
Mr. Pognon is asking me whether I was writing the facts as I had seen
them.  Let me answer him by saying that I spoke the truth, but it
wasn't the whole truth.  It wasn't everything that happened, and my
presence here is justified by the fact that I am ready to speak the
truth and the whole truth, as I will do in front of the Rwandan
courts.  Today, I shall speak the whole truth, which I did not do in
my statements, but this does not mean that I did not speak the truth
regarding the facts that I recounted with regard to Nyange.
Q.   Thank you.  Let me continue reading your letter.  "The church was
completely destroyed.  My responsibility came about right from the
first day when we fought using stones, but no one was killed; there
were only wounded."  Do you admit to having written that statement?
A.   During the fighting, when we were throwing stones, we didn't kill
anyone.
Q.   I have just asked you how many people were killed by your group.  I
asked you that right from the outset this morning.  You said 11 were
killed, and you were unable to count how many people you killed in
Nyange, but you recognised, you admitted the fact that people were
killed at Nyange.  This is a document concerning confession, guilty
plea, and you are stating here that your responsibility can only be
considered from the first day where you fought using stones and that
no one was killed there; there were only wounded.  And you are asking
the Rwandan state and those concerned and all of humanity to forgive
you for all your crimes.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, do you have any objection?
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I am having my rhythm interfered with.  I don't see
what can cause any objection to be raised unless I am being blamed for
having committed some error or other.
MR. TOWNSEND:
My objection, Your Honour, is that counsel is misstating the evidence
and misstating the statement as it appears.  The question counsel
asked earlier was with regard to both the 15th and 16th, and it wasn't
that the witness could not count the number of dead but, rather, that
he did not know.  And then he seeks to mischaracterise this statement
as only attributing responsibility for the 15th and denying it for the
th.  This is a very long, compound, complex question that is
misstating the evidence, and as such, it is entirely objectionable.
Thank you.
MR. POGNON:
Should I react to that objection, which is leading to confusion rather
than anything else?  Because I know how to read and write, and I read.
Before I read what I read, I asked a certain number of questions.  Do
I need to respond to this objection or do you allow me to continue?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
It's up to you to determine whether you are going to react to the
objection or not.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, Your Honours, you are able to determine whether an
objection is founded or not.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
That's why I am saying that, as far as we are concerned, we are taking
note of the objection raised by the Prosecutor and it's up to you to
respond.
MR. POGNON:
I am responding by saying that I have not distorted anything.  I have
read everything which is before me.  It is written in very simple
French, and it is something which is quite easy, even for someone to
read.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Pognon, the Chamber is of the opinion that the objection is well-
founded.  When you are reading, there is no problem, but it is when
you interpret matters that you stray from the text.  So we are asking
you that you merely read the text and then you ask your questions
without interpreting what the witness has said.
MR. POGNON:
With all due respect to the Tribunal, I have not interpreted anything,
nothing at all.  I have not gone into any interpretation whatsoever.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are of another opinion, because when you said that he only admits
to his responsibility only for one day, what is included in the text
is, "My responsibility came about from the first day when we fought
using stones, but no one was killed; there were only wounded."  This
leaves an open door to the second day, obviously.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, let me specify that this document is a document of
confession and a request for forgiveness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The witness has explained himself at length on this.  He told you
under what circumstances he made his confession.  You may --
MR. POGNON:
If we are not allowed to argue, we are going to leave things as they
stand because this doesn't serve any purpose.  I am reading what he
himself wrote.  Each time he is being protected by the Tribunal.
Otherwise we shall withdraw.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
This is not the issue.  You should not behave in such a manner.  We
have allowed you all this time, and you have been cross-examining this
witness since yesterday.  We have not stated anything so far.  You had
cross-examination all afternoon.  You had more than two hours in
relation to what the Prosecution took.  So when there is an objection,
we have the right to decide on the objection, and you should not get
all worked up because we are telling you that you are interpreting
matters.  If there is an objection, we need to hear the objection and
take a decision on it.  You cannot prevent us from doing that because
that is our duty.  So we are requesting you to kindly proceed to ask
questions, put questions to the witness.  Don't get worked up when
there is an objection because you know that these can occur.  You
yourself have raised objections before this Chamber.  You have the
floor.  You may proceed.
MR. POGNON:
Lastly, in relation to this incident, Madam President, Your Honours, I
feel that I am being persecuted as the Defence because when I am
reading clearly, the Tribunal is saying that the witness is allowing
windows to be opened.  I believe that this will be a problem for the
witness, but I must say this so that it is on the record.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Everything is recorded, and please proceed, Counsel.
MR. POGNON:
Thank you.  I have nothing further to say regarding this document.  I
will continue with another document.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, before you continue with another document, you have to tender
this document, since you have used it up to practically the last line.
MR. POGNON:
The document in Kinyarwanda is there.  It can be examined to see
whether there is conformity with that document and the French which I
read.  I do not know whether I can continue if the Tribunal is going
to be protecting the witness when I am asking him about his statement.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are the ones responsible for governing the proceedings.  I do beg
your pardon.  Can you please remain calm, Counsel.
THE FRENCH INTERPRETER:
What is being said by counsel is not coming through the microphone.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are not justifying anything.  You are not calm at all.  You are
shouting.  I will only respond when you have calmed down.
Could you please show this document to the witness so that he can tell
us whether he recognises it or not.
MR. POGNON:
By your leave, let it be known that the Tribunal is protecting the
witness at every point.  So I am not doing my job -- I am not being
allowed to do my job.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, have you looked at the Kinyarwanda document before you, and
if so, is it the same document you sent to the authorities?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, Madam President, it is the same document.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Mr. Pognon, do you wish to tender this document as a
Defence exhibit?
MR. POGNON:
Pardon me.  Yes.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Is there any objection from the Prosecution?
MR. TOWNSEND:
No objection to its admission, Your Honour.  If I could just help
identify the document.  It is the
August 2000 Kinyarwanda statement of CNJ, identified with the
following K-number, K033-4083, and the second page of that two-page
document ends 4084.  I would also ask that the French version
accompany it, if it would help the Chamber, and that is K033-5039, a
three-page document of which the last, or the third, page ends with
the K-number 5041.  Thank you, Your Honours.  No objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  The document of which the original is in Kinyarwanda for
which the pages were indicated shall be tendered.  The document is
dated 21 August 2000.  There is also a French translation of the said
document for which the pages were also indicated.  The document is
tendered, admitted and marked as a Defence exhibit, D. 40, A and B; D
four zero, A and B; A for the Kinyarwanda version.  Yes, Mr.
Prosecutor.
MR. TOWNSEND:
You are perfectly correct.  I was going to add "under seal" would be
preferable because it is identifying the witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.  I was bearing that in mind.  The document shall be marked D. 40,
A and B.  Said document shall be placed under seal.
(Exhibit No. D. 40A and D. 40B admitted, under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Pognon, you may proceed with your cross-examination of the
witness.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   I should now like to turn to the witness's letter entitled,
"Supplementary Information To My
September 1999 Letter and 26 April 2000 Guilty Plea and
Confession."  I should point out in passing that we never received the
September 1999 letter nor the 26 April 2000 letter.  We've never
received those.
MR. TOWNSEND:
I'm sorry to interrupt.  If counsel could identify with a number or a
date the document he seeks to read.
MR. POGNON:
The K-number is the following:  K0335014.  The registry handwritten
letters are 2413 bis, letter to the Prosecutor dated 01.
Prosecutor registry number for Rwanda RNP 55-993-S4-NA-KBY-99.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Counsel.  We've located the document.
MR. POGNON:
As I said earlier, we never received disclosure of the letters
referred to in this document, which is a confession and guilty plea,
letters dated 13 September 19 April 2000, and this document
is a supplement to those two letters.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Prosecutor, do you wish to comment on that issue?  Mr. Pognon says
that he never received the letters of 13 September 19 April
.
MR. TOWNSEND:
If I understand counsel's point, he's saying that the date of 13
September 1999 refers to another document that hasn't been disclosed.
If such a document exists, it's not in our possession, so we've
fulfilled our requirements and we don't have knowledge or cognisance
of such a document.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, there's a second document as well, dated 26 April
, subject to the same situation.
MR. TOWNSEND:
It would be the same situation for us, not in our possession, no
cognisance of it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Pognon, you have the floor.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness CNJ, now I should like to refer to your letter dated 27 May
, a letter addressed to the prosecutor of the republic from your
detention facility, which prosecutor has jurisdiction over that
detention facility.  The letter will be shown to you in a few moments.
You say the following in the letter entitled "Supplementary
Information to the Contents of My Letters of 13 September 19
April 2000 Containing my Guilty Plea and Confession."
I read in the second paragraph of that letter," In a few words, here's
what happened at Nyange.  It was on Thursday and Friday of the week
that followed President Habyarimana's death.  Calls for help came from
Nyange requesting people to come to help.  We left.  We arrived at
Karutehe, at Ndungutse's house and we found a lorry there."
Witness, this is the beginning of the second paragraph of your letter.
This was written by your hand, was it not, Witness?
A.   Yes, I did write this, but I think I made a mistake with regard to
the days.  I spoke of Thursday and Friday.  Later on, I did indeed
explain that the exact dates were the 15th and 16th.  Now, as regards
Thursday and Friday, that is a mistake, but in the other letters that
I wrote, you will see that I did specify that I meant the 15th and
th.
Q.   That is not entirely important, Witness.  Let me go to the second
page, on the last paragraph of that letter.  It begins as follows:
"That is when they brought dynamite sticks from Astaldi.  They placed
three of them, but they were unsuccessful.  Then they left to see
Father Seromba and convinced him of the need to destroy the church.
He accepted that proposal."  You wrote that, Witness.  Which day are
you referring to, Witness, in these passages?
A.   As you see, as you can read in the first paragraph, I am giving an
account of what happened at Nyange.  This happened on the 15th of
April.  People were trying to gain access to the church, to burn it
down, to break down its doors.  That is exactly when the people went
to see Seromba to find out what needed to be done and to inform him
that people were going to be spending the night there.
Q.   That is when they left to see Father Seromba and convinced him of the
need to destroy the church.  What you are saying is that, in addition,
you are distorting the truth.  You said that they went to see Seromba
and convinced him of the need to destroy the church.  You don't
mention anywhere that they asked Seromba for authorisation to spend
the night.  What is the situation, Witness?  Why did you add that
information?
A.   This is the truth.  I wrote my letter, and I explained my opinion,
how I viewed the situation on that day.  But if I am here at the
Tribunal right now, it's to give additional information as a
supplement to what I said previously.
Q.   When you say he accepted the proposal, were you there to be able to
testify about that?  And what was the proposal, to destroy the church?
Or was the proposal to feed the attackers who would spend the night
there?
A.   In my opinion, as I have said before and as I confirm today, they
informed him that people would be staying the night there.  That
indeed happened.  The next day we worked with Seromba to destroy the
church.  That's proof that he accepted the proposal.  The attackers
were fed, the church was destroyed, as was requested, and he worked
with us the next day to do so, to destroy the church, and we killed
the people inside that church.  That is why I am saying that he
accepted the proposal.  Everything that was proposed to him, he said
yes, he accepted.
Q.   Witness, I am simply reading what you wrote in your confession and
guilty plea, and these things are strictly governed by the law.  Do
you wish to say that between what you wrote and what you are saying,
we now have to add additional information?  And what you are saying
here in this courtroom was never written down in three successive
letters written by your hand.  Is that what you are saying?  Which,
furthermore, contain contradictions amongst.
A.   Let me explain myself.  Even Rwandan law provides that after you give
a confession, you can give supplementary information subsequent to
that, and that's what I am doing right now; I am giving supplementary
information, information for which I never had time to put down in my
letter.  I am giving that information now.  In my letters, I gave a
summary of the events, but now I am explaining to you in detail how
things happened.
Q.   Thank you for those details, Witness.  Witness, can you tell us why
here and now you are giving this additional and contradictory
information?  Why didn't you give it in Rwanda?  You've already gone
before the gacaca courts.
MR. POGNON:
Yes, Mr. Prosecutor.
MR. TOWNSEND:
This is, one, argumentative, objectionable in the fact that if counsel
seeks to impeach for a contradiction, he has to put the specific
contradiction to the witness rather than just engage him on why are
you contradicting.  He's given more than ten statements.  He needs to
be a little bit more specific.
MR. POGNON:
Learned colleague, the contradiction is found in the absence of
information regarding what your witness is now saying compared to what
he wrote down.  Therein is the contradiction.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Then it's been asked and answered in his last response.
MR. POGNON:
As if I had not heard the response.  Let me proceed.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, let us remind you that you should avoid drawing conclusions
and avoid telling the witness that he is contradicting himself.  You
can point out contradictions, "You said this, you said that; explain
to us why there is a contradiction between the two things you said."
But if you begin your question by saying, "You are contradicting
yourself," that is a problem.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I read a letter.  He wrote a statement.  He has said
things that are not said in the letter.  There is a contradiction
because there is information that is lacking.  Therein is a
contradiction.  I am not sufficiently strong in French to express it
any other way.  It is a contradiction, simply.  We are following the
procedure and that procedure provides for false testimony and
sanctions against that.  We should not be afraid of that here.  There
is provision for that in the Rules, even if those Rules right now are
being broken.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
If you proceed in this manner, Counsel, you will be the one subject to
sanction.
MR. POGNON:
I am not judging here, Madam President.  That is your duty to do so.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are perfectly capable of assuming that duty.  Be calm, Counsel, put
questions to the witness and make an attempt to stay within the
framework of your cross-examination.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I am calm.  I am up against the Tribunal here and up
against this witness, but I am trying to remain calm.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Let me proceed with regard to your statement, Witness.  Now I am at
the last paragraph of your letter dated 01.  "Because it was
late, it was deemed necessary to delay the operations till the next
day and to guard the church over night.  My companions and I went
home.  When we came back to the site the next day, destruction of the
church was underway with the mechanical shovel."  Witness, please
explain to this Tribunal what you wrote down here, compared to what
you stated to the Prosecutor.
A.   Thank you, Counsel.  Kinyarwanda is not a simple language.  Even
written Kinyarwanda is difficult.  Sometimes you can make punctuation
errors and the whole sense of what you are trying to say can be
distorted, so let me explain exactly what I wanted to say when I wrote
this down.
When we arrived on the 16th in the morning, as I said, we found many
people had surrounded the church.  The church was being destroyed with
the heavy equipment, the Caterpillar.  In addition to that, they were
shooting at the church.  They were firing weapons at the church.
Kayishema shot a weapon.  The bourgmestre and the communal police
officers shot at the church, so I wanted to explain that the church
had been demolished using a bulldozer.
Q.   I believe you would agree, at least, that each time I am producing
the Kinyarwanda document and you confirm that you indeed wrote the
document.  So here is my question, Witness.  For the third time, you
have written a document containing a confession and a guilty plea, and
you say that when you arrived on site destruction of the church was
underway.  "When we arrived on site the next day, destruction of the
church was underway."
This is the third time you've written this down.  Where can I find a
spot -- where do you find a spot for the information?  You arrived,
destruction was underway.  You said that you noticed some discussions
amongst the authorities.  Kayishema, you say, went to look for
Seromba.  Seromba --
A.   Let me respond to that.  You spoke about the destruction of the
church.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, please, Counsel had not finished his question.  Let him
finish his question first before you respond.  Mr. Pognon, you may
proceed, finish your question.
MR. POGNON:
I will be very brief.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   "When we arrived, we came back the next day and destruction was
underway with the aid of a mechanical shovel."  Witness, you said
something different to the Prosecutor with regard to the fact that
Father Seromba gave authorisation for this operation.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Now you may respond, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you.  As regards the destruction of the church, I would like to
ask Mr. Pognon to understand the following.  They did not begin to
destroy the church with the bulldozer.  They started destroying it
beforehand, by shooting at it and attacking it.  The bulldozer was
used only to accelerate the destruction of the church, but they first
started to shoot at the church, and when they were shooting at it,
they began to destroy it.  Other means of destruction were also used.
What I told the Prosecutor completely corresponds to what I am saying
now, but you should not mix things up.  They went to look for Seromba
to seek authorisation.  And what I can point out is that he was late.
He wasn't there waiting.  It was necessary to go and get him.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Why, according to you, was it necessary to go and call him?  Who
deemed it necessary to call him?
A.   You are asking me about my opinion.  Well, Seromba was one of those
in authority and he was influential.  The authorities played an active
role in the killings.  He was a person of authority in Kivumu secteur.
He was somebody who could have stopped the killings, or brought some
assistance in the killings.  So through his activities, he
participated and he gave support.
As for my point of view, when they were discussing what needed to be
done, his position needed to be known.  He was the owner of the place.
He was at home.  He was collaborating and corroborating with the
others and the destruction needed to start while he was there.  And
this is why we went and sought his opinion.  We went and called him so
that he could come there.
MR. POGNON:
(Microphone not activated)...this letter in Kinyarwanda, and we would
wish that it be shown to the witness so that he's aware of it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, please proceed.  Please show the document to the witness so that
he can quickly take a look.
THE WITNESS:
This is a letter which was written by me, and you can always rely on
it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you, Mr. Witness.  Mr. Pognon, do you want to tender this
document?
MR. POGNON:
(Microphone not activated)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Any objection from the Prosecutor?
MR. TOWNSEND:
No, Your Honours.  Just if the record can reflect the K-numbers and
that the French also be admitted and placed under seal.  I have the
references if it would help, Your Honour.  This would be CNJ's Rwandan
statement of 01.  The original in Kinyarwanda is one page
identified by K0334081.  The French translation consists of two pages,
identified as K0335014 to 5016.  I made a mistake; it's three pages.
Thank you, Your Honour.  No objection to its admission under seal.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Prosecutor.  Those are indeed the references.
Therefore, this letter of 27th May 2001, whose original is in
Kinyarwanda and its translation in French, are tendered as Defence
exhibits and they will be marked D. 41, A and B, and they shall be
placed under seal.
(Exhibit No. D. 41A and D. 41B admitted, under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Pognon, do you have any other questions for this witness?
MR. POGNON:
Regarding the letter concerning supplementary information to the
letter of confession dated 30th November 2001, this letter is still
written to the same state prosecutor and it's entitled there as the
subject "Additional Information to the Contents of My Letter of 27th
May 2001", the letter of 27th May 2001.  And that was Defence Exhibit
D. 41, A and B.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Now, Mr. Witness --
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, did you give reference to that document?
MR. POGNON:
I'm sorry, Madam President; it's K0335025, and the handwritten
reference is 2408 bis.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well, Counsel, you may proceed.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Mr. Witness, can you explain to the Court exactly when the decision
for the church to be destroyed was taken?
A.   If you are finished with your question, let me answer you.  The
decision to destroy the church, apart from the movements of the
authorities, as I observed them, those authorities who had planned the
killing, even right up to the burial of the bodies, taking all this
into account, I wouldn't be able to tell you the date or the time when
the decision to destroy the church was taken.  Everything was being
done step by step, and the person who you are defending played an
important role in these activities.  I did not attend their meetings,
so much so that I am unable to tell you specifically when this
decision was taken.
Q.   What day?  I think that you said that you arrived at Nyange on the
Friday and the Saturday; is that not so?
A.   Yes, you are quite right.
Q.   Do you recall, Witness -- do you remember everything that was done?
Can you tell the Tribunal, can you remind the Tribunal about
everything that was done in order to kill the Tutsis who were in the
church?  Can you remind us of that briefly?
A.   Yes, I can do so.  On the 15th, people tried to open the main door to
the church, but in vain.  People tried to bring attributions from the
Kimanzara restaurant, and they tried to break down the door, but they
failed.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Counsel's microphone is off, Your Honours.
MR. POGNON:
He should not always make reference to my client.  He is always making
reference to my client.  He should be stopped from doing that.  Please
take care of business and stop this from continuing.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor.
MR. TOWNSEND:
With all due respect, it appears that counsel asked a question to
which he wasn't enjoying the response and jumped up and interrupted
him.  I would ask that the witness be allowed to continue his response
and, if counsel wants to precise question -- if he wants a precise
answer, let him ask a precise question.
MR. POGNON:
First of all, I asked a question.  I didn't ask a second question, I
asked one question.  And while he was answering, he was mentioning the
Accused in relation to his opinion, and I said that the Court should
be responsible for policing these proceedings.  And I'll therefore ask
for the assistance of the Bench, if I am allowed to do so.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Let me remind you, once again, that you must remain calm so that we
can proceed with this
cross-examination.  There are too many incidents, and this is indeed
regrettable.  As far as we are concerned, we are indeed policing the
proceedings.  You have the right to make objections, given the fact
that the witness referred to your client, but I do believe that you
should stop at that.  It is not up to you to ask the Chamber to ensure
that it is policing the proceedings appropriately.
Mr. Witness, when you are answering questions, please refrain from
referring to the Accused.  Just answer the question put to you.
Please ask your question again, unless the witness has something to
add.
MR. POGNON:
I had not finished my question, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
He was answering your question.  He hadn't finished answering.
MR. POGNON:
He was referring to my client and that's why I called upon your
assistance.  I did that because he did that yesterday.  Today he's
saying the same thing.  It's my duty.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So you do not want him to continue answering your question just
immediately before?  If you want to ask another question, that's up to
you.
MR. POGNON:
I am asking him the question again.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So, Mr. Witness, the question is being put to you again, and please
give your answer to Mr. Pognon once he is done.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   I was asking you to remind the Tribunal briefly everything that
happened so that the Tutsis who were within the church were killed .
MR. TOWNSEND:
I'm sorry, Your Honours, I am obliged to object.  He's asking briefly
for everything, and this just opens it up to a long narrative response
which is necessarily going to involve the Accused as well.  So does he
want everything or does he want to briefly?  If he could just pick one
or the other.
MR. POGNON:
That is not my opinion.  The witness was answering quite simply, and
it was once again when he mentioned the Accused that I came back to
this.  So the witness was answering, so he should be allowed to
answer, since the Tribunal has asked that he continue to answer.  If I
can have the witness authorised to continue with his answer, please.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
(No interpretation)
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, Madam President.  Please excuse me, Mr. Pognon, I will not
speak about your client anymore.  Now, on the 15th, that was a Friday,
when people had sought refuge at the church, we tried to open the
church, but we failed.  We used axes which we found at Kimanzara's
place so that we could break down the door, but we were unable to do
so.  A bulldozer, which was sent to bury the bodies, was used in that
regard, but we failed.  We were unsuccessful.  The doors -- the door
was not opened.  We tried to burn the building down using petrol.  We
lit the fire, but we were unable to destroy the building.  We also
used dynamite in order to break down the door, but in vain.  Those are
the attempts which were made on the 15th to try and open the doors so
that we could have access and kill the Tutsis who were inside.
Now, on Saturday, the 16th of April 1994, in the morning, when I say
that the destruction had already started, what I mean is that the
building was being shot at, but as we were on our way to Nyange we
could hear gunfire.  Later on, we used that machine to destroy the
church.  So, briefly, those are the activities or actions which were
taken in order to destroy the church.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Very well.  After, according to this description which you have just
given, the zeal of the attackers, was its objective to destroy the
church or to kill the Tutsis who were inside the church?
A.   The objective was to kill the Tutsis who were in the church, but
since they had blocked the doors, we sought to open these doors, and
we went as far as destroying the church itself.
Q.   If the objective was to kill the Tutsis, was the attempt at burning
down the church or using dynamite to destroy the church, was that
attempt, had it been successful, was it not mainly to destroy the
church?
A.   Yes, that's quite obvious, it's quite clear.  Even a small child can
understand that.  We wouldn't have sought to burn down the church if
people were not inside.  All of this was done.  Even attempting to
dynamite the church, even trying to burn the church down, we were
doing all these things because there were people inside the church.
Q.   Now, if those multiple attempts which already damaged the church, had
those attempts succeeded, wouldn't the church have been destroyed?
A.   I think I've answered that question already.
Q.   Thank you.  Now, if at that point in time, given all those attempts,
had those attempts succeeded, what would have been the responsibility
of Father Seromba in that attempt which was made by the attackers?
A.   I didn't speak about Seromba alone during these facts.  Even on the
th when we were seeking the Tutsis who had sought refuge at his
presbytery, he said first of all that we needed to remove the dead
bodies.  That signified that we had to do something subsequently.
Therefore, had those attempts succeeded -- I don't know what you want
me to say.  Maybe you want me to say that he wouldn't have committed
any crime or that he wouldn't be held responsible.  But it's clear,
when he first of all said that the dead bodies had to be removed, we
were on the same wavelength; he was with us.  It doesn't diminish in
any way his collaboration with the killers who were pursuing the
Tutsis at the time.
Q.   As you have just said that what he did was to say that the dead
bodies should be removed, you say that he was on the same wavelength.
Does that constitute a crime in the eyes of the Tribunal, in your
opinion?
A.   Let me say the following.  After he asked us to remove the dead
bodies, he -- this obviously meant that there were other things to
come.  And before the Judges, before everyone who is listening to me,
I am not only relying on that.  In fact, what happened subsequently
gives me reason, because after that fact there were other crimes which
were committed, and he collaborated.  So in the chronological sequence
of events, he collaborated with those persons, he worked with them,
and he participated in the actions.
Q.   Now, since those attempts had the objective of destroying the church
or to kill the Tutsis, even if the church had to be destroyed, given
what you have said, the actions that were taken, according to you, the
fact of using the mechanical shovel, was that merely a continuity of
the act of destroying or a continuation of the will to kill the
Tutsis, even if the church had to be destroyed, after the use of axes,
dynamite, petrol?  Was the destruction of the church not only a
necessary consequence to the destruction of the church which had
already begun on the 15th?
A.   Let me say that I was on the site on the 15th and 16th, but that
doesn't mean that the killing of the Tutsis, or even the attempts to
destroy the church, took place only on those days.  In fact, from what
we know from the gacaca courts, it was said that on the 14th there
were attackers.  Father Seromba, who was a Hutu as ourselves,
obviously collaborated with the other Hutus in order to kill the
Tutsis.  He didn't call for help in favour of Tutsis.  There were
gendarmes who had been posted there on
the 12th.  He could have asked for gendarmes to be reinforced in their
numbers so that they could counter the attacks launched by the Hutus.
He could have asked for reinforcement of gendarmes, but he didn't do
anything.  That happened on the 14th.  Today we have information
according to which there were attacks on the 14th.  On the 15th, we
went to the church and we fought with the Tutsis.  On the 14th, if he
were to say that he was not working together with us, there were
authorities from the préfecture who could have asked for assistance
from the gendarmes.  He could have said, "I was attacked today, there
are survivors in the church, please come to my help."  He didn't do
anything.  This shows that on that day and on the following days he
worked together with us in the killings.
Q.   Is that how you come to deduce the responsibility of the Accused in
these acts?
A.   Yes, I confirm that.
Q.   Did anything happen before the church was destroyed?  Do you recall
anything, any action whatsoever, which may implicate the Accused
before the church was destroyed?
MR. TOWNSEND:
I am just going to object as vague and ambiguous.  Counsel can lead
the witness a little bit more detailed a question.  I think it would
help all of us, but "anything" isn't going to refresh the memory of
this witness.
MR. POGNON:
With the Tribunal's control, I don't know what questions I put that
are vague and confused.  Let me have the list of questions.  I don't
think I have anything to learn from my learned friend.  Ask me to be
precise, but don't tell me that all my questions are vague and
confused.  That is unacceptable.  I have the list of questions.  I
have the list of your questions.  I have references.  I can read out
your questions, sir.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, we shall ask the witness to answer.  The witness explains his
answers and they are pretty long and that is because of the nature of
the questions.  The questions are not sufficiently targeted.
MR. POGNON:
I do not -- I cannot do otherwise.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, can you answer the questions put by counsel.
MR. POGNON:
Your Honour, let me be very precise from now onwards.  I have to go
back to two or three questions that I have put.  The first was as
follows.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   You have recognised that the destruction of the church by the
Caterpillar -- because you were not able to kill the Tutsis inside,
besides all the means you used that could have killed all the Tutsis
in the church.  Now then, you are claiming that you were there on the
th and you've seen a certain number of things, in spite of three
contradictory statements you made.  Could you tell us, apart from the
fact that Seromba was fetched, what was done before they started
destroying the church at that particular time?  At that particular
time, was anything done?
A.   If you are talking about the events of the 16th, I don't know.  I
told you that the destruction of the church started the 15th, when
dynamite was used.  Now, give me the date and I'll tell you what
happened.
Q.   Now, let's take it as you started to seek to dynamite the church or
burn it on the 16th, on the 16th.  Now, before you did that -- did you
see Father Seromba before you did that on the 16th?
A.   Let us not confuse what happened on the 15th and what happened on the
th.  The dynamiting and the attempt to burn the church happened on
the 15th.  On the 15th, I saw Seromba.  I saw him.  I told him that we
should take out the bodies.  And on the 16th, I told you how the Tutsi
were being killed, how the bulldozer was being monitored on the 15th
and 16th.
Q.   Now, on the 15th, he stopped you at the gate of the presbytery and
asked you to go clean up, and on the 16th he attended -- he monitored
the destruction of the church; is that correct?
A.   (No interpretation)
Q.   Now, were you there on the 14th at the church?
A.   No, sir, on the 14th, I was not there.  I told you that this was
information I received during the gacaca sessions.  I think I was very
clear on that.
Q.   (No interpretation)
A.   No, sir.  No, sir, I did not go to the church on the 12th.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Could counsel please wait for a few seconds for the interpreters to be
able to know what the question and answers are.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I was there on the 15, 16.  On the 14th I was not there.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Now paragraph 2 of your letter entitled "Additional Information," you
say in this letter that, "After having decided to demolish the church,
people went to seek Father Seromba so that he takes out religious
equipment or material with the help of gendarmes that were there."
That's what you say in the letter.  Now, my question is as follows: do
you remember having written this?
A.   Yes, absolutely.
Q.   Very well, thank you.  Now then, who are these people who decided to
demolish the church?  Who were they?  After having decided to -- after
having decided to demolish the church, they went to seek Father
Seromba to come and take out the religious material in the church.
A.   Thank you.  Have you finished with your question?  Now, let me
explain what that was.  I explained this when the -- after the
killings took place.  Yesterday, I talked about my uncle who had
informed us of what was said at the meeting.  He told us that it was
decided that the refugees would be taken away, and he was the one that
told us to get the Tutsis, to take them to Nyange, and that there were
gendarmes at Nyange to protect them.  Now, there was information
according to which on the 13th, people had gone to the church to take
away some equipment, some material, and those people were searched;
they were subjected to body searches.  I don't know too much on this,
so I didn't talk about it at length.  But as a matter of fact, before
the 15th some equipment was taken from the church.  I do confirm that
I wrote this, but this is on the basis of all the information I had as
to what happened in that location, sir.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Microphone, please.  Microphone, please.
MR. POGNON:
Excuse me.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Sentence is incomplete.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   You were talking about the information at your disposal, and the
information at your disposal says that Father Seromba was helped by
gendarmes to go into the church; is that correct?
A.   Well, the first series of information say that Seromba took part in
the meeting, talked about the attack of the Tutsi at the church.  I
talked about the Tutsi briefly and I said that the gendarmes came on
the 12th and the gendarmes would help kill, as it was said.  The
gendarmes couldn't have body searched those people without the
presence of Father Seromba.  This is why I am saying that Seromba was
present.
Q.   Do you mean that the fact that the priest went to get some religious
equipment from the church and the fact that he was accompanied by
gendarmes and the fact that the people in the church were body
searched are one and the same thing?  Is that what you are saying?
A.   I don't understand your question, sir.  I don't understand your
question.  Could you kindly reformulate your question clearly.
Q.   My question is, on the basis of your letter of confession, you said,
after having decided to demolish the church, they went to seek Father
Seromba for him to take out religious equipment, and that with the
assistance of the gendarmes that were there.  This is what you say in
your letter.  Now, on the basis of this particular fact, my first
question that you didn't answer is as follows.  Who are those people
that made the decision to demolish the church and who went to get
Father Seromba for him to take out the religious equipment from the
church?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, you asked this question once.  He didn't answer.  Witness
said to you that he was not there.  He was not there.  He was told
these things.  Why do you insist on asking him questions on things
that he didn't see?  He just told you what he was told.  It is not
pertinent for this Chamber.
MR. POGNON:
Most obliged, Your Honour.  I shall proceed.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Now, still you writing:  "He came" -- that is Father Seromba -- "and
talked to several persons who were in the backyard at the spot that I
was, as I did in my last letter (sic).  If you decided to demolish the
church, go ahead, the equipment is there.  It is not more precious
than the life of the people in the church."  Did you say so?  Do you
remember having said so or written that?
A.   Yes, sir, I do agree.  Let me explain, if I may.  Do you want me to
explain?
Q.   I am only waiting for you to explain.  I am sure the Chamber also --
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, could you explain what happened?
THE WITNESS:
On the 15th -- we're talking about him talking to people in the back
where I was myself.  It is the place in which I said that I arrived at
the backyard and we wanted to kill some people.  The gendarmes stopped
us.  When he was told that people were going to spend the night at the
church, he was also told that the operations would continue the next
day.  They talked to each other.  I wouldn't know what they said and
nobody told me what they said to each other.  They talked to each
other, one by one, and then we went home.  Now, so far as religious
objects are concerned, I don't know what objects it was a question of,
but I know that they didn't agree about guarding the refugees.
Now, the religious objects not being more precious than the lives of
the people in the church, I was asked to explain what happened.  I
didn't know that I was going to come here to testify for the Defence
or the prosecutor.  Now, when the prosecutor told me that if I didn't
explain clearly what events took place, the prosecutor threatened to
put me in the first category.  Seromba's brother, moreover, proposed
to give me some money to testify in favour of Seromba.  This is why I
tried to change what I had said before, but the truth is not that.  So
that what is in the letter here is not contradictory to what I said --
is not contradictory to the truth that I have always said before this
Chamber.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Thank you.  I commend you for having risen against the threat of the
Prosecutor and Seromba's offer.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.
A.   I am not talking about this Prosecutor here.  It is the prosecutor in
Rwanda, not the Prosecutor of this Tribunal.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much for that explanation.
Mr. Pognon, would you like to tender this as a document in the file,
if you may?
MR. TOWNSEND:
If I could help identify the document while the witness is reading it.
Your Honours, this would be CNJ's Rwandan statement of 30 November
, a one-page document, original in Kinyarwanda, bearing the
reference number K0334080.  The French translation of which comprises
three pages, referenced K0335025, the last page bearing 5027.  No
objection to its admission under seal.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Prosecutor, for that information.  The letter is dated 30th
November 2001.
Witness, do you recognise this document?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I do recognise this document, Your Honour.  Let me add one or two
words on this document, if I may, that is, with your permission.  When
I wrote this document -- when I wrote this document, I was under
rather precarious circumstances.  Félicien Ntibanoga, Seromba's
brother, proposed to give me some money if I testified for Seromba.  I
did say so in my testimony, so far as ******* was concerned.  And as I
was going to testify, I was in danger of being imprisoned.  I wrote
this letter as though it was a safety valve, and if I were to testify
for Seromba.  So I wanted to use that money that was promised me.  I
wrote a letter to apologise about what I said in the letter.  I'm
saying this to the Chamber here, so that this is not the truth.  I
simply wanted to make use of the testimony in favour of Seromba.  This
is why I made such a statement in this document.  I simply wanted to
testify in favour of Seromba.  This is why I made this statement.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Witness, for this explanation.
Pognon, Counsel Pognon, do you want to say something?
MR. POGNON:
No.  I want specific mention to be made of this statement.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, this is in the record.  This is to underscore the statement made
by the witness.  Very well.  The seriousness of this document dated
the 30th of November 2001 is noted.  The references there have been
given by the Prosecutor, and this is admitted as evidence of D. 42, A
and B, in Kinyarwanda and French, and this document is placed under
seal.  Mr. Pognon.
(Exhibit No. D. 42A and D. 42B admitted, under seal)
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Since we haven't concluded, I have a small question concerning this
document as well.  When I
read -- when I read the first part of the sentence that you wrote that
the people took the decision to destroy the church, they went to seek
Seromba with the help of the gendarmes to take out the religious
equipment.  I'm talking from memory, but isn't that what you said?
Now, when I read that part of the sentence, the explanation you gave
was that those were information coming from a third party because you
were not there; is that correct?
A.   (No interpretation)
Q.   Now, I went down to read the rest of the sentence, and the rest of
the sentence talked about what you said Father Seromba said concerning
the removal of the equipment; in other words, that the religious
equipment was not more important than the lives of the people in the
church.  The explanation that you gave me was that you yourself were
very near the spot at which you heard those utterances and that you
heard those utterances.  Now, what is the linkage, what is the
linkage, the link that you establish between what you've said and what
was told you, since you say you were not there?  What is the
connection between what you said and what you heard and what was told
you?
A.   Thank you, sir.  Now, to say that I was informed by a third party
about the fact that there was a meeting on the 11th, on Monday, 11th,
I do confirm that that meeting took place.  It took place, according
to the information I have.  Now, as far as the statement made by
Father Seromba is concerned, I explained the reason why I made that
statement.  I recognise that I made a mistake.  I was faulty (sic).  I
made that statement because of money that I wanted, and I told the
Rwandan jurisdiction so.
Counsel, I have given you the explanations I have, and I am telling
you that the meeting took place.  Seromba was there, took part in the
meeting.  Now, so far as the very statements are concerned, I made
them because of money.  I wanted to trick the judicial system, and
I've apologised for that.
Q.   Now, do you think that Seromba said that the lives of people and the
Tutsi in the church are not more important than the religious objects,
was that a statement in favour of Seromba?  Was it to defend Seromba?
A.   I think you want me to say that that was the case so that you will
relieve him, but that is not the case.  I made a statement
contradictory to what happened.  I was afraid that if I did not
testify in favour of Seromba, I would not get the money that was
promised me.  I therefore thought that I would use that money and use
it if I were to be in prison for several years.  That was a trick I
was going to play against the judicial system in Rwanda.  That was a
lie, and I apologise for it.  I continue to apologise for that lie.
Q.   Where's the truth then, Witness?
A.   I explained my part of the truth.  Seromba played a role in the
massacres in that location.  So far as my statements are concerned,
that is not the case.  Did he not make those statements?  I said he
said so because I was expecting some money.
Q.   Thank you very much.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, does the Prosecutor have any questions for the witness?
MR. TOWNSEND:
Yes, Your Honour.  I don't expect to be long, but I do have some
redirect examination.
(Pages 1 to 22 by S. Eboe-Osuji)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, how long do you anticipate taking for your re-
examination?
MR. TOWNSEND:
I have five past the hour.  I think I can finish in less than 20
minutes, Your Honours, 20, 25 minutes, maximum, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are now going to take the 15-minute break, and in 15 minutes we
will resume with these proceedings.  I also will have some brief
questions for this witness. These proceedings are adjourned. (Court
recessed at 1105H to 1130H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The proceedings are resumed.  Before we give the floor to the
Prosecutor, I simply wanted to seek some clarification from the
witness.
Mr. Witness, can you tell us how many seats, approximately, were there
in Nyange church?
THE WITNESS:
There were many benches.  There was a row for women and girls that was
on the right-hand side; and then on the left-hand side there were
places for men.  There was a bench close to the altar where the
fathers and assistants could sit; also there were children who sat
near the altar and on the steps to the altar, whenever there was a
celebration or a large crowd in the church, on the left-hand side,
near the large door, right near the altar, there was other seats for
those people.  Now, near the bell there were also other spots.  It was
elevated, and there were also seats there -- not the bell, but another
place which was elevated, there were also seats and in all of these
places people in the church could be seated.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
But you are not in a position to give us an approximate figure, is
that correct, Witness, with regard to the number of seats in the
church?
THE WITNESS:
I could try to estimate Nyange church, and I would say that there were
between 1,000 and 1,400 seats -- or, rather, between 1,000 or 1,400
people could be in the church, either seated or standing.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Thank you, Witness.
Mr. Prosecutor, you have the floor for your redirect of this witness.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Thank you, Your Honours.
I would ask for the assistance of the registry.  I would like to show
the witness another Rwandan statement, Your Honours.
For the record, Your Honours, this is a statement of the witness, CNJ,
of 25 July 2004.  The original of which is in Kinyarwanda, composes
three pages, and there is a translation of that document both into
French and English.  This document was not put yet into evidence by
counsel.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Mr. Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
I simply wanted to respond to what the Prosecutor just said.  This was
not tendered into evidence because we saw that this document is a
reply to the documents that were used to question the witness.  So
this is quite normal that this situation stands as it is.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Mr. Prosecutor.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Your Honour, I'm admitting them for the purpose of showing a prior
consistent statement, in light of the impeachment during cross-
examination.  That's my purpose, and I'll put a question to the
witness.
RE-EXAMINATION
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   Witness, before you are the three versions of your 25 July 2004
statement.  Could you look at the Kinyarwanda copy and tell us if the
signature is yours and if it is your statement of 25 July 2004?
A.   I wrote this letter myself, indeed.
Q.   Is that letter in your own hand?  Did you do the writing yourself, in
other words?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And the previous statements that were admitted in handwriting in
Kinyarwanda, were those also written by your own hand?
A.   All of those letters are mine and they were all written by my hand.
Q.   With regard to the statement before you of 25 July 2004, do you, in
that statement, make reference to the events of 15 April 19 -- I'm
sorry, 15 April 19 April 1994?
A.   When I wrote that letter it was upon a request from the *******
prosecutor's office.  My case was being handled by that office.  They
wrote the letter to combine everything that I had written in previous
letters, especially as regards the events that took place on the 15th
and 16th April 1994, the events that occurred at Nyange church.
Q.   So, with regard or in comparison to your previous statements in
Kinyarwanda to the Rwandan authorities, would you say that that
statement of 25 July 2004 is less complete or more complete than the
previous statements?
A.   Thank you.  The confession and guilty plea contain some revelations
and sometimes things are not brought out.  I would ask you to consider
this letter as the most complete of all.  This is the one that can
replace all the others that I wrote.  I should like to ask the
Tribunal, therefore, to consider this letter as the most complete.  If
they want to attribute any probative value to any of the documents, I
would think that this would be the one that would have the most
probative value, simply because everything I wrote previously is
reflected in this letter.  It reflects all of the information that was
taken down in the previous letters.
Q.   Would you characterise your previous letter, that is the letters
before July 25, 2004, as exhaustive and complete?
A.   As I explained before, all the letters I wrote prior to this one were
incomplete.  However, this letter, although it does not give an
exhaustive account of all the events, it does reflect more
systematically how the events unfolded. With regard to the letters Mr.
Pognon referred to, I had told you that I was promised money in
exchange for them and I even received a small sum, which I accepted,
and subsequently wrote a letter for, and that was a letter in favour
of Seromba.  I should also like to tell you that the person who
offered me that money received a copy of the letter, and so the person
I gave the letter to could come before this Tribunal and show you the
copy they received.
Q.   Can you give us an estimate of the number of such statements or
letters that you wrote to the prosecutor in Rwanda?
A.   There were many letters; I don't remember how many.  I would have to
have all of the copies in order to tell you, but I think there are
more than five or six of them in all.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Your Honours, I would move at this time to admit the statement of CNJ
dated 25 July 2004 into evidence.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Interpreter, we are hearing the interpretation in Kinyarwanda.
If you could please change the channel.  As such, Mr. Prosecutor,
could you repeat your remark for purposes of interpretation?
MR. TOWNSEND:
Be my pleasure.
Your Honour, at this time I would move to admit into evidence the
statement of CNJ dated
July 2004 as a Prosecution exhibit.  I think we are at 26, if I'm
not mistaken, and I'll identify that for the record.  It's in
Kinyarwanda original three pages, bearing the reference K0299037, last
page bearing 9039; in French, K0331288, last page bearing 1291; and
finally the English translation, reference K0331968, last page ending
.  And that would be admitted under seal.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Are there any objections from the Defence?
MR. POGNON:
No.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  The document that has just been identified by the
Prosecutor, which is a letter dated 25 July 2004, is tendered,
admitted and marked as Prosecution Exhibit P26. A, B and C and said
document shall be placed under seal.  A, B, and C correspond with the
three versions, Kinyarwanda, French and English.
(Exhibit No. P. 26A, P. 26B, P. 26C admitted, under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, you may proceed.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Thank you very much, Your Honours.  I seek to do the same thing with
the statement by the witness given to investigators of the ICTR.  So
there is only a French original and an English translation.  The date
of the ICTR statement, Your Honours, is  of August 2002.  If
it can be, again, just to confirm with the Defence and shown to the
witness, and I'll be asking the witness if he can acknowledge the
signature on the French original as being true and his.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   Witness CNJ, taking a look at that statement, the French original, do
you notice a signature at the bottom?
A.   Yes, that is my signature.  But with regard to this statement, in its
English version, I believe, there is a mistake with regard to my
father's name.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Regarding your father's name, you can write that down and if it's with
regard to the other documents just say so, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, Madam President.  I was saying that on the English version,
the translation of that statement, there is a mistake regarding my
father's name.  I also see other mistakes.  There are some small
mistakes in the French version.  I see that the mistakes I asked for
them to correct were not corrected.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   In that statement you gave to the ICTR in August 2002, did you speak
about the events at Nyange and particularly what you witnessed with
regard to Seromba?
A.   Yes, I testified about the events I was an eyewitness to at that
point in time.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Your Honours, he's pointed out a few mistakes, including something
that relates to something that would reveal his identity, so I am
going to have to come back to that in a closed session and at that
time move it in evidence.  I'm going to move on to something in the
meantime.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  You may proceed.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   I'm going to ask you a question about a statement that was put into
evidence by the Defence.  It's now Exhibit D. 40.  It's a statement
that you believe you authored in 1999, although the date was not
legible on it.  And in that statement you said that you arrived at
Nyange at around -- I should quote -- "about", it's "vers" in French,
"around 1430".  My question to you is, what did you mean "about" or
"around", or the French "vers 1430", when you gave that statement?
A.   As I explained, I wanted to speak briefly about the events.  I didn't
use the most correct punctuation.  I mentioned the fact that people
were throwing stones at about 2 p.m., but other events occurred, even
later on.  So in that statement I briefly gave an account of the
events, and when I mentioned 2 p.m. I had said that there were already
many dead bodies, so in that letter I did not explain everything.  I
did not arrive on site at about 2 p.m.  I simply was giving an account
of what had happened at around
p.m.
Q.   My remaining questions may reveal the identity of this witness and I
only have a few, so at this time I move for a closed session to
protect the identity of the witness, Your Honour.  I estimate only 5
or 10 minutes and then I will be concluded.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Pognon, do you have any objection regarding that motion?
MR. POGNON:
No.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well. We are now going to move into closed session.  We apologise
to the members of the public; however, this is necessary to protect
the identity of this witness and this is done in the interest of
justice.  This is an exception, however a necessary one.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 35] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the
session was heard in camera)
(Pages 23 to 27 by R. Lear)
(Court resumed at 1510H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Audience called to order.  Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen.  This
morning when we left, the Prosecutor had made an objection to the
question raised by Counsel Pognon who wanted to know from the witness
whether he had said as follows: "We finally went into the presbytery,
but we did not kill anybody.  The gendarmes prevented us from killing
the girls we found therein."
Having deliberated, the Chamber was of the opinion that the question
had already been raised and that the witness had answered the question
and, as far as the issues concerned that do not fall within the
framework of the cross-examination and the re-examination, it would be
difficult for us to admit questions that are without the framework of
the supplementary, additional questioning there.
Mr. Pognon, do you have any more questions?
MR. POGNON:
No, madam, I do not have any more questions.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.  So there are no more questions for this witness.
Witness, we therefore thank you for coming to testify here before this
Tribunal.  We thank you for having been as kind as to answer all the
questions put to you.  We want to bid you farewell at this time.
THE WITNESS:
I thank you, Madam President.
(Witness excused)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, is this the last witness that you wanted to call
before this Chamber?
MS. ARBIA:
Yes, Madam President, Your Honours, that was the last witness.
With your leave, I should like to draw your attention to one or two
things that are pending and, with your leave, I would pray that we
resolve those issues at this time.  These are the --
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, probably, we should rise and immediately enter into
another session that will be a status conference, or would you like it
to --
MS. ARBIA:
With your leave, may I explain, Madam President.  These are two
evidences.  The first is P. 2 stroke or dash 29 that was
professionally admitted; that was Rémy Sahiri's evidence during his
testimony at the 27 September two-zero-four testimony.  The witness
did commit himself or herself to bringing in an original document,
which was done.  This is the certified copy notarised, and we are
seeking to tender this document, with your leave.
The Defence has already been served with the document and, with your
leave, we should like to discover the document.  It is a document of
three pages called K0506964 and K0506964K (sic).  This is the
invitation for the inauguration of the Nyange church.  On the first
page there is a picture of the church that was reflected in the
photocopy.  Now, we have a notarised copy.  There is also a receipt
from the investigator that testified here, Rémy Sahiri, who certified
the payment of the fees for the notarisation of the document.
I should like to pray that this document be tendered as evidence.  It
could be P. 2/29 bis, if the Chamber may so accept.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Are there any objections from Defence?
MR. POGNON:
No objections, except that we did not receive the notarised and
certified photocopies that madam, the prosecutor, is referring to.
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, may I tender to Defence this document?  It was filed
yesterday; probably the registrar didn't have the time to communicate
or serve this document to Defence.
Madam President, let me just make a little correction.  The copy was
served by hand yesterday and we also received the acknowledgment of
reception, according to what my assistant is telling me.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I did not sight any receipt about any copy
whatsoever.  This morning when we arrived Mr. Vincent showed me a
photo, which is certified, of the Nyange church that he intended to
file, but I did not receive any document.  I didn't sign any receipt
of acknowledgment; none at all.
MS. ARBIA:
Very well, then, Madam President, probably we can show this document
to Defence and, later on, we can make sure as to whether the document
was served.
MR. POGNON:
We did not receive anything, Madam President.  We cannot be shown a
document here.  And there's nothing that could be said by the
prosecutor in this respect.  We have not received anything.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, we have just tendered this document to Defence.  Could you,
Defence, please look at the document and tell us what your opinion is?
MR. POGNON:
Neither myself nor my assistant signed any acknowledgment of receipt.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
No, we simply wanted to know if you’d taken cognisance of this
document.  This is the document you claimed the last time, because the
document that was filed was provisionally admitted whilst we waited
for the original copies.  Have you taken cognisance of that document?
MR. POGNON:
Yes, we have taken cognisance of it but, whatever the case is, this
document has just been given to us.  Even if it's a document that was
filed and was certified, we have just received it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, indeed, we only received this document yesterday.  I do not
understand why you did not receive the document.  But we simply wanted
to show it to you so that you take cognisance of it and tell us
whether you oppose the tendering of the document.  This will be
clarified later on.  The -- we will clarify as to whether the
Prosecutor served it to you or not, but you have taken cognisance of
the document.  What is your opinion?
MR. POGNON:
All we are saying is that the document should have been served us.  As
far as its tendering is concerned, we have no objections, but it
should have been communicated to us.  We are saying that we have not
been served with this document, and we are here in the Court and we
want the document to be served us.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, do you have a copy of that document for Defence?
MS. ARBIA:
Yes, Madam President, we were just cross-checking because the document
has been filed; I am sure it was done yesterday.  But we can put at
the disposal of Defence a copy of this document within the next 60
seconds.  There's only one page missing.  So, with your indulgence,
several more minutes we will take to get the document at the disposal
of Defence.  Yes, I have all the documents and I should like the
registrar to kindly serve this document to Defence.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Could you kindly, registrar, serve this document to Defence.
Very well.  The document reflecting Nyange church -- and this is
partly an invitation for the inauguration the church -- this document
is admitted under code P. 2/29 bis, P. 2/29 bis.
(Exhibit No. P. 2/29 bis admitted)
MS. ARBIA:
Most obliged, Madam President.  There is another little issue.  This
is, rather, a matter of cross-checking.  This is P. 18 that was
tendered in the language in which it was available.  It was in
Italian.  It's an article in Italian.  I cross-checked this with the
registrar to see whether a translation has been made of it.  I've not
been told whether it's been done and, probably, before we lay our case
we should like to verify whether the document could be translated into
French at least, because the parties concerned are French speaking.
It is document P. 18.  Most obliged.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Registrar, could you ensure the translation into French of this
document; that is, document P. 18.
MS. ARBIA:
Most obliged, Madam President, Your Honours.  I do not have any more
pending issues.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Madam Prosecutor.
Now, does Defence have any questions to raise because we shall now
move on to the status conference if there are no other problems to be
resolved here?
If there are no further issues, we shall now rise and come back at 16
hours, that's four o'clock, for a status conference.  We will also
have a representative of the witness protection section that we have
invited to possibly answer certain questions.
I want to thank all of you.  We shall now rise.  The status conference
will take place at four o'clock.
(Court adjourned to a status conference at 1528H)
(Pages 36 to 39 by Verna Butler)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Shannon Eboe-Osuji, Rex Lear and Verna Butler, Official Court
Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, do
hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-entitled
cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was taken in
shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer; that the
foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of said
proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________ Shannon Eboe-Osuji
___________________________ Rex Lear
___________________________ Verna Butler
