P R O C E E D I N G S
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The proceedings are called to order.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  This morning we are beginning
with a slight delay.  It would appear that -- it appears that the
interpreters were not ready at 8:45.  I would like to remind everyone
that we begin at 8:45, and that everyone should make every effort to
see to it that the proceedings begin at the scheduled time.  I,
therefore, call on each and every one of us here to take the necessary
steps to be here at the agreed hour.  I thank you all.
Good morning, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We will continue with your examination-in-chief this morning and the
Prosecutor will, therefore, continue asking you questions.  You are
still under oath and at present we are in open session.
Counsel for the Prosecution, please; you have the floor.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Good morning, Madam President, Your Honours; good morning, Counsel for
the Defence; good morning, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning.
WITNESS TBJ
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF (continued)
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Witness, when we took the adjournment at five minutes past 5:00 you
had just told this Chamber that Accused Gacumbitsi arrived at your
trading centre in a double-cabin pickup with several people, and you
had just given us the names of three policemen.  Witness, can you now
tell this Chamber whether he was only in the company of these three
policemen or whether there were other people not known to you?
A.   He was also with other policemen who I do not remember.
Q.   Now, to the best of your recollection, Witness, how many people were
in the bourgmestre's entourage, other than the three you have
mentioned by name?
A.   Apart from the three persons I mentioned, there was the driver, whose
name I do not remember.  There were other policemen.  I think there
were two or three other policemen.
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  Now, can you tell Their Lordships what the
Accused, Sylvestre Gacumbitsi, did upon arriving at your location?
A.   On his arrival, he opened the door of his car.  He alighted from the
car.  He leaned on the door and he asked a question to those who were
drinking beer with me.  He said, "You are drinking beer and are not
participating in the activities geared towards fighting against the
enemy".
Q.   Now, is that all he said, Witness?
A.   He added -- well, following the question put to him as to what the
activities or fighting the enemy were, he said it was driving the
Tutsis away from where they were, looting their property and
destroying their property.
Q.   And did he add anything to that or was that all that Gacumbitsi said?
A.   He said that we had to carry out the instructions he had just given
us and that we had to do so quickly.
Q.   Now, can you tell Their Lordships how many people Gacumbitsi was
addressing at that trading centre where you were located?
A.   I could say that, well, since I did not count them, there were about
a hundred people.
Q.   And how long, Witness, did Gacumbitsi stay at that location?
A.   He stayed at that location for about 15 minutes.
Q.   And in those 15 minutes, Witness, is that all he said, that you
should drive Tutsi away, destroy their property, loot their property
and start acting immediately, or did he say anything else?
A.   He also told us that we had to come after him to join other people to
whom he was giving the same instructions as he passed by; we had to
join those people in order to help them to commit such acts.
Q.   And did Accused Gacumbitsi specify where you were supposed to follow
him and/or join him?
A.   He simply told us that we had to meet him at Kigarama, but when we
arrived at Kigarama we noticed that he had already left from there.
Q.   Now, Witness, you have told this Chamber that the Accused was
travelling in a double-cabin pickup vehicle and that he asked you to
follow him and join him in Kigarama.  Did you also travel by means of
a vehicle, or did you walk?
A.   Those of us who went to Kigarama went on foot.  We were many and,
therefore, would not have been able to enter or travel in the same
vehicle.
Q.   And how many were you, Witness?
A.   I have already given you an estimate of how many of us were there.
We were about a hundred people, but a group stayed behind, another
group went.  I would say that those who went were between
people.
Q.   Now, this group of 50 to 60 people that followed the bourgmestre to
Kigarama, were you armed with any weapons?
A.   Yes, we had clubs and machetes.  These are the weapons that I saw.
Of course, there were two guns which two soldiers who were in our
group who were following Gacumbitsi had.  So, these two soldiers had
two guns and there was a number of grenades, but I do not know how
many grenades there were.
Q.   And can you tell us the distance between your location and Kigarama
where you went following the Accused?
A.   Please forgive me; I do not know the distance in kilometres, but I
will give you an estimate.  In this regard I would say the distance
was about ten kilometres.
Q.   If you can't estimate in kilometres, Witness, how long did it take
you on foot from your location to Kigarama, how many minutes?
A.   We met people whom he had positioned at certain places and we moved
along with those persons, so we met persons at various locations,
persons whom the Accused had positioned there and we walked with them,
so it took us about one hour to get to Kigarama.
Q.   Witness, when you say you met groups of people on the way whom the
Accused had positioned, what exactly did you mean -- do you mean?
A.   To be clear, we did not have to waste time on the way and we had to
be a great number of assailants in order to carry out the attack.
Q.   So, can you tell Their Lordships, by the time you arrived in
Kigarama, how big was your group of assailants?
A.   Once more, I will give you an estimate since I did not count the
number of people who were with me.  So, I would say that at that time
our group comprised between 10 people.
Q.   So it's correct to suggest, Witness, that the people you left your
location with were approximately 60, so you picked up over a hundred
people en route; is that correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   Now, can you tell Their Lordships what transpired when you left
Kigarama?
A.   When we arrived in Kigarama, we went to the house of a certain
Callixte.  It was said that that was the home of a Tutsi.  All the
assailants went to that place.  There we did not find anyone.  The
doors of the house were closed.  We had to force the doors open in
order to loot the property in the house.  While some of us were busy
looting, a group in which I was, a group which comprised about 30
people, or should I say 40 people, saw the place where the cows of
that man were and we went to get the cows which we took along with us.
Q.   Now, Witness, can you tell us who led you to the homestead of
Callixte?
A.   It was a young man.  His only name I know is Bamenya.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Could the Kinyarwanda booth please spell that name for the record?
THE KINYARWANDA INTERPRETER:
Bamenya is spelt as follows: B-A-M-E-N-Y-A, Bamenya.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   And when you went to attack Callixte's homestead, what was your
intention, Witness?
A.   Our intention was to carry out the instructions given by Bourgmestre
Gacumbitsi, in particular, to commit killings, but since we did not
find anyone, we were not able to kill at that place.
Q.   Now, around what time of the day was this attack on the 14th of April
, Witness?
A.   I told you that I can only give you estimates.  I did not have a
watch with me, so I would say that it was between 2 p.m. and 3 p.m.
Q.   So, Witness, did your group of attackers, in addition to looting
Callixte's property, destroy his homestead?
A.   Yes, the group looted and at the same time destroyed.
Q.   Now, in the course of your testimony yesterday, Witness, you
mentioned that your group or that you participated in acts of looting
and destruction at the property or home one Louis Buhanda.  My
question is: when did this take place?
A.   It was before we went to Kigarama.  A man who claimed to be sent by
Gacumbitsi divided us into two groups: one group left, and the other
stayed on the spot where we were.  The group that stayed destroyed the
property of Ludoviko Buhanda.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
If that name could be spelt, please.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Buhanda was spelt yesterday, Your Honours.  It is B-U-H-A-N-D-A.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   So, Witness, is it your evidence that prior to departure for Kigarama
on foot you first indulged in acts of pillage and destruction in your
locality?
A.   That's correct.
Q.   Now, you have mentioned an unnamed person, who had received
instructions from Gacumbitsi.  What is the name of that person?
A.   It was Juvenal Ntamwemezi, who was nicknamed “Sergeant”.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours that name appears at No. 263 of the Prosecutor's list of
proper nouns.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Now, do you know where Ntamwemezi, Juvenal received his special
instructions from Accused Gacumbitsi?
A.   I was not there when Gacumbitsi gave him instructions, but I heard
the person concerned say that he had received instructions from
Gacumbitsi.
Q.   Now, what was the occupation of Ntamwemezi, Juvenal?
A.   He was a teacher at the private secondary school of Nyakarambi.
Q.   And was he with you at your trading centre on the morning of the 14th
of April 1994 when Accused Gacumbitsi arrived?
A.   Yes, we were together.
Q.   And at what point did you and others, including Ntamwemezi, Juvenal,
attack the home of Louis Buhanda?
A.   We attacked the house immediately after Mr. Gacumbitsi left, at the
times I have already mentioned.
Q.   And what was your intention, Witness?
A.   Our intentions in launching this attack were to execute the orders or
wishes of Mr. Gacumbitsi which were to kill, destroy, loot and
perpetrate other criminal acts.
Q.   Now, in the course of the attack on Louis Buhanda's homestead, did
you kill anyone, Witness?
A.   No, neither myself nor anyone from the group of attackers killed
anyone because no one was there.
Q.   Now, Witness, other than these two incidents of destruction and
pillage which you have just told Their Lordships, did you participate
in any other criminal acts?
A.   I participated in acts of destruction and pillage.  Those are the
only activities I participated in.
Q.   And my question was, Witness: are there any other acts, other than
the two you have just mentioned, that you participated in?
A.   No.
Q.   Now, during the month of April 1994, subsequent to the 14th of April,
did you have occasion to meet or otherwise see Bourgmestre Gacumbitsi
again?
A.   No, I did not see him again.
Q.   And did you stay in Rwanda or did you flee Rwanda subsequent to the
th of April 1994?
A.   I stayed in Rwanda until the 29th and it was on the 29th that I left
into exile with other persons, and we went to Tanzania.
Q.   Now, prior to your flight into exile on the 29th of April 1994, do
you know whether Tutsi homesteads were attacked and people murdered in
your native secteur?
A.   Well, I can speak of what happened in my cellule.  People were killed
-- and many people were killed, and this is something that I
personally know.
Q.   Now, prior to these events, Witness, can you tell Their Lordships, to
the best of your recollection, the Tutsi population in your native
cellule?
A.   I can give you a figure, but I did not go out and conduct a census.
This would an approximation.  I would say there were approximately ten
households, ten, 15 households, and I would not be able to give you an
approximation as to the exact number of individuals or the exact
composition of these households.
Q.   Now, prior to your flight into exile, Witness, on the 29th of April
, these ten homesteads or households in your cellule, were they
still there or had they been destroyed?
A.   Well, I didn't verify it, but all of the houses that I was able to
see had been destroyed and the members of these families had been
killed during the events.
Q.   Witness, it's now nine years after these tragic events we are
recounting in this Chamber.  Now, if you met Sylvestre Gacumbitsi,
would you be able to recognise him?
A.   Yes, I believe I'd be able to recognise him.
Q.   Witness, I would like you to stand up and look around the courtroom
and tell us whether the person you call Sylvestre Gacumbitsi is in
this Chamber.
A.   Yes, I have located him.
Q.   Please stay standing up and tell Their Lordships: is he to your left
or your right as you face the Bench?
A.   He is to my left.
Q.   Now, can you tell Their Lordships what he is wearing?
A.   He is wearing a jacket that seems to be khaki-ish in colour.  I am
not really sure about the colour, but he is wearing a white shirt and
a tie.  The tie seems to have green dots and he is also wearing
glasses.  He is a tall man.  You can see that from here.
Q.   And is he sitting alone or is he sitting with other people in his
row?
A.   Well, as I look at the row where he is sitting, he is alone there,
but there seems to be someone else sitting there and they seem to be a
security officer.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, if it pleases you to reflect on the record that the
witness has positively identified Accused Sylvestre Gacumbitsi.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber is of the view that the witness has recognised the
accused person.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Witness, please be seated.
A.   Thank you.
Q.   Finally, Witness, can you tell Their Lordships why you indulged in
criminal acts of pillage and destruction on the 14th of April 1994?
A.   The reason why I participated in these criminal act, I can speak to
this but briefly, giving you almost an indirect answer, and I would
like to ask you to try and understand me.  First of all, we had to
implement the instructions that Gacumbitsi had given us.  In view of
the fact that Gacumbitsi was a leader, an official, that he was in
charge of the commune and in view of the fact that he had policemen at
his beck and call under his orders, I would say that they were almost
his army and they had guns and we were afraid of guns.  To this, you
must add that Gacumbitsi was an intellectual, someone who had received
education and we felt -- we thought that he must have had his reasons
for thinking in that way, and taking also into consideration that he
is a tall man.  I was afraid, and I thought to myself that I should
not remain behind and that I should also participate in these
activities so that subsequently I could not be blamed or prosecuted
for not having participated in those activities.
Q.   And, Witness, can you tell this Chamber why you confessed to your
crimes?
A.   Yes.  First of all, I admitted to my crimes because my conscience was
bothering me.  I felt I was a criminal and it was proper for me to ask
for forgiveness because I had participated in criminal acts.
Moreover, it was important for the truth to come out in broad daylight
with respect to the events of 1994 in Rwanda, because there are people
who were not there and who do know what happened.  We are Rwandans and
it is our duty to speak about these events so that Rwandans can once
again come together and live in harmony without any suspicion.
MR. KAREGYESA:
I have no further questions for this witness, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I would like to thank the Prosecutor.
Good day.  I believe it is Ms. Mbattang who is going to cross-examine
the witness.
MS. MBATTANG:
Yes, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You may proceed.
MS. MBATTANG:
Good morning, Madam President; good morning, Your Honours; good
morning, Mr. Prosecutor and all other members of the Court.  Good
morning, Witness TBJ.
To begin, Madam President -- Madam President, to begin I would like to
-- I would like to begin with a closed session because the questions
that I would like to put to the witness might reveal his identity and
might affect the security that he should receive.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, we shall now go into closed session, and we regret to inform the
public of this necessity, but we have to proceed in this manner in
order to protect the witness.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 21] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the session
was heard in camera)
(Pages 1 to 7 by Verna Butler)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, we are in open session.  Do you want to continue with your
cross-examination of the witness?
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Witness TBJ, can you tell this Court whether on the 14th of April
, the conseiller of the secteur was with you or with Mr.
Gacumbitsi?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Has the witness not already answered that question, Counsel?  It seems
to me you have already asked the witness that question.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Witness TBJ, can you tell the Court, when Gacumbitsi arrived at the
bus stop of your centre was Mr. Juvenal already there?
A.   Yes, he was there.
Q.   Witness TBJ, can you tell the Court what Mr. Gacumbitsi said to the
people who were at the bus stop when he arrived?
A.   When he arrived there, Mr. Gacumbitsi asked the people that were
there, "Why are you drinking beer instead of participating in the
struggle against the enemy?"  One of the persons who was there asked
him, "What do you mean by fighting against the enemy?"  And he said,
"It means to kill all the Tutsi, to loot their property and destroy
their property."
MS. MBATTANG:
Madam President, with your leave, I would now like to read previous
statements made by the witness.  I would like to read what he said
with respect to the presence of Mr. Juvenal at the bus stop of their
centre.  Madam President, if you would like to refer to the statement
of May 2003, the witness states as follows in the second paragraph:
"We asked him what needed to be done to fight the enemy and he
answered that it -- fighting the enemy was to kill the people.  Then
he asked a policeman to call Juvenal Ntamwemezi, then he asked someone
to go and call."
If we look at the document that was given to us yesterday, Madam
President, we can see that the witness states as follows in the first
paragraph of the document:  "The people were there -- the people who
were there asked what he meant by fighting, and a policeman who was in
the rear of the vehicle answered that it meant to kill the Tutsi".
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Sorry.  Madam President -- rather, Witness TBJ, you stated earlier
that Mr. Gacumbitsi arrived at the bus stop at your trading centre
with policemen.  What were the policemen wearing?
A.   The policemen were wearing their usual uniforms.
Q.   And what was Mr. Gacumbitsi wearing?
A.   I don't remember exactly what he was wearing, because this happened a
long time ago.
Q.   Were all the policemen armed?
A.   I was able to notice that Berakumenyo was carrying a gun, but I could
not verify and say that people who were sitting in the cabin were also
carrying guns.
Q.   Witness TBJ, was there only one armed policeman?
A.   Yes.  I said that I noticed that Berakumenyo was carrying a gun.
Q.   Witness TBJ, you said that Gacumbitsi left the area before Juvenal
gave you any instructions.  How long did he spend with you?  How much
time did he spend with you?
A.   I stated that he spent 15 minutes with us; this is an approximation.
A.   After Mr. Gacumbitsi left, you stated that first you attacked the
house of Mr. Louis before proceeding onto Kigarama.  At what time did
you attack this house?
A.   The attack against Kigarama -- and this is only an approximation
really -- between 1 p.m. and 3 p.m.  This is only an approximation
because I do not remember the exact time at which the attack took
place.
MS. MBATTANG:
Madam President, I am not referring to the attack on Calixte but the
attack on Louis's, and he testified before this Court that they had
first attacked Mr. Louis's house before going to Calixte's -- to the
house of Calixte.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Maybe the witness had not understood your question.  Counsel would
like to know at what time did you attack Louis or Ludoviko's house?
THE WITNESS:
The attack against Mr. Louis's house.  Thank you for this
clarification.  We launched this attack -- if I were again to make an
approximation, around 11.  This is an approximation, really.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   How long did the attack last?
A.   I wouldn't be able to say how long the attack lasted, because in view
of -- Mr. Ntamwemezi asked us to split into two groups as Mr.
Gacumbitsi had requested, and I was amongst those who left right away,
and this is why I cannot know -- I cannot tell you how long the attack
lasted, that is, the attack led by those who remained there.
Q.   Did you participate in the attack that was launched on Mr. Louis's
house?
A.   Yes.
Q.   At what time did this take place?
A.   I have always told you that I was not wearing a watch and I would not
be able to give you the exact time, but it was around 11.
Q.   How long did the attack last?
A.   I will tell you how long it lasted, but in relation to my -- the time
I left the place, approximately 25 minutes.
Q.   When you reached Mr. Louis's house, was the house empty or was anyone
in it?
A.   When we reached the house, no one was there.
Q.   What did you take out of the house?
A.   As the authorities had asked us, particularly Gacumbitsi's
representative, we looted everything that was in the house.
Q.   I asked you what you took from the house.
A.   We took many things, but I remember that before we went off to
participate in the other attack we had taken some chairs, beds,
clothing, as well as other pieces of furniture.
Q.   You are confirming that you did all of that in 25 minutes?
A.   Yes, I confirm that because we looted things in 25 minutes because
our group was a large group.
Q.   Was -- were all of these items taken to Gacumbitsi?
A.   Gacumbitsi had asked us to take away the property that we were going
to loot, so we took the property -- we looted the property and took it
to our house.
Q.   I would like to return to the bus stop.  Witness TBJ, can you tell
the Court how many persons were at the bus stop when Mr. Gacumbitsi
arrived?
A.   I stand by what I said previously when I said that I was making an
approximation, an estimate.  When I saw those people going to Louis's
house to conduct the attack, I would say that there were approximately
a hundred persons.
Q.   Were all those persons from your cellule?
A.   Some were from my cellule, were from the neighbouring cellule -- the
cellules that neighboured mine -- and they were present there at the
centre.
Q.   Witness TBJ, you told us earlier that Mr. Gacumbitsi spent 15 minutes
with you.  Aside from the instructions that you claim he gave to Mr.
Juvenal, did he make any other recommendations?
A.   He did not give many instructions.  He just asked us to follow him to
Kigarama to participate with other persons he was going to collect
along the way to participate in the attack.
Q.   Witness TBJ, during those 15 minutes, were the bars closed or did
they remain open?
A.   The Accused could not have left until the bar -- until he had made
sure the bars were closed; that is, the bars were closed immediately
before he left.
Q.   Did you receive instructions from soldiers or policemen?
A.   The instructions were given by Mr. Gacumbitsi and they were not
forced by the policeman to follow his instructions.
MS. MBATTANG:
Madam President, with your leave, I would like to read the statement
given by Witness TBJ in May 2003.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, how much longer do you expect to need, because it is now the
time for the break?
MS. MBATTANG:
It will take me at least another 30 or 40 minutes, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
In that case, we are going to take a break.  We will adjourn now and
you can proceed when we resume at 11:15.
MS. MBATTANG:
Therefore, do you want me to wait and to read after the break?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well, very well.  Thank you.
The Court is adjourned for 15 minutes.
(Court recessed from 1105H to 1125H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
This Court is in session.
Counsel, you may proceed.
MS. MBATTANG:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Witness TBJ, can you please tell the Court the person -- the first
person the bourgmestre meets as soon as he reaches secteur -- or
cellule?
A.   What exactly are you referring to?  Are you referring to meetings?
Under what circumstances exactly would the bourgmestre meet someone
for the first time?
MS. MBATTANG:
Madam President, if the bourgmestre comes to a secteur at any point in
time, regardless of whether he is just passing through or if it's a
meeting, if he stops, who is the first person he should meet?  Should
he meet with the secteur chief or the cellule chief or, rather, the
responsable de cellule?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, that's asking the witness to speculate.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, the witness cannot know this.  Are you asking from a protocol
perspective if he is coming to visit an authority?
MS. MBATTANG:
Yes, perhaps.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, in that case, you should put that question to the witness.  I
don't know otherwise.
MS. MBATTANG:
Madam President, maybe I should rephrase my question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, please do.
MS. MBATTANG:
Do you want me to answer the Prosecutor?  Would you like me to respond
to the Prosecutor with respect to what he has just said, because he
said he doesn't understand the meaning of my question?  He said he
doesn’t know why I am putting this question to the witness. That is
what the Prosecutor has just said.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel.
MS. MBATTANG:
Very well, Madam President.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Witness TBJ, when the bourgmestre comes to a cellule, whom should he
meet?
A.   It's difficult for me to answer your question.  I know nothing about
administrative organisation and I have no idea whom the bourgmestre
should meet when he first arrives.
MS. MBATTANG:
Madam President, can the witness tell us what is the distance -- how
far away does the chief or conseiller live with respect to the bus
stop?
THE WITNESS:
Well, of course, I can give an approximation, because I did not
measure the distance on the spot.  I would say that the distance is
approximately 500 metres.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   On the 14th of April, was the conseiller at home when the bourgmestre
arrived?
A.   I ignored where the conseiller was, because I had not seen him on
that day.
Q.   When he arrives in a cellule or in a secteur, if he has instructions
to give, whom will he speak with first?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, first, it's been asked and answered; the witness doesn't
know.  Secondly, it's just asking the witness to speculate.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, you asked the witness earlier whom the bourgmestre would meet
when he arrives in the cellule.  He told you that he had no
understanding of administrative -- organisational understanding and
that he couldn't answer your question.  I think that the question you
just put to him is very similar to the question you put to him
previously.
MS. MBATTANG:
I don't think so, Madam President.  I believe that when he has
instructions to give, whom does he give those instructions to?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, but these are still questions that deal with the organisation of
the administration, and as far as -- it is difficult for the witness
to answer questions that are technical, in my opinion.
Judge Reddy, would you like to add something?
JUDGE REDDY:
Not only that, I think it would also depend on the purpose of his
visit.  If he visited some place on lawful, legitimate business, he
may want to see certain people and observe protocol.  But if he has
gone there to incite people to kill and to plunder and to rob, he may
want to see an entirely different kind of people.  I think I know what
you are getting at, but isn't that -- isn't that the position?  I
think your co-counsel understands that.  So, really, it's a pretty
futile line of questioning, as far as I can see.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Witness TBJ, what was Monsieur Juvenal in your cellule?
A.   Juvenal was nothing in my cellule, but he was an intellectual.  Since
he was a teacher, he was an intellectual.
Q.   Witness TBJ, if -- you said that Juvenal was an intellectual, did you
obey his orders in that capacity or did you think that the orders he
gave were legitimate or illegitimate?
A.   The fact that he was an intellectual is a fact that I acknowledge,
and I also acknowledge -- recognise that he exercised coercion over us
to do what he had asked us to do, because he claimed that his orders
came from Gacumbitsi, Gacumbitsi.
Q.   TBJ, you mean to say that you did not hear Gacumbitsi personally give
orders?
A.   I personally heard Gacumbitsi give orders.  However, that young man
Juvenal coerced members of the population by saying he'd received
certain orders from Gacumbitsi.
Q.   TBJ, can you confirm the distance between Kigarama and the Rwanteru
bus stand, bus stop?
A.   I told you, and I repeat, that I can only make an estimate.  That
distance is about ten kilometres.  It might well be less.  You must
understand that is only an estimate -- estimation.
Q.   TBJ, who told you that the bourgmestre left your centre for Kigarama?
A.   No one told me.  I saw myself -- for myself.  I saw him get in his --
get into his vehicle and depart in the Kigarama direction.
Q.   So, it's merely a supposition on your part that he went to Kigarama
after leaving the place where you were?
A.   Yes.
Q.   You said before that Juvenal split the market group in two, part went
-- one part went to Kigarama and the other part stayed on the spot.
Was it Juvenal who told you to go and operate in Kigarama?
A.   Gacumbitsi himself told us to attack Kigarama, but since we wanted
first to loot the property nearest to us, we went to loot at Louis's.
That is when Juvenal said that he didn't agree and that one group
should follow Gacumbitsi while the other group stayed on the spot.
Q.   Did the group that followed Gacumbitsi -- was the group that followed
Gacumbitsi organised?
A.   Yes, we were following orders, the orders and wishes of Mr.
Gacumbitsi.  He had, moreover, before leaving, informed the group of
what he wanted.
Q.   TBJ, were there roadblocks between your secteur -- between your
secteur and Gikarama (sic)?
A.   No.  There were no roadblocks on the road from the bus stand to
Kigarama, but near the trading centre on the road to Rusumo, which is
a tarred road, there was a roadblock.
Q.   TBJ, do you confirm that you took one hour to cover the ten
kilometres from your bus stand to Gikarama (sic), whereas on the way
you were obliged to stop, to consult, to exchange views, to consult
with the other groups there?
A.   I did not tell you that I was wearing a wristwatch to tell you
exactly how long it was or what the time was.  I gave you a
guesstimate.
Q.   And did Mr. Gacumbitsi, in the end, go to Gikarama (sic)?
A.   Yes, in the end, he did.
Q.   And you?
A.   I know that because he contacted other people that we had to see on
the road, and when we arrived at Gikarama (sic) we found them there;
that is to say that he had spoken with those people before we arrived.
And the people we found on the spot at that place told us that they
had been ordered by Gacumbitsi to join us in the attack.
Q.   TBJ, you said that once on the spot you went to Calixte's house where
you found no one; you looted the whole house and took the cattle.  How
many cows did you take from Calixte's house?
A.   I couldn't count them.  Everything happened too quickly.  But I could
say there was about 30 head of cattle.
Q.   And what did you loot from Calixte's house?
A.   When I went to loot the cattle -- before I went to loot the cattle,
we had already looted furniture such as chairs, moveable objects from
Calixte's house.
Q.   Did Mr. Gacumbitsi also loot anything?
A.   On our arrival, we found members of the local population who told us
that Gacumbitsi had gone on his way going down towards us.
Q.   Did Mr. Gacumbitsi distribute any arms to you -- any weapons to you
for your operation?
A.   On his arrival, he told us that we had to find arms for ourselves, so
he did not distribute any weapons.
Q.   Witness TBJ, you told us that you were exiled on the 28th of April --
you went into exile on the 28th of April 1994.  Why did you go into
exile on that date?
A.   If you have correctly understood me, I stated that I fled on the
th.  Now, I should like to ask you to repeat your question.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Could counsel for the Defence please wait until the Kinyarwanda booth
has finished talking.  This means that she must keep her eye on the
booth.  When the red light goes out, then she can ask her question,
because the English booth has lost the question.
The witness is repeating.
THE WITNESS:
I told you I left on the 29th.  Now I will tell you why I left.
I left on the 29th because I saw that my neighbours and the refugees
that were in the camp very near, all left at the same time.  There was
no reason for me to stay alone when everybody else was leaving.
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Were there any Interahamwe in your secteur?
A.   I don't know what the term “Interahamwe” means.  You might like to
clarify your question and the meaning you ascribe to the term used in
your question.
Q.   I asked if you were a member of the Interahamwe and if they existed
in your secteur?
A.   I never was a member of the Interahamwe.
Q.   When you left, you went to what country?
A.   I fled to Tanzania.
Q.   To which camp?
A.   To the camp called Benaco.
Q.   Did you meet Mr. Gacumbitsi in that camp?
A.   Yes, I would meet him from time to time on the way -- on the road.
Q.   Did he have a position in that camp?
A.   I don't know what functions you are referring to.  What I know is
that he continued to govern the population of his commune.  He was
still bourgmestre of that commune.
Q.   In Tanzania, in the Benaco refugee camp?
A.   Yes, quite.
Q.   At the outset, you said that you had met Gacumbitsi only once in 199
-- that you only met him once in 1994?  Do you confirm that?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honour, that is a mischaracterisation of the witness's evidence.
He said it was only once in April 1994.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel for the Defence, can you rephrase your question, in view of
what the witness has already said?
BY MS. MBATTANG:
Q.   Witness TBJ, you said that you had come here to help make the truth
manifest and that peace should return to Rwanda.  Do you think that
your contribution is going to bring peace back to Rwanda?
A.   Yes.  I believe that the testimony we give -- the purpose of the
testimony we give is for justice to be done and the guilty parties to
be punished.  What happened, happened in broad daylight, and the truth
must be known for the guilty people to be punished, for the Rwandan
people to know that justice has been done and that there is no
immunity for crimes of the type that we are concerned with in the
course of this trial here.
Q.   Do you think that peace will only come back if all those that
contributed to the genocide are punished equally?
A.   Yes, that is what I believe.
Q.   We can -- we cannot have peace without justice?
MS. MBATTANG:
I have finished, Madam President, thank you very much.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
(No interpretation)
JUDGE EGOROV:
Mr. Witness, in your testimony you mentioned a person, Juvenal
Ntamwemezi, who was given instructions by the defendant.  Was this
person the only person who received instructions from the defendant?
THE WITNESS:
Thank you.  We all received instruction -- orders the same way, but
that person claimed to have special orders from the Accused.
JUDGE EGOROV:
He was the only person who received instructions?  There were no other
persons?
THE WITNESS:
Yes.
JUDGE EGOROV:
Could you recall how many people were killed in your area after the
visit of the defendant?
THE WITNESS:
I don't have statistics as to the victims of the events that occurred
at that time.
JUDGE EGOROV:
Thank you.
JUDGE REDDY:
Just a couple of quick questions, Witness.  When the Accused arrived,
did his vehicle stop at the bus stop?
THE WITNESS:
No.  The bus stop is near the main intersection.  He went on a --
crossed the intersection and turned to come to the drinking place I
referred to.
JUDGE REDDY:
So the vehicle stopped -- ultimately stopped near the drinking place?
THE WITNESS:
Yes.
JUDGE REDDY:
And that is where all the people were, near the drinking place?
THE WITNESS:
Yes.  There were several little drinking places, but the vehicle
stopped near the drinking place where I was.
JUDGE REDDY:
All right.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, you told us that you were with other detainees and among whom
there were Hutu but also some Tutsi.  You told us that some were
provisionally released but one Anastase, a certain Anastase, was
tried.  Do you know what happened to Anastase?
THE WITNESS:
After his trial he was, in fact, found guilty of genocide and he was
sentenced to life imprisonment.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I thank the witness.
Counsel for the Prosecution, do you wish to re-examine the witness?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, I have no questions in re-examination.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, we have reached the end of your testimony.  We thank you for
having come to testify before this Tribunal and we wish you a safe
journey home.
THE WITNESS:
I wish to thank you also.
(Witness excused)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Council for the Prosecution, pray, continue.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, our next witness will be Witness TBK, and if it pleases
the Registry, we have rough in-house translations into the English
language of the Pro justicia statement that we gave Your Lordships
yesterday.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Counsel for the Prosecution, we have received the Pro
justicia document in respect of Witness TBK.  Is that witness ready to
appear now?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Yes, Your Honours.  The courtroom officer has gone to usher him in.
JUDGE REDDY:
Mr. Prosecutor, do we have his statement -- other statement, the
statement made to the investigators?  Have they been given to us?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Yes, Your Honours.  His statement to the investigators is under the
pseudonym TBK,and it should have been on the CD that was filed on the
st of July.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Does the English booth need the Pro justicia?
JUDGE REDDY:
If you have a spare copy I would be most grateful to have one.  I
don't seem to have a copy.  Is there -- no rush for it; you can give
it to me.
MR. KAREGYESA:
It is only one paragraph, Your Honours, but I am trying to see if we
can have photocopies done.  Do Your Honours have the -- would you need
the English, French or both?
JUDGE REDDY:
Well, I just need the English.
MR. KAREGYESA:
The English, most obliged.
Your Honours, the language booth has obliged and given us a copy in
English.
JUDGE REDDY:
Thank you very much.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good morning, Witness TBK.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning, Madam.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Registry will assist you -- will help you to make your solemn
declaration.  Thereafter, the Prosecutor will ask you questions, and
then it will be the turn of Defence counsel to cross-examine you.  It
is also possible that the Judges may ask you a few questions of
clarification.  It will be explained to you when we will be in closed
session.  When we are in closed (sic) session you should avoid giving
information which may lead to your being identified.
You should listen carefully to the questions.  You should listen
carefully to the questions that will be put to you, and you should
answer those questions clearly.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Now, Registry, could you help the witness to make his solemn
declaration?
(Declaration made by Witness TBK in Kinyarwanda)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank the witness; we also thank the Registry.
Counsel for Prosecution, you have the floor.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Thank you, Madam President.  I move this Chamber, Your Honours, for a
closed session, initially to establish the particulars and antecedents
of this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Any objection from the Defence?
MS. MBATTANG:
No objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  We are therefore going to move into closed session for the
purpose of protecting the identity of the witness.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 38] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the
session was heard in camera)
(Pages 22 to 33 by Judith Baverstock)
MR. KAREGYESA:
I noticed, Your Honour, that the Accused has excused himself from the
Chamber for a minute, and it appears that I also be allowed a one-
minute recess.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber would like to make an observation.  If the
Prosecution or the Defence needs to leave for a moment, then we
believe it's appropriate that the Trial Chamber be informed.  If we
ask for a break, we inform you all of the parties.  So, in the future,
please, inform us when you would like to take a short break.  Thank
you.
Mr. Prosecutor, you may proceed.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Thank you, Your Honours.  I just wish to note for the record that the
Accused is back in the Chamber.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Witness, you've situated yourself on the 14th of April 1994, and
you've given us the name of the cellule and secteur.  We are now in
open session and there is no need to mention the name of your cellule
and secteur during this open session.
So, Witness, during the month of April 1994, did you have occasion to
see Accused Sylvestre Gacumbitsi?
A.   Thank you.  I saw him.
Q.   And do you recall the date in April 1994 when you saw him?
A.   Thank you.  I saw him on the 14th of April.  It was a Thursday in
.
Q.   And at around what time of the day, Witness, did you see Accused
Sylvestre Gacumbitsi, to the best of your recollection?
A.   I was not wearing a watch, but I think it must have been around 3
p.m.
Q.   At around 3 p.m. on that day.  Was it in your native secteur?
A.   He found us at a centre called (By order of the Court this word has
been extracted and filed under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Please, the witness has just stated the name of the centre.  Please
ensure that this is not mention -- that this does not appear in the
record.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Most obliged, Your Honour.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Witness, please, refrain from mentioning that name again.  We shall
just refer to the location as the centre or trading centre.  Now,
Witness, what were you doing at that centre you have just mentioned at
around 3 p.m. on the 14th of April 1994, when the Accused found you
there?
A.   You will understand that activities occurring in trading centres are
commercial activities, and people go there to have a drink as well.
So, we were there having a drink.
Q.   And did Accused Gacumbitsi arrive on foot or was he in a vehicle,
Witness?
A.   Thank you.  Gacumbitsi came in a vehicle.
Q.   And do you recall what kind of vehicle this was, Witness?
A.   The vehicle I saw was a double-cabin vehicle, and it was white.
Q.   And it was the Accused alone in this vehicle or was he with other
persons?
A.   There were five persons in the vehicle.
Q.   Were there five people, including the Accused, or was it five people
and the Accused, Witness?
Q.   Gacumbitsi was amongst those five persons?
Q.   And did you know the other four persons in his company, Witness?
A.   Amongst the four persons, I knew a policeman.  However, I did not
know the other policeman and the soldier that was with them or the
driver.
Q.   And what is the name of the policeman you knew, Witness?
A.   Thank you.  The policeman name was Jonathan Berakumenyo.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, that name appears at No. 256 of the Prosecutor's list of
proper nouns.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   And what were the policemen wearing, Witness?  Were they in uniform
or were they in civilian clothes?
A.   They were wearing their police uniforms.
Q.   And did they carry any arms with them, Witness?
A.   I would not be able to confirm this because I did not see any arms.
Q.   Did the policeman and the other soldier you have just mentioned,
Witness, have any guns with them?
A.   They had one gun, and it was the person whose name I have mentioned
Berakumemnyo who was carrying the gun.
Q.   So, Witness, can you tell us what transpired when Accused Gacumbitsi
arrived at your trading centre in the company of these policemen and a
soldier?
A.   When he arrived at the centre, he parked the vehicle and stepped out
of the vehicle.  He greeted us and he told us, "Others have already
completed their work.  Where do you stand?"  And we asked him, "Do our
work.  What work?"  And Berakumenyo pointed at a woman whose name was
Nyibizi (phonetics), and she was selling sorghum beer,  "Do you want
me give you an example?".  And he said, "If she is a Tutsi woman I am
going to show you."  But we told him no, she wasn't -- that woman
wasn't a Tutsi woman, and he did not shoot at her.  At that point,
Bourgmestre Gacumbitsi said, "Any person who looks like a Tutsi must
be killed on the spot."  After saying those words, they left in the
vehicle.
Q.   Now, Witness, about how many people were you at the trading centre on
that afternoon to whom the Accused made this address?
A.   Thank you.  There were approximately 10 people.
Q.   Witness, is it my -- is my understanding correct that you were only
people at the trading centre on that afternoon?
A.   People gathered at the centre to drink, they don't all come at once;
they come one by one.  And when he arrived there were approximately 10
of us.
Q.   Now, is that all the Bourgmestre Gacumbitsi, told you prior to his
departure?
A.   Yes, that is what he said; nothing further.
Q.   And for how long did he stay at your location, Witness?  How long was
his stopover at your location?
A.   I didn't have a watch.  I can make an approximation and say it was
approximately 20 minutes.
Q.   Now, Witness, subsequent to Gacumbitsi's departure from your
location, what did you do?
A.   After Gacumbitsi's departure and after he had spoken to us, two young
people from my region who were demobilised persons immediately
implemented Gacumbitsi's words on the day that followed.  On the 15th,
we started to kill people, to loot and to slaughter cattle to eat it.
Q.   And, Witness, can you give us the names of these two people who
assumed leadership?
A.   Thank you.  One was named Nkaka, and the other one was called
Sendama.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Could the Kinyarwanda booth please assist us with spelling of the two
names?
THE KINYARWANDA INTERPRETER:
Nkaka is spelt N-K-A-K-A; Nkaka.  Sendama is spelt S-E-N-D-A-M-A;
Sendama.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   And what were the respective occupations of these two people,
Witness?
A.   They were demobilised soldiers.  And after they had been demobilised,
they became farmers.
Q.   And did they have any weapons, Witness?
A.   Are you referring to the young demobilised soldiers?
Q.   Yes.
A.   They had guns that they used to hunt buffaloes in this country, here
in Tanzania.  And Mr. Nkaka was the one who owned this rifle.
Q.   Now, other than this hunting gun or hunting rifle, Witness, did they
have any other weapons?
A.   Sendama had a grenade, and someone who had two grenades came and
people shot at this person and took the two grenades from him.
Q.   And who shot this person who had grenades, Witness?
A.   He was shot by Nkaka.
Q.   You've told this Chamber that Nkaka and Sendama organised the local
population.  Can you tell us whether this was on the 14th or on the
th?
A.   It was on the 15th of April.
Q.   And to the best of your recollection, were they amongst the 10 or so
people who were at the trading centre when Accused addressed you on
the 14th of April 1994?
A.   Mr. Prosecutor, could you please repeat your question?
Q.   My question was whether Nkaka and Sendama were present with you
amongst the 10 people who were addressed by the bourgmestre at your
trading centre on the 14th of April 1994?
A.   Yes, when the bourgmestre came to the centre on the 14th, the two
young people were there.
Q.   Now, can you tell us what you did on the 15th of April 1994, Witness?
A.   After receiving the instructions given by the bourgmestre and
instructions which were implemented by Nkaka and his colleague, we
started to kill the people, slaughter their cattle and destroy their
property.
Q.   And how many attackers, Witness, were in your group?
A.   Are you referring to the point when we killed these persons?  All the
population of the cellule were gathered in that place.
Q.   And my question, Witness, is:  How many attackers were you in the
group you participated in on the 15th of April 1994?
A.   We were over 100.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, it looks like it's 1 o'clock.  I propose that we take
the adjournment now, and I will round up with the witness maybe in
another 15 or 20 minutes when we resume the hearing at 2:30.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  We shall now adjourn, and we shall resume at 2:30 p.m.
Witness, I would like to remind you that you are still under oath, and
you should not speak with anyone and particularly with respect to what
was said here in this courtroom.  We will see you at 2:30.  Thank you.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, Madam President.
(Court recessed from 1300H to 1430H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The hearing will now resume.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Honourable Witness, good afternoon.
THE WITNESS:
Good afternoon, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We will now continue with your examination-in-chief.
Counsel for the Prosecution, you have the floor.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Thank you, Your Honours.
Permit me, Your Honours, before we continue with the witness, to
inform the Chamber of a slight change in the order of witnesses.  Your
Honours, we expected Witnesses TAE and TAF to take the stand after the
current witness.  These two witnesses, Your Honour -- Your Honours,
arrived from Rwanda yesterday on yesterday's flight in the afternoon
and were met this morning by a staff from the OTP.
Now, I am informed, Your Honours, as subsequent to that meeting this
morning, the two witnesses are deeply traumatised by having to
recollect certain events related to the genocide and may, therefore,
not be in a position to take the stand immediately after this witness,
as previously anticipated.
We, therefore, crave your indulgence, Your Honours, to allow us to
lead the evidence of Witness TAW tomorrow to be followed by Witness
TAE and TAF, rather than the other way round.  That is all I had to
say in regard to the order of witness appearance, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel Kouengoua, do you have any observations as regards the order
of witnesses proposed by the Prosecution?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President.  Your Lordships, good afternoon.
Observations, why -- what for?  The Defence organised its work as does
the Bench from Friday to Friday.  The only thing now we are going to
have to invert everything.
I admit that materially speaking, there is no serious problem, but as
regards our order of ideas, the Defence, once again, has to undertake
some gymnastic -- some athletics to put things in order.  We would
like to say that every time that there was a witness, he was
traumatised.  There have been incidents such as for Witness TAP.  I
hope they are not going to come and tell us something that we didn't
know before.  TAP was sick and had to leave, but we were never told
what the witness was ill with.
I have no observation other than this disturbs us and it disturbs the
preparation of the Defence's case.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, you must understand that we are dealing with witnesses that
had to live through unbearable events.  We can understand very well
that they are traumatised in as much as we, ourselves, are often
shaken by what they have to say here.  So, I think you can understand
that a witness might need more time to gather their wits.
Since materially, there is no problem, we consider that the witnesses
that will -- the order of appearance of witnesses after the present
witnesses will be in the following order:  TAW, TAE then TAF.  Is that
correct, Counsel for the Prosecution?
MR. KAREGYESA:
It is correct, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel for the Prosecution.  In that case, please proceed
with the current witness.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Most obliged, Madam President, Your Honours.
JUDGE REDDY:
That takes us to the end of the week?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Yes, Your Honours.  We are remaining within our planning for the week.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Good afternoon, Witness TBK.
A.   Good afternoon.
Q.   Now, Witness, you recall that before we took the lunch time
adjournment, you had just told Their Lordships how you participated in
criminal acts along with approximately a 100 other people from your
cellule on the 15th of April 1994.  And can you now tell Their
Lordships who were the targets of your criminal attacks?
A.   Madam President of the Trial Chamber, Your Lordships, I should like
to answer the question just put to me.  Please forgive me I cannot
speak louder because I have a problem with my throat.  My voice does
not carry any louder than it is at present.  If I have further
problems I will notify you.  So, now, please allow me to ask for the
question to be repeated so that I might answer fully.
Counsel for the Prosecution, could you please repeat your question?  I
did not fully understand it.
Q.   Witness, I recollected that you told this Chamber before lunch time
adjournment, that you and approximately a 100 other people from your
cellule indulged in criminal acts on the 15th of April 1994.  I wanted
you to tell Their Lordships who were the targets of these criminal
attacks?
A.   Thank you.  Your Lordships, the people who were the targets of our
attacks were the Tutsi, and that was on the orders -- following the
orders given to us by the bourgmestre who ordered us to kill the
Tutsi.
Q.   And can you tell Their Lordships, how many Tutsis were killed in your
native secteur?
A.   Thank you.  In my home secteur -- in fact, I did not go all around it
-- I was active in ……… cellule.  That's where there were many Tutsi.
In our home cellule ……….., there was only one Tutsi.  So, our attacks
were against …….. cellule.  This is where I went, and at ……….., a 100
or so people were killed.  If I -- going by the number of Tutsi
households there were in that secteur, that is only an estimate, of
course.
Q.   And over what period of time in the month of April 1994 did you
participate in these attacks against Tutsi homesteads?
A.   On the 15th -- the 15th is the day we hunted down the Tutsi, and on
the 17th -- it's 16th I killed one person and I stopped there.  I
subsequently no longer participated in the attacks.
Q.   Now this one person you killed on the 16th, Witness, did you know
that person prior to killing him?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And did you know to which ethnic group he belonged prior to killing
him?
A.   Yes, I knew that the person was a Tutsi.  But before, there had been
no discrimination between Tutsi and Hutu. We shared everything, even
in the drinking places, and we visited each other.  However, I obeyed
the bourgmestre Sylvestre Gacumbitsi's orders, and that is why I
killed that person.  But before that, everything -- I shared
everything that we could share that was shareable with that person.
Q.   Now, Witness, you were aware, weren't you, prior to April the 14th,
, that murder or killing a person was a criminal offence; didn't
you?
A.   I knew that.
Q.   Now, if you knew that it was an offence --
A.   I knew it, but because Gacumbitsi had given us orders, given us
instructions, and you know, when someone gives you orders, and that
person is an authority, you respect their instructions.  If I hadn't
killed that person and I would have been accused of not having killed
that person, I myself might have been killed.  It was a question of
saving my own skin.  It was a question of life or death; either you
kill the person or you yourself was killed.
Q.   Witness, it has been slightly over nine years since these events,
would you be able to recognise Sylvestre Gacumbitsi if you met him on
the street today?
A.   But I have known him since I was a child, since my school days.  I
could, therefore, recognise him if I met him.
Q.   I would like you to stand up, Witness, and tell Their Lordships if
there is nobody in this Chamber you can identify as being Sylvestre
Gacumbitsi?
A.   Thank you.  Madam President, Your Lordships, I have seen and identify
-- identified Gacumbitsi among the people here because I know him.  He
is seated behind the three people I see at the back.  He is alone; he
is wearing a jacket which is more or less a khaki beige, and one of
the colours in his tie is green.  He is also wearing glasses.
MR. KAREGYESA:
If it pleases Your Honours to reflect on the record that the witness
has positively identified Sylvestre Gacumbitsi.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Bench confirms that the witness has correctly identified the
Defendant, Gacumbitsi.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Witness TBK, you've told Their Lordships that you participated with
other members of your cellule in criminal acts subsequent to receiving
instructions from the Accused Gacumbitsi.  However, Witness, you only
confessed to having killed only one Tutsi.  My question is, Witness,
weren't you involved in any other acts of murder of Tutsis in your
area on or about the 15th and 16th of April 1994?
A.   As to the part I played, I killed only one person, because he was the
only person I met.  If I had met other people, I might -- would have
killed them.  Otherwise, my role was to loot, to destroy dwellings, to
eat cattle.  So, I participated in the slaughter of cattle.  You see,
what part I played in those events.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, I have no further questions for this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel for the Prosecution.
Witness, it is now Counsel for the Defence that will cross-examine
you.
Counsel Kouengoua, you have -- you may proceed.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President, Your Lordships.  I think that parallelism
of form being required, that I request the Trial Chamber for a closed
session.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well, we shall go into closed session.  We apologise for that to
the public.
(At this stage of the proceedings [pages 47 to 62] were redacted and
put under a separate cover as the session was heard in camera)
(Pages 39 to 46 by Haruna Farage)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good, we are now in open session.  You may proceed with your
cross-examination.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBK, on what date in your cellule did the attacks begin?
A.   The attacks began on the 15th.
Q.   Before the 15th, did you hear of any distribution of arms?
A.   Before Gacumbitsi arrived in our area to tell us we had to kill, we
were living peacefully together.  There was no conflict.  There were
no arguments, no disputes.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
I've missed the first part of counsel's question because the
Kinyarwanda booth hadn't finished.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   From what you know, was Gacumbitsi in the habit of fighting with
neighbours who were not of the same ethnic group as he?
A.   No, myself, I don't know why he came to incite us to kill the people
of a different ethnic group.  You might very well ask him that
question yourself, Counsel.
Q.   Witness TBK, you say, "I obeyed Gacumbitsi's orders, instructions".
You maintain that; do you stick to that?
A.   Yes, I maintain what I said.
Q.   This morning you told the Prosecution that you knew that to kill was
a bad thing and that you could be condemned, seriously condemned, for
that.  Do you stick to that?
A.   Yes, I do.
Q.   When did you find out that killing is a bad thing, before or after
Gacumbitsi's visit?
A.   I knew that killing is a bad thing and has unfortunate consequences
after having suffered those consequences, in particular, when I was
imprisoned.  That's when I knew that killing is a bad thing.
Q.   On the 16th of April 1994 when you were killing someone that you knew
before, one of the friends you were drinking with, you didn't know
that it was a bad thing?
A.   I knew that it was a crime, but I killed him because I was under
orders to do so.  If I hadn't killed him, I would be killed myself.
Q.   Witness TBK, before the 14th of April 1994 had Gacumbitsi ever given
you any orders?
A.   Could you repeat that question?
Q.   Witness TBK, you said that you were obeying orders; that's why you
killed, that's why you looted.  I am asking whether -- before the 14th
of April 1994 had you been given any order by the person that on that
date ordered you to kill?
A.   It is only on the 14th of April 1994 that he gave us the order to
kill, but before that date he had not.
Q.   You answered the Prosecution this morning by saying it was a question
of life or death; is that correct?
A.   Yes, it is correct.
Q.   Witness TBK, do you know a Tutsi that wasn't killed?
A.   Yes, there are some.
Q.   Do you know any Hutu that didn't kill?
A.   The Hutu that didn't kill, there are some that didn't kill.
Q.   Could you tell this Trial Chamber who was killed for not having
obeyed Gacumbitsi in killing and looting in April 1994?
A.   The situation was as follows: when you were part of an attacking
group, when you flushed out a Tutsi and the person in front -- and did
not kill the person who had been flushed out, they were killed.  They
would be first killed and then they would kill you.
Q.   Witness TBK, I will repeat my question: can you give us -- give the
Trial Chamber the name of a Hutu that was punished because he did not
kill on Gacumbitsi's orders or instructions?
A.   No, I have no name.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Lordships, the Defence has finished its cross-
examination of TBK.  Thank you for your kind attention.
JUDGE REDDY:
Now, Witness, I have some questions, and again I will emphasise that I
am asking you these questions merely so that I can better understand
your evidence.
Now, although you told us that you were instructed on the 15th to
start killing the Tutsi, you claim that you did not kill any Tutsi
either on the 14th or the 15th; is that correct?
THE WITNESS:
I answered that question when I said that on the 14th, when the
bourgmestre arrived, nobody was killed and nobody went chasing the
Tutsi.  On the following day, on the 15th, we came together and we
went out pursuing the Tutsi.  On the said 15th I did not come across
any Tutsi whom I could kill, but if I had come across any, I would
have committed murder.  On the 16th I met a Tutsi, the one I
mentioned, and I killed him.
JUDGE REDDY:
Let's talk about the 15th for a minute.  Put the 16th aside.  On the
th you were part of a group, were you not, as I understand your
evidence?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I was part of a group and I told you that our leader killed
someone.
JUDGE REDDY:
This group went out looking for Tutsi, did it not, this group that you
were part of?
THE WITNESS:
When that person was killed by our leader, we were still at a trading
centre.  We had not yet started chasing the Tutsi.  After the murder
of that person, after that person was killed by our leader, we went
out pursuing the Tutsi in the bushes and in various houses.
JUDGE REDDY:
And did you find the Tutsi on the 15th?
THE WITNESS:
In the group of which I was a member, we did not meet any Tutsi.  If
we had met any, we would have killed him and I would know that.
JUDGE REDDY:
So on the 15th, your group did not kill any Tutsi at all?
THE WITNESS:
No Tutsi was killed by members of my group; however, our leader shot
at the person I mentioned on that 15th.
JUDGE REDDY:
And you were present when that Tutsi was shot?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I was present.
JUDGE REDDY:
And you say that that was the only Tutsi killed on the 15th; no other
Tutsi were killed by your group on the 15th.
THE WITNESS:
No.
JUDGE REDDY:
But in your evidence-in-chief you said many Tutsi were killed on the
th, did you not?
THE WITNESS:
The persons were killed by other groups of attackers, but in my group
we did not kill any Tutsi; but I cannot tell you that no Tutsi was
killed on that day.
JUDGE REDDY:
All right.  You killed this man on the 16th.  You killed one person on
the 16th, didn't you?  You told us that.
THE WITNESS:
Yes.
JUDGE REDDY:
Yes.  And you also said that it was then that you stopped pursuing and
killing the Tutsis.
THE WITNESS:
On that day, the 16th, in our area massacres stopped, massacres
targeting the Tutsis, because there was no longer any Tutsi in the
locality.
JUDGE REDDY:
Why did you stop?  Why did you, yourself, stop on the 16th?
THE WITNESS:
I was not alone.  It was everyone in our secteur and cellule.  We did
not have many Tutsi, so we worked for two days, the 15th and the 16th,
and we were done with the Tutsi.  That is why the chasing of the Tutsi
came to an end.
JUDGE REDDY:
All right.
THE WITNESS:
On the whole we brought attacks to an end because there were no longer
any Tutsi in the locality.
JUDGE REDDY:
That is why you stopped, because there was no one left to kill?
THE WITNESS:
That's correct.  If there had been any, we would have continued.
JUDGE REDDY:
Now, do you accept any personal responsibility for the killings of at
least three of the Tutsis?  Do you accept personal responsibility?
THE WITNESS:
Personally, and I have already explained this to you, I killed only
one person because that is the only person I came across.  If I had
met several others, even if I had met more than three or even ten, I
would have killed them.  I met only one person and it is that person
that I killed.
JUDGE REDDY:
Do you accept responsibility for killing that person?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I admit my responsibility, but I committed that crime in
collaboration with other persons, and I have already explained that to
you.  You would understand that I have some share of responsibility in
the death of that person.
JUDGE REDDY:
Would you have come to this Tribunal to give the evidence that you
have if you had not been provisionally released?
THE WITNESS:
I do not know whether I'm doing what I'm doing now because I was
released.  I don't know.
JUDGE REDDY:
All right; fair enough.  So when did you realise that it was important
to speak the truth and to let the whole world know what had happened
in Rwanda in 1994 was both legally and morally wrong?  When did it
dawn on you, this idea?
THE WITNESS:
I was in prison since I had committed a crime.  I had committed murder
and I had been instigated to commit the murder, and someone accused me
of that murder.  I admitted that I had committed the murder.  I asked
to be forgiven.
JUDGE REDDY:
And when you were committing this murder or murders, as the case may
be, did you understand -- did you appreciate that what you were doing
was not only legally but morally wrong?  Did you appreciate that?
THE WITNESS:
Yes; however, as you are aware, it was a bad thing to kill, but I was
ordered to kill and I killed so that I should not be killed, myself.
The order to kill came from the bourgmestre.
JUDGE REDDY:
Yes, all right.  Thank you.
(Pages 63 to 67 by Verna Butler)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I thank you.
Witness, you told us that the Accused met you at the trading centre on
April at about 3 p.m.  Can you tell the Court what you did when he
left the centre?  You testified that he stayed there for a few
minutes, perhaps about 20 minutes, and then he left, after, of course,
asking you to kill the Tutsi.  What did you do on the 14th of April
after the departure of Mr. Gacumbitsi?
THE WITNESS:
After the departure of Gacumbitsi, I told you that there were people
who invited us to kill, and these are the people who led us.  When the
bourgmestre gave instructions, those persons were present.  The said
persons hurriedly sought to implement the bourgmestre's orders, but it
was late; it was practically night.  The following day, that is the
th, we started pursuing the Tutsis and killing them.  You would,
therefore, understand that our leaders were enthusiastic about this.
They performed the task zealously, and I could not change the course
of events.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Do you mean to say that on the 15th, after the departure of Sylvestre
Gacumbitsi, you -- you joined this group that was led by these two
young men whom you mentioned to us, and that on the 14th, the 15th and
the 16th you were still a member of the said group?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I was a member of a group.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Are you in a position to describe to the Court the guns you saw in the
possession of the person you referred to as Jonathan?
THE WITNESS:
He had a gun, but I do not know the make of the gun.  I am not
conversant with makes of guns.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I did not ask you of the make; I asked you to describe to me the gun.
What was it?  You saw it, because you even said that he pointed it at
the head of a woman who was there and that, finally, you saved the
life of the woman saying that the woman was not a Tutsi, but rather a
Hutu.  So, you had the time to look at the weapon; can you describe it
to us?
THE WITNESS:
It was a long gun.  It had a wooden handle.  It was a long gun.  That
is all I could tell you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Nobody used that gun in your presence?
THE WITNESS:
Are you talking about the gun that Jonathan had?  Well, he did not use
it at that time.  They left immediately and he did not kill anyone in
that place.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you, Witness.
Counsel for the Prosecution, do you have any questions in re-
examination of this witness?
MR. KAREGYESA:
I have no questions for this witness, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you Counsel for the Prosecution.
Witness, we have come to the end of your testimony before the
Tribunal.  We thank you for having accepted to come and give evidence
before this Court, and we wish you a safe return back home.  You would
be escorted out of the Court; wait for a moment.
THE WITNESS:
I thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel for the Prosecution, do you have any other witness for this
afternoon or do we wait for tomorrow morning?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Thank you, Madam President.  Our next witness is Witness TAW, but
given that we have 10 minutes to five o'clock, I'd rather that I start
with the witness first thing tomorrow morning at quarter to nine.
I am most obliged, Your Honours.
JUDGE REDDY:
Mr. Prosecutor, do you still feel that we can complete the
Prosecution's case by the end of next week?  I am merely asking this
so that we can -- we know we are working to a program that is being
met.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, we are committed to completing the case before the 28th.
Most obliged.
JUDGE REDDY:
Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you all.
The proceedings are adjourned.  We resume tomorrow morning at 8:45.
Thank you.
(Court adjourned at 1650H)
(Pages 68 to 69 by Judith Baverstock)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Verna Butler, Judith Baverstock, and Haruna Farage, Official Court
Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, do
hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-entitled
cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was taken in
shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer; that the
foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of said
proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________       Verna Butler
___________________________       Judith Baverstock
___________________________       Haruna Farage
