P R O C E E D I N G S
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The hearing resumes.
Registrar, please could you read us the cause list?
MR. HOMETOWU:
Trial Chamber III of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
composed of Judge Andrésia Vaz, presiding, Judge Jai Ram Reddy and
Judge Sergey Egorov, is now sitting in open court today, Monday, 18th
August 2003, for the continuation of the trial in the matter of the
Prosecutor v. Sylvestre Gacumbitsi, Case No. ICTR-2001-64-T.  Thank
you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank the Registrar.  We invite the parties to present themselves,
beginning with the Prosecution.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Good morning, Madam President, Honourable Judges.  The Prosecutor is
represented by
Ms. Mobberley and myself.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Lordships, Mr. Gacumbitsi's Defence consists of
Anne Ngatio Mbattang,
co-counsel, Counsel Kouengoua, myself, and will, as usual, need the
services of Mr. Gatarama, Tharcisse, our legal assistant.  Thank you,
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank the parties.  The Chamber adjourned until today, 18th of
August, Monday, to allow the Prosecution team to pursue its duties in
another trial.  We will proceed this morning with the Prosecution
witnesses.  I should like to note something before we continue,
concerning the recording of the proceedings, the Prosecutor was
concerned that there was no recording in Kinyarwanda.  Now, from the
information I have obtained from the registry, it appears that
proceedings are recorded in the three languages, that is to say,
French, English and Kinywaranda.  But as regards Kinyarwanda, it is
not on audio cassettes, but only at the request of the parties, it is
possible to have the record of the proceedings on audio cassette.  So,
whenever you need it, you can state the date, and if possible, the
time, and the cassette concerned will be handed over to you.
Mr. Prosecutor, you said there were nine witnesses remaining to be
called, and that you will probably ask the Chamber to withdraw some of
them.  We now give you the floor to bring us up to date as regards the
witnesses.  Thank you.
MR. KAREGYESA:
I am most obliged, Madam President.  No decision has been made with
regard to dropping any witnesses yet to be called, because some of the
witnesses have not arrived from Kigali, we expect them on today's
flight.  So it is subsequent to that that we shall be in a position to
inform
Your Honours whether we are dropping any witnesses, and if so, which
witnesses are being dropped.  Otherwise we are ready to proceed with
witnesses in the order indicated in our filing of last Friday.
But before we do so, Your Honours -- before we proceed with the next
witness, Your Honours, I just like to bring it to your attention that
over the weekend, on Saturday, we received from our Kigali office, the
pro justicia statements made by the five listed witnesses who are
subject to the 90bis transfer order.  We have this morning served
counsel the five pro justicia statements in the Kinyarwanda language,
we have copies for Your Honours, if the registry could oblige.  And,
we have undertaken last night to have the five statements translated
into the French language, it is a rough certified translation.  It's a
translation that was done in-house, generated by one of our team
members in the OTP.  So, I have given the Registrar a set of the
translations and the originals in Kinyarwanda, and when I served
counsel this morning, I had not received the French translations.  So
I am handing over one set of the French translation for the benefit of
Defence counsel.
I am told, Your Honours, that there has been a mistake in collating
the copies.  If the Registrar could just retrieve them so that --
retrieve all the copies I gave you, the French translations are not
properly collated.  Registry, could you please give the Judges a copy
each, and Defence Counsel.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Mr. Prosecutor, we have the statements you have handed in, you
may proceed.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, in that event we are ready to proceed with the next
witness, if the registry could kindly usher Witness TBI into the
Chamber.  Evidence will be led by my learned colleague, Ms. Andra
Mobberley.  Much obliged, Your Honours.
JUDGE REDDY:
Are there no English translations of this document yet?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Unfortunately not, Your Honours.  We got these on Saturday.  We had
first to confirm with the witnesses whether these documents or their
signatures were authentic, and then there weren't any translation
services available, the only in-house ability we had was immediately
to put them into the French language first for the benefit of counsel.
We do, however, have at the moment, someone trying to put them into
English.  So hopefully by the close of business today they should be
available in English.  Most obliged, Your Honour.
JUDGE REDDY:
Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good morning, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You are a protected witness, and we will call you Witness TBI.
THE WITNESS:
Madam President, could you please repeat this?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
What would the witness' pseudonym be?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
It is Witness TBI.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, my pseudonym is TBI.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well, you will be TBI.  You will be assisted to make your solemn
declaration and after that the Prosecutor will put questions to you in
examination-in-chief followed by cross-examination led by the Defence
and the Judges may have questions to put to you.
THE WITNESS:
Very well.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
MR. JUMA:
Mr. Witness, could you please stand up.  Please raise your right hand
and repeat the following words after me.
(Declaration made by Witness TBI in Kinyarwanda)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We would like to thank the registry and the witness.
Madam Prosecutor you have the floor.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Thank you, Madam President, Your Honours.  I make an application to
begin the witness' testimony with closed session.  There will be some
brief specifics concerning his identity and following that the closed
session will be necessary to go into detail of some issues relating to
his background.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel Kouengoua, do you wish to make some observations?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, Madam President.  Without wishing to reveal the identity of
Witness TBI, we would respectfully like to draw the attention of the
Honourable Chamber to the fact that the statement made by this witness
were disclosed to us, if my memory serves me right, in May or June,
.  And the statement that was -- the unredacted statement as
disclosed to us bears the date of the 1st May 2003, and the 14th of
May 2003;  May 1st 20th May 2003.
The document that refers to the same witness and that was only given
to us during this session, bears the date of the 6th of April 2000,
and the Prosecutor has just told the Trial Chamber that he only
received these documents over the weekend.  Madam President, would it
not be desirable that before we proceed with examination-in-chief,
that the Prosecutor could inform us, or maybe initially the witness
should leave the courtroom so that we can discuss these two documents,
because I believe they are somehow delicate, and the Defence really
does not understand.
So, Madam President, I shall respectfully request that the witness
leave the courtroom so that we can discuss this document, because I
believe that the witness would be involved -- concerned with this
document, and I believe it will be better that he is not present in
the courtroom while it is being discussed.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, could you please answer this without going into the
details of the problem, but can you tell us whether you believe the
witness should leave the courtroom so that we can discuss the problem
raised by the Defence.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, I believe there is no need for the witness to leave
because what is in issue here and merits very little discussion is the
Prosecutor's disclosure obligation.  There are two statements here.
Counsel has raised questions about dates of disclosure and, you know,
to me the issue is very, very, simple, and in fact with your
permission, I can just clarify to Your Lordships why there was late
disclosure; namely, we were not in possession of these statement.  The
statement disclosed this morning was not a statement recorded by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal,  this is a
statement recorded by the prosecution authorities in Rwanda.  We got
them shipped out here on the Friday pouch on the Beech craft, and we
didn't receive them until Saturday.  Last night we had them translated
into French and we disclosed them this morning.  And if you recall,
Your Honours, you had made an order in one of your rulings last month
that in the event that we do get documents pertaining to this category
of witnesses we disclose them.  So we were basically complying with
our disclosure obligations.
JUDGE REDDY:
But the statements recorded by the Prosecutor's Office were disclosed
within the time stipulated within the Rules?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Yes, Your Honour.
JUDGE REDDY:
I assume from the discussion that there are two such statements; am I
right?
MR. KAREGYESA:
No, it is the date appearing on the statements recorded by the Office
of the Prosecutor; there is the date of the 1st May and 14th May.
Now, in ordinary practice, a statement may not be completed on the day
it is recorded.  So in this case it would probably have been recorded
by hand on the 1st of May, typed out, and then the investigator would
have returned to this location on the 14th of May to procure a
signature.  Basically it is one statement bearing two dates, the 1st
and 14th of May, but it is one document and it was disclosed in
redacted form on 6th of May 2003, and unredacted on the 1st of July
, well within our limits.  Indeed, it was 27 days before the
commencement of trial.
JUDGE REDDY:
Yes.  Thank you.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.  We shall proceed, and, of course, we shall allow Defence, if
necessary, to take some time to review the new statements and make any
comments.
Therefore, without any further ado, we shall go into a closed session
to allow the Prosecutor to question the witness about the identity and
about events that might -- that cannot be revealed to the public.  We
regret to inform the public that we are now moving into closed
session.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 14] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the session
as heard in camera)
(Pages 1 to 5 by Regina Limula)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are now in open session.  You may proceed, Madam Prosecutor, with
your examination-in-chief.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MS. MOBBERLEY:
Q.   Witness TBI, the Court is now in open session.  That means that the
public are present and your evidence is being broadcast.  You must
ensure that you do not reveal your identity when you respond to
questions and you should raise any concerns if you have them.  So I
reiterate we are now in open session.  Do you understand?
A.   Yes, I understand.
Q.   Witness TBI, before April 1994, did you know Sylvestre Gacumbitsi?
A.   Yes, I knew Mr. Sylvestre Gacumbitsi.
Q.   How did you know him?
A.   I knew him in his capacity as the bourgmestre of Rusumo commune.
Q.   Did you know him personally or did you know him because of his
official capacity?
A.   I knew him in his capacity as the authority of the Rusumo commune,
but we had no personal ties of friendship between us.
Q.   Had you seen him before April l994?
A.   Yes, I would often see him.
Q.   Did you see him during April 1994?
A.   Yes, I saw him during the month of April of that year.
Q.   Do you recall the date?
A.   I saw him on the 14th of April l994.
Q.   Do you recall what time of the day it was when you saw him?
A.   There was no specific reason for me to remember the time, but I would
say that it was approximately around 4 p.m.
Q.   Where were you when you first saw him?
A.   We were at our centre.
Q.   What was the name of your centre?
A.   Thank you for your question, Madam Prosecutor.  But if I were to
mention this location, it might lead to my identity being revealed
because the centre is well known and it is the only centre in our
area.
Q.   Would you like to write the name down?
A.   If necessary then I will, and I think it will be better for all.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Your Honour, rather than going into a closed session, if the witness
can write the name down, I will apply for the document to be under
seal.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, please give the witness a piece of paper.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Thank you, Madam President.
I make an application for the document to be placed under seal and
produced as the next Prosecution exhibit.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, if you please.  The witness has informed the Trial
Chamber that if he were to answer the question his identity might be
revealed and that is why he was given a piece of paper.  He has now
written down on that piece of paper what we have taken into
consideration, but I don't see why it should become an exhibit, Madam
President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The witness has provided information, and the Prosecutor is of the
opinion that they should tender this document as an exhibit, and I
don't see what your problem is.  I believe that we can accept it and
consider it as a Prosecution exhibit because it provides us with the
name of the centre.
Registry, what would the next exhibit number be, please, for the
Prosecution?
MR. JUMA.
Our next Prosecution Exhibit is P12.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Therefore, the document is tendered and admitted as Prosecution
Exhibit P12,  and, of course, this exhibit shall be placed under seal.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Thank you, Madam president.
(Exhibit No. P12 admitted, under seal)
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, if you please.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, Madam President.  The Defence has some difficulties with respect
to the disclosure of the Prosecutor.  We have documents -- these are
the documents that we have received, unfortunately, the name that
appears there does not correspond with the documents.  And if we
weren't in open session, then I would be able to tell you what I find
under TBJ.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I had noticed the same thing, and I was going to go back to this
problem.  It is correct, we have TBJ and TBI are -- have the documents
been collated properly?  It seems that the witness was first
identified as being Witness TBJ when, in fact, the witness is TBI.
This is a problem that we will have to clarify, Madam Prosecutor.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Madam President, unfortunately, I am not able to give you a reason, I
am not able to clarify.  My understanding is that this is Witness TBI,
and if there has been an error, then I will look into it and give the
Court an explanation.  The most obvious explanation would be that the
cover page had been swapped before they were photocopied.  It is not
an issue I can respond to immediately.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Madam Prosecutor.
Therefore, this information -- this matter shall be clarified when the
Prosecutor will be able to verify these documents.  In any case, Madam
Prosecutor, you may now proceed.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
My understanding is, and I will check the matter, that the list which
was issued on the 1st of July has this witness' pseudonym
corresponding with his name -- list of 22 names of Prosecution
witnesses.  But it does not matter, that I will check and report back
to the Court later on.
JUDGE REDDY:
But we are dealing with Witness TBI, and not any one else.  That is
clear; isn't it?
MS. MOBBERLLEY:
That is correct.  I think the question of what is the correct name for
Witness TBI, and I will have it clarified.
BY MS. MOBBERLEY:
Q.   Witness TBI, you have given us the name of a location -- a trading
centre where you were on the 14th of 1994.  Now, without mentioning
any names, it is correct, isn't it, that the trading centre was within
your cellule?
A.   Yes, the centre was in our cellule.
(Pages 15 to 17 by Regina Limula)
H
Q.   What were you doing when you first saw Sylvestre Gacumbitsi?
A.   We were drinking banana wine with some friends.
Q.   Where was Sylvestre Gacumbitsi when you first saw him?
A.   He was coming to the centre that I mentioned the name on the piece of
paper.
Q.   Was he on foot or was he in a vehicle?
A.   He was in a vehicle.
Q.   Do you recall the make of the vehicle?
A.   I do not remember the make, but I do believe it was a double-cabin
Hilux.
Q.   Do you recall the colour of the vehicle?
A.   The vehicle was white.
Q.   Do you know who owned the vehicle?
A.   The vehicle belonged to the commune.
Q.   Was Sylvestre Gacumbitsi alone in the vehicle or was he with others?
A.   He wasn't alone; he was with other persons.
Q.   And who were those other persons?
A.   They were policemen.  They were members of the communal police as
well as the inspecteur judiciaire (sic) of the commune, the IPJ.
Q.   What were the policemen wearing?
A.   They were wearing their uniforms and they could be identified because
of their uniforms.
Q.   Were they inside the double cabin or were they on the back, on the
tray of the pickup?
A.   No, they were in the tray of the pickup.
Q.   Could you see whether they were armed or unarmed?
A.   They were armed with guns.
Q.   Could you see whether the IPJ was armed?
A.   I clearly saw the inspecteur de police judiciaire and he was not
carrying a weapon.
Q.   When you saw Gacumbitsi's vehicle, was it moving or had it already
stopped?
A.   As the vehicle was coming to the centre we were already inside, but
we saw it once.  It was parked in front of the shop of a person who
had the shop in the centre.
Q.   What did you see Sylvestre Gacumbitsi do?
A.   He stepped out of the vehicle and stood next to the vehicle and he
started to give us instructions that we were to follow during this
time, as I have already mentioned.
Q.   Now, when you say "us", who do you mean?
A.   I am referring to all the members of the population who were present
at the centre, including myself.
Q.   Now, up until that point, up until you saw Sylvestre Gacumbitsi that
day, how would you describe the situation in your cellule; was it
peaceful or had there been attacks?
A.   The situation was calm in our area.  We were drinking beer, and the
group was composed of all ethnic groups; everyone was there.  Nothing
bad had happened yet.
Q.   So what were the instructions that Sylvestre Gacumbitsi gave to the
members of the population?
A.   He ordered us to start killing the Tutsi and that we should eat their
cows and goats and to make sure that no Tutsi could cross the river;
and he ordered those manning the boats, the canoes, to move the canoes
and that no one should help any Tutsi to cross the river.
Q.   How many people were there in the crowd of Hutus and Tutsi that
Gacumbitsi was speaking to?
A.   I had no reason to count the people that I could see, but if I were
to make an approximation, I would say that there were approximately 40
persons.
Q.   What was the reaction of the group of people to Sylvestre
Gacumbitsi's instructions?
A.   Generally speaking, Rwandan -- the Rwandan people respect authority
and his instructions were immediately implemented.
Q.   You said that there were Tutsis among the crowd.  Did you see what
the Tutsis amongst the crowd did after Sylvestre Gacumbitsi had issued
these instructions?
A.   I'm not sure I understand your question.  Are you asking me whether
they attempted to flee --
Q.   What did you see?
A.   -- or whether they did anything to follow the instructions they had
been given?
Q.   What did you see, Witness?  What was it you observed the Tutsis in
the crowd doing once the instructions had been given?
A.   They understood that they were being targeted and that they might be
killed and so they sought to flee, especially as they were in the
minority in our region and instructions had been given in front of
them.  They just sought to flee.
Q.   Now, you've said that the instruction given by Sylvestre Gacumbitsi
was that no Tutsi should cross the river.  Which river are you
referring to?
A.   The Akagera River.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Your Honours, that's name No. 4 on the list.
BY MS. MOBBERLEY:
Q.   Witness TBI, what was the reaction of the Hutus in the crowd once
Sylvestre Gacumbitsi had given his instructions?
A.   They had no choice.  They started to loot and set fire to the houses,
and to slaughter the cattle.
Q.   Immediately after Sylvestre Gacumbitsi had spoken to the crowd, did
he speak to anybody else?
A.   Yes, he spoke, in particular, to one person.
Q.   What did he say to that person?
A.   He gave this person instructions in order for that person to
supervise and make sure that we followed the instructions that we had
just been given.
Q.   Now, how was it that you were able to hear what Sylvestre Gacumbitsi
said when he first spoke to the crowd of people present?
A.   I was present and I was amongst the people in the crowd Gacumbitsi
was speaking to.  I was amongst the crowd; I was one of the crowd.
Q.   When Sylvestre Gacumbitsi spoke to the individual and gave him orders
to monitor the implementation of his instructions, how were you able
to hear what he said?
A.   There was no secret.  No one was hiding what was happening.  He was
giving his instructions in public.
Q.   Witness TBI, are you able to give us the name of that person, the
individual who Sylvestre Gacumbitsi gave a specific order to?
A.   I could give this person's name; however, I would rather write it on
a piece of paper, because if I mention this person's name out loud,
then it might affect my security because it could lead to my identity
being revealed.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Mr. Registrar, could you give the witness a piece of paper, please?
Madam President, has the Bench seen the name that the witness wrote
down?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
No, the name is not currently in front of me, but I did read the name
on the piece of paper.  I believe the registry now has the piece of
paper.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Madam President, I'll apply for that document to be placed under seal
and also to be produced as Prosecution Exhibit 13.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
This document will bear Exhibit No. P12 -- sorry, P13.  We had P12
earlier, so this document will now be P13.  It will be a Prosecution
exhibit and shall be placed under seal.
(Exhibit No. P13 admitted, under seal)
BY MS. MOBBERLEY:
Q.   Witness TBI, were Sylvestre Gacumbitsi's instructions carried out
that day, the 14th of April 1994?
A.   We did not follow his instructions that day because we were more
interested in looting and slaughtering the cattle, and we did not
immediately block off access to the loading points on the river.
Q.   And in subsequent days in your cellule were Sylvestre Gacumbitsi's
instructions implemented?
A.   Yes, in the days that followed, we implemented all the instructions.
Q.   You've given us the name of a person responsible for monitoring the
progress of your actions.  Do you know whether that person did keep an
eye on what you were doing?
A.   Yes, the person that was appointed by Gacumbitsi to monitor the
situation and to ensure that the instructions were implemented, and he
continued to monitor our activities as we massacred the Tutsi and as
we looted.
Q.   Witness TBI, you've said that you knew Sylvestre Gacumbitsi before
and during April 1994.  Would you recognise him if you saw him again?
A.   Yes, if I were to see him, but I would like to make one reservation
first: I haven't seen him in a great deal of time and if you were to
ask me to identify him and if I were to make a mistake, I would like
you to understand that this would be due to the fact that a great deal
of time has elapsed since I last saw him.
Q.   Witness TBI, please stand and look around the courtroom and see if
you can identify the person you've talked about as Sylvestre
Gacumbitsi.
A.   Yes, I have already located him.
Q.   Can you describe what he is wearing?
A.   He is wearing glasses, spectacles, a white shirt and a tie and a
jacket.
Q.   What colour is the jacket?
A.   I could not describe the colour, but I note that no one else is
wearing a jacket, on the side where he is seated.  He is seated at the
back.  Next to him there is someone in a police uniform.
Q.   Yes.
A.   And there is no one else next to him.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Madam President, is that a sufficient identification?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, the Trial Chamber takes note that Witness TBI has recognised the
Accused.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Thank you, Madam President.  I have no more questions for the witness.
JUDGE REDDY:
Before we go into cross-examination, Witness, in this group of people
that you were amongst, and who were addressed by the accused person,
you said there were some Tutsis also.  Now, out of those approximately
people, how many were Tutsi?
THE WITNESS:
I remember that there were two Tutsi, Your Lordships.
JUDGE REDDY:
And what was their immediate reaction after the Accused said that all
Tutsi should be killed?  What did they do?
THE WITNESS:
Thank you for your question.  They could do nothing else, but there
were friends who began to give them refuge, and as it was near the
river they led them to the river while others were busy looting and
killing the cattle -- slaughtering the cattle.
JUDGE REDDY:
So who were the people who were giving them refuge; were they Hutus?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, they were Hutu who gave refuge -- who hid the Tutsi.
JUDGE REDDY:
Yes, thank you.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, sir.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  We now give the floor to the Defence to undertake cross-
examination of the witness.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President, Your Lordships.  The Prosecutor -- the
counsel for the Prosecution made a promise to us -- even if it is a
bit late -- who are we going to cross-examine --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Could counsel please repeat?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
It must be cleared up for us.  Are we to do TDI (sic) -- or TB -- or
BBJ?  I thought perhaps it would have been done before, before
examination-in-chief.  The Prosecution did not do so, but I think it
is high time that some phenomena were explained to us.  We prepared
TBI who was disclosed to us for some time now, but coming here it is
now TPJ who is being questioned.  And I say, in closed session, I do
not want the witness to be put in a difficult situation.  There are
some statements I wish to make and everyone who sees the documents
realises it is not normal and it is not a mistake that should be
permitted.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The English booth apologises if we haven't got the witnesses'
pseudonyms correctly.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, do you have a comment?  You told us it was TBI, no?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Your Honour, I think the best way to resolve this issue might be to
take the morning break just a few minutes early.  What is the time?
It is ten to 10:00.  We could take the break now, clarify the matter
and then come back to determine the best way to proceed.  It's my
understanding that this witness is Witness TBI, and that his name
correlates to his pseudonym.  I am unable to say whether there has
been some reproduction error after we have disclosed, crossing the
cover pages for the different witnesses.  I have sent somebody to the
office to clarify and produce the list, but I haven't had a response
yet.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Madam Counsel.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
In fact, Your Honours, I do have the list.  My assistant has the list
that was filed on the 1st of July, and it has a list -- it's a list of
witnesses.  It's a document headed "Gacumbitsi's Trial Witness
List".  This witness is No. 20 on that list, and the name on the list
corresponds to the pseudonym of this witness, so the name for witness
is the name given by this witness in Court and corresponds to
pseudonym TBI.
JUDGE REDDY:
So we are dealing with witness 252 and his pseudonym is TBI?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
That's correct, Your Honour.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Counsel for the Prosecution, I think things should be cleared up
some more.  Perhaps we could proceed on the basis of the signatures.
I shall ask the parties during the break to confer.  I think that on
the basis of the signatures we can clear things up, but there does
seem to be some confusion between Witnesses TBI and TBJ.  Doubtless we
do have TBI here, but it would be good to clear things up.
You have requested that we now take the break.  I think it might be
wise that we break now.  The Judges need to deliberate on another
matter, so we will resume only at 11:30, which should leave enough
time to clear things up and begin the cross-examination of the
witness.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
I am obliged, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  Very well, then, the hearing is adjourned until 11:30.
(Court recessed from 1045H to 1130H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
This hearing is resumed.  Counsel Kouengoua, can you continue with
your cross-examination?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Honours, I believe the Prosecutor was the one
who requested an adjournment in order to resolve the confusion with
respect to the documents that we had received with respect to TBJ and
TBK, and the Trial Chamber had asked the parties to come to an
understanding about this matter, but I believe that there wasn't
enough time for us to do so.  In any case, we remained in the
courtroom and we did not receive anything along those lines.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Thank you, Madam President.  I have checked some of our records and we
are still endeavouring to check another correspondence between the
Office of the Prosecutor and the registry, and I am currently waiting
for a report.  What happened was that when the documents were
disclosed by CD there was, indeed, a mix-up on the cover pages for TBI
and TBJ.  But it is my understanding that that was corrected, that
there was correspondence correcting that error and that subsequently
the list of the 1st of July was filed with the correct pseudonym
matching the correct name.  Now, I can't confirm that the
correspondence -- the intermediate correspondence pointing out the
correction did, in fact, reach the parties and I won't be able to
confirm that until I receive a report which I expect within a few
minutes.  But the position as at the 1st of July was that the formal
list was filed with the registry and with the parties, and it's clear
on that list who witness 20 is, what his proper name is and what his
pseudonym is.  And at this stage I am unable to take it any further.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Madam Prosecutor, for this information.  Counsel, you may
proceed.  When she has additional information she will give it to us.
But in the meantime correspondence was sent to the parties to clarify
that, indeed, this was the witness and not another one.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President.  I still maintain that the presence of
this witness disturbs me -- bothers me to a certain extent.  As the
witness is going to remain, maybe the President or the Trial Chamber
could please look at documents I have here and tell me -- or realise
that, indeed, the cover page has been collated incorrectly with the
statement.  All you have to do is look at the first sentence with
respect to what was disclosed to us this morning.  This will raise
many problems.  I just would like the Trial Chamber to review this.
Unfortunately, I cannot read the first sentence because if I were to
do so -- this is why I believe it might have been better to have this
discussion outside -- without the witness being here; otherwise, this
might cause problems in cross-examination.  The witness might mention
these things because he will have an idea of what we duly believe.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, we gave you over 30 minutes for you to clarify this point
together.  Now the Prosecutor has told us that letters have been
exchanged with the parties.  Did you receive the letter or not?
Because we cannot remain here just to wait.  The witness has given his
identity.  The Prosecutor has confirmed that this is Witness TBI;
therefore, you should proceed with your cross-examination, and we can
go back over this at some later point.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Very well.  In that light, then I guess I shall proceed.
Madam President, Your Honours, I should like to request the cross-
examination to begin in closed session for some time.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We regret to inform the public that we are going to continue in closed
session.  This is in order to protect the identity of the witness.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 40] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the
session was heard in camera)
(Pages 19 to 25 by Verna Butler)
H
MR. PRESIDENT:
We are in open session.
Counsel, the time now is one o'clock.  This is the time for the lunch
break.  How much time do you need to finish with this witness?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
About one or two hours.  For the Defence, one or two hours, not more.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I hope it will be one hour at most.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
That is also my wish, Your Honour.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The proceedings are adjourned.  We resume at 2:30 p.m.  Thank you.
(Court recessed from 1301H to 1432H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is in session.
Counsel Kouengoua, you may proceed.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Good afternoon, Madam President, Your Honours.
Madam President, before I continue with my cross-examination, I would,
respectfully, like to bring to the Prosecutor's attention that this
morning I received a document entitled "Pro justicia".  And by its
decision of August 1st, 2003, the Trial Chamber had ordered the
Prosecutor to provide the documents to me within 48 hours, and if not,
then they would have to provide explanations.  I have received the
document today, whereas I did not receive anything within 48 hours and
the Prosecutor did not present any type of explanation or apology
before the Trial Chamber.
And Madam President, I just wanted to mention this for the record
before I continue -- proceed with my cross-examination.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Madam President, ought I set the record straight or can we just
proceed?
This is a matter of ongoing disclosure.  The Prosecutor has an
obligation under Rule 67(D) to disclose any material that comes into
his possession.  The explanation was given this morning as to why this
document has only just been disclosed, and why we made every effort to
ensure that counsel had a translation in a language that he
understood.  I wish the record to be properly reflective of the
situation.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel.
I believe that the Prosecutor had explained this morning why you only
received disclosure of this document today and, of course, this is
just as good as an apology.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, absolutely, Madam President.
I am just trying to ensure that all the parties must respect a
decision ordered by your Trial Chamber.  If it's not possible, then
they should have come in front of you to say, Madam President, this is
the situation, but nothing was done.  I just wanted it to be mentioned
on the record that the -- in view of the fact the Prosecutor did not
provide the document within 48 hours, and did not apologise, then
these are special witnesses that have been released, Madam President.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBI, good afternoon.
A.   Good afternoon, Counsel.
Q.   We are -- we were discussing the date of the 14th of April 1994.  I
believe that's where we stopped right before the break and you were
explaining to the Trial Chamber various points.  I would now like to
ask you to explain; before 1994, were you a member of any political
party?
A.   Thank you for your question, Counsel.  I have already explained that
I was not a member of any political party and I will repeat that.  I
am not a member of any political party.  If I killed, it's not because
I was necessarily a member of a political party; I fell into this
unfortunate state of events because of the person you are representing
here today.
Q.   Thank you, Witness TBI.  Before the break, in answer to one of my
questions, you stated as follows:  "The préfet could not be respected
in times of war."  Do you stand by your testimony, Witness?
A.   I stand by my testimony, because if the préfet had been respected,
then I believe the person that you are representing here today would
not have pushed us to perpetrate the acts that we committed.  It meant
that leaders were either no longer respected, heeded, or they were
encouraging the genocide.
Q.   Witness TBI, you have described the vehicle of the bourgmestre.  Did
you know the vehicle before the 14th of April 1994?
A.   Yes, I knew the vehicle well, because that was the vehicle that was
often used by the person whom you are representing.
Q.   Would anyone else be able to recognise the vehicle if they saw it?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, that's speculation; the witness cannot know.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
I will withdraw my question, Madam President, and I will rephrase it.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Did this vehicle have any distinctive characteristic?
A.   Each vehicle belonging to the government had a different licence
plate from vehicles belonging to ordinary citizens, and the vehicle
belonged to the government and had a licence plate showing that it was
a government vehicle, but someone would not necessarily recognise it
as the vehicle of the commune.
Q.   Aside from the licence plate, was there anything written on the
outside of the vehicle, Witness?
A.   I have told you that I knew the vehicle before, and this was the
vehicle that your client used.  What are you -- exactly what do you
want to know?  Do you want to know if there was anything drawn on the
vehicle, or are you asking me some other question?
Q.   Witness TBI, who is the person that the bourgmestre asked to monitor
that his orders were being followed?
A.   Counsel, I have already explained to you that after he gave us his
instructions, he asked someone to make sure that his instructions were
implemented, and I told you that the person's name was (By order of
the Court, this name has been extracted and filed under seal).
Q.   Did you follow -- did you implement Gacumbitsi's orders?
A.   I have already explained that to you, Counsel.  Once he gave us the
instructions we did not immediately follow them all, because we were
much more interested in looting, but the following day, we implemented
the instructions that we had been given, and we implemented them
fully.
Q.   Witness TBI, aside from the vehicle, the bourgmestre's vehicle, did
you see any other vehicles go by on that same day?
A.   Counsel, thank you for your question.  I told you that after your
client gave us instructions to go and kill the Tutsi, I personally
left the area, and if a vehicle arrived on that location after I had
left, I would not be able to answer that question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The witness mentioned a name, and had the name been put under seal?
So, the name should be struck from the record.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Madam President, so as not to draw attention to it immediately, I
waited as you have done, but it was Prosecution Exhibit 13 that the
document you are referring to took as an exhibit number.
I'm not certain whether the witness is aware he's in open session at
this stage, given the answer that he gave.
THE WITNESS:
I thought we were still in closed session.  I am sorry.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, please be careful as to what questions you put to the
witness.
Witness, indeed, we are in open session, so, please, be very careful
with the questions that are put to you by the Defence, and, please,
also be careful with your answers.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBI, when he gave you the instructions on the 14th, as you
allege, what did you do?
A.   Once he finished giving us the instructions, we started to loot, and
we immediately left to go and loot, slaughter the cattle; we destroyed
Tutsi houses.
Q.   When you -- were any Tutsis present when he gave you those
instructions?
A.   I have already explained that, Counsel.  The Tutsi were present
because the massacres had not yet begun in our area.  The situation
had remained calm, and it was your client who came and launched the
massacres in our area.  Up until that point, nothing bad had happened.
Q.   And in your opinion, what language was he speaking in?
A.   Sylvestre Gacumbitsi is Rwandan and he spoke Kinyarwanda.
Q.   So, the Hutu and the Tutsi could understand what he was saying?
A.   Yes, absolutely; everyone could understand.
Q.   Was his message focused on one specific ethnic group?
A.   He was giving the instructions to the Hutu.  And I can clearly see
that you do not know what the situation was like.  He was giving the
instructions to the Hutu for them to kill the Tutsi.  Even though
Tutsi were present, and could follow what was being said, they were
victims; they were going to be killed, but they were not to go out and
kill; they were the ones who were going to be killed.
Q.   On that occasion, did the bourgmestre bring with him the weapons that
you were supposed to go out and kill people with?
A.   On that occasion, Bourgmestre Gacumbitsi did not distribute any
weapons.
Q.   Were weapons distributed in your cellule on any other occasion?
A.   Please follow what I am saying, Counsel.  Gacumbitsi did not
distribute any weapons in my presence; he might have distributed
weapons on another occasion.  You might put -- want to put the
question to him, and this would assist in the pursuit of justice.
Q.   Witness TBI, you have said that, “Before the 14th of April 1994,
there were no specific problems in our area.”  Are you referring to
your cellule, secteur, or commune?
A.   Thank you for your question, Counsel.  I have told you that I was
referring to the events that I eye-witnessed directly.  For the other
-- as to other matters, it might be better to ask your client.  The
events I am referring to are events that took take place in our
cellule.  I would not be able to give you any answers as to what
happened elsewhere because I was not there.
Q.   Witness TBI, on the 14th of April was anyone killed in your area?
A.   Counsel, I will repeat this once more:  When he gave us instructions
to kill people on the 14th of April, we looted, we destroyed houses,
and we slaughtered the cattle, but we did not kill any people on that
day.
Q.   Witness TIB -- sorry, Witness TBI -- Witness TBI, don't you --
weren't you disobeying the bourgmestre's orders by not killing people
on that day?
A.   No, we didn't disobey.  We implemented one specific aspect of his
orders.  We weren't going to loot and also slaughter the cattle and go
and man roadblocks; we participated in the activities that would most
benefit us.  We would loot, but in reality, we did not disobey the
orders given to us, especially as we continued the next day.  And on
the day that followed, we implemented the remaining instructions.
Q.   Witness TBA -- I, why didn't you begin killing people immediately
since there -- those people were present when the orders were given?
A.   This is easily understandable.  When you want to participate in an
activity such as that, a negative behaviour, first of all, you start
to think, and then you take your own decision.  We decided to begin
with looting and slaughtering the cattle, and then we decided to
continue by killing the people.
Q.   Witness TBI, can you tell the Trial Chamber when you killed the woman
and her two children?
A.   I will repeat the date.  I explained that the woman and her two
children were killed on the 19th of April 1994.
Q.   Five days after you received the instructions; is that correct?
A.   Yes.  We killed her five days after, but that does not mean that
other persons were not killed.  Other persons were killed before the
th.
Q.   Witness TBI, on the day you received the instructions, was the
responsable of your secteur present?
A.   Let us agree on the terminology.  Are you talking about the
conseiller of the secteur or the responsable?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, did you hear the question he would like you to clarify?  “Are
you referring to the conseiller of the secteur or the responsable of
the secteur?”  Just answer the question, please.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam President.  I am referring to the conseiller, unless
there is a difference between the two.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, there’s an important difference between the two.  There is no
responsable de secteur; in our system we have a conseiller de secteur,
and the conseiller in our secteur was a Tutsi; therefore, he could not
be -- he was not present there.  In any case, he did not live in our
cellule, he lived in another cellule that was in the secteur.
Q.   Did you kill him?
A.   No, we did not kill him.
Q.   Can you tell us why?
A.   Yes, I can.  You don't seem to have a grasp of the situation.  The
people that you're -- the person that you are representing was like a
God.  He came and he told us not to kill our conseiller, and the
person whose name was our leader, who was in charge, insisted, so that
the family of the conseiller de secteur and the conseiller of the
secteur should be spared.  Gacumbitsi had given orders that the Tutsi
should be killed, but that it didn't apply for the conseiller, and he
(sic) didn't know if it was because they were good friends or because
they had collaborated.  And to this day, this person is still alive.
Their -- this house -- person's house is still standing and their
property was never looted.
Q.   Witness TBI, we are in open session.  If you don't answer the next
question properly, it could lead to some problems.  So, please, do not
make any comments and just specifically focus on the question.  Do you
maintain that the conseiller de secteur did not live in your cellule?
Do not mention the name of the cellule or the secteur, just answer.
Do you maintain that the conseiller de secteur was not from your
cellule?
A.   But I know this perfectly well.  The conseiller de secteur was not
from our cellule, but the cellule in which he lived bordered our
cellule.
Q.   In response to a question put to you by the Prosecutor this morning,
you stated as follows:  "I have personally killed three persons -- a
woman and her two children."  There is a question that I would like to
put to you:  Do you stand by your testimony?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Your Honours, that was a mischaracterisation of the witness's
testimony.  He said he killed four people and not three.
THE WITNESS:
The confession that I made to the prosecutor's office in Kibungo is
true.  I killed three people, but I told you that there was a fourth
victim.  It wasn't just three victims; I killed four persons.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, I even asked the question to -- I asked the Witness the
question --
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, absolutely, Madam President.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, even the other --
MADAM PRESIDENT:
-- my question was:  Were the four persons killed on the same day?
THE WITNESS:
Let me explain.  These persons were not killed on the same day.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   These persons were not killed on the same day; and so, when were they
killed?
A.   These persons were not killed on the same day.  The woman and her two
children were killed on the 19th of April, as I have already
explained, whilst the other person was killed on the 15th of April
in the morning.  It was at that point that we drowned him.  The
situation was very tense and we had decided to implement the
instructions that we had received from your client.
Q.   Witness TBI, in your confession, you stated to the prosecutor of
Kibungo that you personally killed the woman and her two children and
that other persons brought Damascene to you; is that correct?
A.   Thank you, Counsel, for your question.  That's correct; Damascene did
not live in our secteur, he was fleeing -- he was running away, and
when he reached the secteur that was bordering the centre I have
already spoken to you of, the people of that locality caught him and
brought him to the centre, and that is why we took him to the river
and drowned him.  But we weren't the ones that had hunted him down; it
was other persons who brought him to us.  Up to that stage, there had
not been any killings.  Your client is responsible for all of these
unfortunate events.
Q.   Witness TBI, in response to the question put to you by the Judge, you
stated, "I personally killed a woman and her two children."  What
exactly by you mean by, "I personally killed a woman and two
children?"
A.   Let's agree on the words, Counsel.  This does not mean that I
personally cut someone up with a machete or that I went off on my own.
When you say, "I personally," I don't think that I made such a
statement, unless there was a poor interpretation.  We drowned people
in the Akagera River, which is why I recognise that I have my share of
responsibility in what happened, and that is why I say I have a great
deal of remorse for what I did, based on instructions received from
your client.
Q.   Madam President, Your Honours, it was 9:15 in the morning, draft 37 --
page 7:  "I also personally recognise that I -- admit that I killed a
woman and her two children.  I stated that, this morning” --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
If Counsel could please repeat the page number, the interpreter -- the
English interpreter did not hear it.
JUDGE REDDY:
What is the difference between those two propositions, Counsel; can
you please tell me, because I don't see it?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Your Honour, if this statement is accurate as to our understanding, it
means that he killed without someone else participating.  It means
that he alone killed that person, because for Damascene he pushed him
into the water, but he was with other persons, but now he said, "I
personally killed a woman and her two children."  "I personally".
JUDGE REDDY:
Well, what he is saying is that he is responsible.  He is not saying
anything beyond that, is he?  He is accepting responsibility for their
death.  At no stage has he said that he had himself personally thrown
them into the water; has he?  I didn't hear it.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Your Honour, I thought that when someone says “personally,” it means
“individually,” because with Damascene he said, “With others.”  “We
went to throw them in.”
There were doubts that remained, and that is why we asked the question
of the witness -- put the question to the witness, because he said
that he personally killed the woman and the two children.  But he
added, "We threw them in the river," and that is why I asked the
witness, “With respect to the fourth person that you killed,” and he
said the same thing:  "This person I -- we pushed this person into the
river and we waited to make sure the person did indeed drown, and the
person died before -- was dead before we left."  But to me it was very
clear.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, for Damascene, it’s clear there is no discussion.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
It’s just that it appears in the draft and in the preliminary
statement as to whether or not the woman and the two children were
thrown in the river, or they died in the water, or whether they were
killed before being thrown into the water, because the witness has
confessed to a crime; at least, that's what he stated this morning.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBI -- Witness TBI, what did you understand from the -- what
the bourgmestre said to the man who was supervising you, leading you?
A.   This morning I explained that the instructions were given in public
and I was present when they were talking; I was listening.  I could
not prevent myself from listening to what your client was saying.
Q.   Did Gacumbitsi have a tool to speak to you or was he using his own
voice?  Did he have a megaphone or did he use his own voice?
A.   I will explain to you because you were not present.  Gacumbitsi did
not use a megaphone, he used his normal voice -- his own voice.
Q.   Do you understand --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Change of sentence --
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   In the Solidarity camp, were there other people who knew Gacumbitsi?
A.   You mean when I made my confession?  I should like you to repeat the
question for me to be able to understand it and give you an adequate
response.
Q.   Witness TBI, when they came to hear you, were there other people who
knew the bourgmestre?
A.   I should like to know the identity of the people who came to
interview me.  I was interviewed by many people.  Who are you
referring to, so that I may respond correctly?
Q.   I mean the -- I mean the Prosecutor.
A.   The state prosecutor? There is the state prosecutor at Kibungo's
state prosecutor's office.  I told you that I did not meet him
personally, I appeared before a commission.  There is also the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.  So, are
you talking of the Tribunal's Prosecutor or the state prosecutor?
Q.   Madam President, must I go on answering the witness, or is it I who
am cross-examining him?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
If your question is not clear to the witness, he can, I am sure, ask
you the necessary questions to elucidate it --
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, but  Madam, I spoke of the camp; there was only one.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
-- and I do believe he is addressing you with all due respect.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, very much.  When there are explanations it is easier to
answer questions.  It was the Tribunal's investigators, or people
working for the Tribunal, that came to question me and no one else.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Apart from the 14th, did Gacumbitsi come back to your place?
A.   Thank you, Counsel.  After the 14th of April, I cannot confirm nor
deny that Gacumbitsi came, because I was not there regularly; I
participated in other activities.
Q.   You said this morning that on that day you helped the Tutsi to cross
the river, Kagera -- the Kagera river; is that correct?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
I think it should be “clear” -- should be “clear.”
THE WITNESS:
During that period, what I can describe is what I did, and most of --
activities were undertaken in common, together, that is why I say
"we."  And most of us, rather directly participated in the looting and
slaughtering of cattle, but others took advantage of the opportunity
to help their friends to escape.
(Pages 41 to 49 by Judith Baverstock)
H
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBI, did you also have friends among the Tutsi?
A.   Thank you very much for that question.  Even if I am one of the
criminals in Rwanda, I am saddened, because I had a Tutsi friend and I
killed Tutsi who were members of the families of my friends.  So I
must beg for forgiveness in this -- in answering this question.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Lordships, at the time of the preliminary
investigation -- I think it's page 3 -- anyhow, it's the only page in
the statement -- contained in the statement -- last paragraph.  If I
may read it, the last paragraph, the English text doesn't tell, but
one paragraph:  "That day, we Hutu did not -- it's the third but last
sentence, "On that day, we, the Hutu community, never executed his
instructions; we instead helped the Tutsi people to cross the Akagera
River to Tanzania."
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBI, is that your statement?
A.   Yes, that is what I stated, but if you need further explanation, I
would be glad to do so.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Lordships, what follows is as follows: "But
after some days we killed the Tutsi people we could come across,
destroyed their properties and slaughtered their cattle."
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Is that also your statement, Witness TBI?
A.   Yes, that is what I stated.
Q.   In relation to those statements and what you said this morning and
here this after -- here this morning and this afternoon, have you
anything you wish to change?
A.   No, there is nothing to change in my statement because that was my
statement -- my statements.  The mistake perhaps is that I could not
distinguish between the gravity of the crimes.  We did not immediately
obey the instruction to kill.  So, as I said, we looted and we did not
immediately fulfil all the bourgmestre's instructions, and some of us
helped Tutsi to cross the Akagera River
Q.   At that unfortunate time, were you ever in a group that was being
supervised by the person entrusted with fulfilling the bourgmestre's
orders?  Avoid, please, mentioning his name because we are in open
session?
A.   Certainly, yes, I was part of that group of criminals, and it was
that man who led us.
Q.   Witness TBI, you stated this morning that your confessions date from
.  Do you confirm that?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Could you please repeat that question?  The interpreter requests it
was not clear; the full sentence was not clear.
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   This morning, Witness TBI, stated that he made two confessions in
writing; the first in 1998, and the second in 2000.  I should like to
know whether he is sticking to that.
A.   Yes.
Q.   When you fled to Tanzania, can you tell the Trial Chamber in what
location you were after crossing?
A.   I sought refuge in Ngara region at Benaco camp.
Q.   Was that camp guarded?
A.   Yes, the camp was guarded, although it wasn't encircled, but there
was a presence of the Tanzanian law enforcement agencies.
Q.   At Benaco camp did you recognise people that were with you in April
in Rusumo commune?
A.   In the camp, I saw the members of the population from my secteur,
from my cellule.
Q.   Witness TBI, in order to gain entrance to Benaco camp, did one have
to register?
A.   On entering that camp, the camp was not well organised, but
subsequently, a reception centre was established to receive the
refugees.
Q.   When did you leave that camp?
A.   You mean when I went back to my country?  Counsel, you mean the dates
when I went back to my country?
Q.   Witness TBI, on what date did you leave Benaco camp?
A.   I left Benaco camp to return from exile in December 1996 with other
refugees who had been at the camp.
Q.   To your knowledge, did the bourgmestre stay at that camp?
A.   Yes, I know very well.  The bourgmestre was at Benaco camp -- in
Benaco camp, and we were together in the camp.
Q.   Witness TBI, did you see him or did you hear that he was in the camp?
A.   I saw him.  He was present at the camp -- in the camp.  I personally
saw him.
Q.   Witness TBI, does that mean that you saw the Accused twice in 1994?
A.   Let us be quite clear, Counsel.  Why are you trying to lay a trap?
Why are you trying to entrap me?  I told you that in 1994 when we were
in Rwanda, I saw that man only once in April, but as regards our stay
in the camp in 1994 until our return to our country, I saw him more
than once.  But in April 1994 in Rwanda, I only saw him once.
Q.   Witness TBI, in Benaco camp, were there any Tutsi?
A.   Counsel, the question as to whether there were any Tutsi is possible.
We were not obliged to exported racial segregation to another
country.
Q.   Witness TBI, were there any Tutsi in Benaco camp?
A.   I will repeat what I have just told you, Counsel.  I told you the
following:  There might have been Tutsi in the camp or not, but that
was none of my business.
Q.   Witness TBI, to your knowledge between May 1994 and December 1996,
was there any killing in Benaco camp?
A.   I would tell you what I heard said, but I was not a witness.  I did
not witness myself.  I learned that there was a person who was killed
there, a pastor distributing pamphlets.  That person was killed, but I
only heard about it.  I did not witness that murder.
Q.   Did you also learn of who was the person or persons who allegedly
killed him?
A.   I had no interest in it.  Why should I investigate it?
Q.   Before you went to Tanzania you said you were fleeing before the RPF.
Did the RPF kill people on their arrival?
A.   I told you that when I heard that the Inkotanyi had arrived at one
hill, I immediately fled in order not be held to answer for the crimes
I had committed.
Q.   Witness TBI, of you and the bourgmestre, who left Benaco camp first?
A.   Counsel, I don't know why you are asking me that.  Perhaps you are
right, but I don't have any answer for you.  The Tanzanian authorities
ordered us to leave their country, I had my own problems, I don't know
whether such and such a person left before me or after me.  I really
can't tell you.  I don't know who left first, who left later.
Q.   Witness TBI, when you receive a ration of food, your food rations --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Oh, sorry, maybe the question is when did you receive food rations.
THE WITNESS:
If my memory serves me right, we were given grams of beans, oil, salt
and also even soap, and also tarpaulins.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Your Honours, the interpreter didn't quite get the question.  The
interpreters -- English interpreters have indicated that they didn't
quite get the question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, could you please put your question of necessity.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Madam Interpreter (sic).
BY MR. KOUENGOUA:
Q.   Witness TBI, during your stay at Benaco camp, did you receive food
rations?
A.   I explained it to you clearly.  The UNHCR gave food rations to
refugees.
Q.   Witness TBI, to your knowledge, did Bourgmestre Gacumbitsi play a
role in your camp?
A.   He was not an employee of the UNHCR, but he continued leading
refugees who came from Rusumo commune.
Q.   Witness TBI, do you at last remember when Gacumbitsi left the
commercial centre where you were?
A.   Counsel, you are complicating my task.  I was not interested in the
time.  All I can tell you is that it was around the evening at about 5
p.m.  If an official comes with policemen and tells you to do
something, I am going to do it.  All I remember is the date.  And, in
fact, even to remember the date required a great effort of me.
Q.   How much time did you spend at that place before the arrival of
Gacumbitsi?
A.   Just a short while, because someone who had some money could go to
the centre -- to the commercial centre to have a drink.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Honours, I think I am done with Witness TBI.
And I thank you for your attention.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We also thank you, Mr. Kouengoua.
Judge Reddy has a few questions for the witness.
JUDGE REDDY:
Am still not very clear about some things, so I will ask you some
questions just so that I can better understand you.  Now, you told us
that you killed four people in Rwanda during the genocide; am I
correct?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, together with my colleagues, we threw the bodies of the persons
in Akagera River.
JUDGE REDDY:
You accept the responsibility for causing the death of four people,
either you did it singly or with others, doesn't matter for the
moment.  You accept responsibility; is that correct?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I accept that -- I accept the role I played in the genocide and
the massacres of 1994.  I agree that I played a bad role in the murder
of the four persons.  Together with my friends, we also looted, but we
did all of this because of the bad leadership of Mr. Gacumbitsi.  I
repeat that before the date of 14 April, nothing bad had happened in
my area -- in our region.
JUDGE REDDY:
Let's leave the leadership aside and let's leave the looting alive --
aside.  Now, do I understand your evidence to be that the authorities
in Rwanda accused you of killing three other people; that is, apart
from the four that you say you killed; is that correct?
THE WITNESS:
It is not Rwandan authorities, Your Honour, but, rather, a genocide
survivor who accused me of the murder of those three persons.  He
instituted proceedings against me before Rwandan courts.  If the
allegations were founded, I would not have been acquitted or released,
because an investigation was carried out and it was established that I
am not guilty of other crimes, apart from those that I admitted to.
Therefore, if the judicial authorities had realised that I was guilty
of other crimes, I would still be in prison today, because I would be
considered a liar.
JUDGE REDDY:
But the question of whether you killed only four people or seven
people has yet to be resolved in Rwanda.  That's how I understood your
evidence or was I wrong -- or am I wrong?
THE WITNESS:
The matter has not yet been resolved.  I am waiting to be tried by the
Gacaca court in Rusumo commune, which is going to see whether my
confessions are true, and if I did not fail to mention other crimes.
JUDGE REDDY:
Is the Gacaca court to decide whether you kill seven people or four
people?  Is that what they will decide?
THE WITNESS:
The Gacaca court in our cellule is going to establish the reliability
of my confessions and this will be done openly.  If that court comes
to the finding that I am speaking the truth, my case will be
transferred to the Gacaca court in the commune, and the commune is
going to try me in the presence of the local people of my cellule.
JUDGE REDDY:
So, the Gacaca court will not decide whether you killed seven people
or four people.  Is that what you are saying now?
THE WITNESS:
The Gacaca court is going to establish my responsibility, either for
the death of the three or four or seven persons.
JUDGE REDDY:
All right.  Assuming that they decide that you killed seven people,
what would your fate be; would you still be category two, or would you
move up to category one?
THE WITNESS:
For one to be placed in category one, well, it depends on the crimes
charged against me, which crimes could put me under category one.
Otherwise, the fact of killing seven persons cannot put me in category
one.  But it emerges that the three persons whom I did not admit I
killed, if it transpires that I killed them, I could be convicted as
someone who did not confess to his guilt.
JUDGE REDDY:
Let's get this clear.  As far as you are concerned, you have neither
been dealt with for the death of the four people that you say you
killed, nor have you dealt -- nor have you been dealt with for causing
the death of the three people that you are accused of by some person
or persons in Rwanda; is that correct as of today?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I have never appeared before a Court so far.
JUDGE REDDY:
All right, one other issue.  On the 14th of February, you and your
friends allowed two of your Tutsi friends to escape.  You didn't hurt
them, you didn't kill them, in fact, you helped them escape; is that
correct?  That was your testimony.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, we did not prevent them from fleeing.
JUDGE REDDY:
That was a commendable behaviour.
THE WITNESS:
We did not prevent them from crossing the river.
JUDGE REDDY:
But why did you kill them subsequently, other Tutsi?
THE WITNESS:
With the passing of time people became heated up.  We were given
instructions, but his subordinates also came and told us, "You have
looted the property of a Tutsi, why don't you kill them.  Show us
people who are not joining others to kill the Tutsi.  Show us the
people who are acting as Tutsi accomplices."   So, if it emerged that
you were not a member of a group of killers, you pay for that.  You
bore consequences, and that is why we thought it appropriate to kill.
JUDGE REDDY:
So at the time you yourself approved of those killings; did you?  At
the time you were doing it, you were not merely carrying out orders,
but you yourself approved those killings; did you?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, that's correct.
JUDGE REDDY:
And when did you come -- at what point in time did you come to repent
and relent what you have done?
THE WITNESS:
Your Honour, without misleading you, I would say that I repented after
I saw the consequences of the crimes I had committed after I had been
imprisoned, and after having spent some hard times in prison, this led
me to repent.
JUDGE REDDY:
Yes, thank you.  I have no other question.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Your Honour.
Witness, you told us that the Accused had ordered certain persons - -
you even wrote the names of those persons on a sheet of paper that was
given to you - - so, you said that certain persons were asked by the
Accused to see to the enforcement of his decisions.  You still haven't
told us the name of the person.  Are you in a position to tell us the
duties of those persons?
THE WITNESS:
I thank you, Your Honour, for your question.  The said persons were
asked -- were responsible for taking us ahead of him and to tell us,
"Let us go here, let us go there; let us go and kill."  And since
those persons had modern weapons, that is why we moved along side them
so that we should be seen in their company.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
But did you know the duties of those persons apart from what you are
telling us now?  What were his previous functions; that is, his
functions before the events of 1994?
THE WITNESS:
He was a businessman, a tradesman who had a shop at the commercial
centre that I mentioned to you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Were these duties not in any way related to those of the Accused?
THE WITNESS:
Your Honour, I am not aware of the personal relationship between them.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  So, he was someone who acted in a private capacity, who
was not acting as a -- in other words, that person was not under the
authority of the bourgmestre; is that correct?
THE WITNESS:
I cannot say whether that is correct or not.  I cannot tell you
whether that person was or was not under the authority of the
bourgmestre.  That is the -- that's a matter of -- that is the private
life of that person and the personal relations between the Accused and
that person.  Personally, I am not in a position to tell you anything
about that.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
To your knowledge, did that person act according to the instructions
of the Accused?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, he did.  It is true that some persons could escape from his
vigilance and help others, or some persons did not participate in the
attacks, otherwise almost all members of the local; population
followed him.  If you came to my place you will be able to see that
there are many people who are detained because of these activities
that were carried out at that time.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You told this Court that this person had modern weapons, what do you
mean by that?
THE WITNESS:
I saw that the man had two grenades.  One of the grenades had a wooden
handle; the other grenade resembled a fruit, an avocado, for example.
These are the weapons which I described as modern weapons.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
To your knowledge, is that person still alive?
THE WITNESS:
The last time I saw that person was in 1996 when we returned from
exile.  It was in the refugee camp in Tanzania.  At present, I do not
know where he is; I do not know whether or not he is alive.  It's a
long time I did not see him.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You also told us that policemen who accompanied the Accused had guns.
Can you briefly describe the guns?
THE WITNESS:
Your Honour, I am a civilian; it is not easy for me to know the type
of gun.  I can see a gun and know that it is a gun, but would be
unable to know what type of gun it is.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, but perhaps you may give a few description.  Was it in wood?
Describe the gun that you saw?  Was it long?  Was it short?  Without,
of course, telling us the make.
THE WITNESS:
I saw the gun, and if my memory serves me right, I noticed that the
butt was a wooden butt.  However, I did not verify each one's gun; I
was unable to know whether all their guns had wooden butts.  Nobody
knew that they were going to be questioned subsequently with respect
to the events.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Were these weapons used in your presence, whether we are talking of
guns or the modern weapons that you talked about earlier on?
THE WITNESS:
I will begin with the weapons that the policeman had.  The police did
not shoot at anyone in our area.  What he did was to send us away from
that place asking us to go and implement the bourgmestre's orders.
With regard to the person who had modern weapons, and who accompanied
us during the attacks, he never used the grenades.  Well, the victims
were afraid, they did not put up any struggle, and it was not
necessary for grenades to be used on the victims.  At the end of the
war, the person who had the grenade still had them.  I must specify
that the attacks involved 30 or more persons.  Consequently, the
victims were afraid of such groups of persons and did not resist their
assailants.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Thank you, Witness, for the answers to my questions.
Counsel for the Prosecution, do you want to carry out a re-examination
of this witness?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
I have no questions for re-examination, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
Witness, we thank you.  You have come to the end of your testimony
before this Court.  We wish you a safe return back home.
THE WITNESS:
I thank you, Madam President.  I thank you, Your Honours.
(Witness excused)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, do you have another witness to call now?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
We do, Madam President.  Before we call that witness, I thought that
this might be the appropriate time to clarify the question of
pseudonym for TBI and for TBJ that was raised this morning.  I have
handed to the registrar and to your assistant two letters, both from
the Prosecutor.  The first is dated the 1st of July 2003 to Ms. Talon
who is the Trial Chamber coordinator, and that to be circulated to
Defence counsel, to each of the Judges of the Trial Chamber, and to
the registry.
That letter refers to the disclosure of witness statements and
attaches a list.  On that list which is the second page of the letter,
you will see that Witness TBI is the witness who you have just heard
from.
JUDGE REDDY:
And that witness is No. 251 --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Your Honour, please your microphone is on.  Thank you.
JUDGE REDDY:
-- this is No. 251 on your list; isn't it?
MS. MOBBERLEY:
That's right, Your Honour.  His named is listed as No. 251.
The second letter which is dated the 7th of July 2003, draws the
attention of the Trial Chamber coordinator, and by way of a copy, also
the attention of Defence counsel and the Judges of this Trial Chamber,
to an error made by the Office of the Prosecutor.  So, a week after
disclosing the statements, the Prosecutor wrote and said, "Please note
that the cover sheets for Witnesses TBJ and TBI were mistakenly
switched and ought to be renamed.  You will see that the second page
of that letter, again, confirms that Witness TBI is the person who is
listed on the Prosecutor's list of names under 251, and that TBJ is
also listed correspondingly.
So, while there was on the 1st of July an error that emanated from the
Office of the Prosecutor, the matter was cleared up both by the
attachment to that letter, but more particularly by the specific
letter addressing the point on the 7th of July 2003.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, thank you, Madam Prosecutor.
Counsel Kouengoua, have you taken note of these letters?  What do you
wish to say?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, Your Honours, I have no specific comments to make
with respect to these two letters.  This morning I just wanted to draw
the Trial Chamber's attention to the fact that the witness said that
this was the first time in May -- he appeared in May 2003, which is
what appear in the document.  We were given a document that said that
he had been heard in the year 2000.  And with respect to the other
documents, this is what caused the problems.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, but there are no further problems now; are there, with respect to
the witness that has just appeared?  This is indeed Witness TBI, as it
appears from the documents that you have in your possession.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes, I had wanted to say that he stated this morning that he was heard
on the first time on the 1st of May 2003 and the 14th of May 2003, but
we received the document from Saturday.  He said that he was heard in
the year 2000 -- on the 6th of April 2000.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, things are now clear.  TBI is indeed the witness that was heard
this morning.
JUDGE REDDY:
I would just like to ask Mr. Kouengoua, do you admit receiving these
two letters?  Do you admit receiving these two letters from the
Prosecution or from the coordinator?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Your Honour.  Well, this is a problem that was raised here
this morning.  I was given copies of two letters.  If the letter was
sent to the coordinator of the Trial Chamber to be forwarded to us,
then we must have received a copy.  The only thing - - I don't know
what happened, is that usually when we receive documents from the
coordinator, we usually provide the date and time on which we received
it.  We sign for it.  But there would be no reason for the Trial
Chamber coordinator not to communicate these two letters with me.  And
with the cross-examination, I did not have the time to go and conduct
more research.  That is why on the face of things - - this is why I
said that I have no specific comments to make with respect to these
two letters.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam President, do we have a witness?  Maybe Mr. Karegyesa will be
handling this witness.
MS. MOBBERLEY:
Yes, Your Honours.  The next witness is Prosecution Witness TBJ, and
Mr. Karegyesa will be taking the witness, but I understand he has a
preliminary matter to raise with you beforehand.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
(Not interpreted)
MR. KAREGYESA:
Good afternoon, Madam President, Your Honours, I have not received an
English translation of what you said, but nonetheless, I just wanted
to bring it to Your Honours’ attention that we have this afternoon
circulated through your assistant, two English translations, draft in-
house translations for the pro-justicia statements of Witness TBI, who
testified this morning and TBJ whom we are calling next.  The others
are still in the translation process of the OTP, and would be availed
to Your Lordships as soon as they are ready.
With that, Your Honours, could the courtroom officer usher into the
Chamber Witness TBJ.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Madam President, with your leave.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Kouengoua, you asked to speak.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Yes.  The Prosecutor did not deal -- address the Defence's main
concern which we raised earlier, which was the fact -- the Trial
Chamber’s decision on the 1st of August, stating that they had to
disclose their evidence.  Prosecutor must disclose its evidence, and
if not then he should come and explain why.  Neither of these
recommendations issued by the Trial Chamber were observed, and
therefore, I want to know if we should accept the documents as they
are given to us.  This is an order that was issued by the Trial
Chamber.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, do you wish to address what has just been said?
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, I'm not quite sure I understand counsel, but assuming
for a moment that I do, my response is simply that the Prosecutor
discloses material that is within her custody and possession, and this
is precisely what we tried to achieve this morning.  This material
came into our possession on Saturday.  It arrived on Friday night by
the UN flight from Kigali.  We had rough translations done by the OTP
over just yesterday from Kinyarwanda to French, and we disclosed it to
counsel.  And we could have looked for counsel all over town yesterday
and disclose it to him in Kinyarwanda, but he has always complained
that his working knowledge is -- working language is French.  So we
extended that courtesy.  We could not have had them ready today if we
submitted them to language section this morning.  And that is why we
went to the extra mile to have them translated into his working
language first, and second, to extend the courtesy and have them
translated into English for the benefit of Your Honours.  That is all
I can say.
And maybe I should add that should we -- in the event that we receive
any more documentation regarding this category of witnesses, we will
comply with the order and disclose it to the Defence.
Most obliged, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Do you wish to add anything, Counsel?
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Obviously, Madam President.  I would like to read from the order of
the 1st of August.  I am sorry, I wish to apologise to the
interpreters for the speed in which I was reading this document.  May
I proceed?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The interpreters would just like to state for the record that we do
not have a copy of the decision that counsel is reading from.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
“The Trial Chamber orders the Prosecutor if he use a specific document
to gather evidence mentioned in annex A to allow the Defence to
inspect the documents within 48 hours, beginning -- the time starts
running from the time this decision was rendered and should justify
itself before the Trial Chamber before the expiry of this delay.  If
there is any exception with respect to its obligation to disclose,
pursuant to Article 66(B) -- of the Rule 66(B) of the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence.  Arusha, August 1st 2003."
Today is the 18th of August 2003, and to my knowledge, the 48 hours
have expired, and I receive nothing within those 48 hours.  And I do
not believe that the Prosecutor has provided any explanation to this
matter.  And I would, therefore, like to say that the Prosecutor did
not respect the decision -- the order that was issued by the Trial
Chamber.
Therefore, Madam President, Your Honours, the conclusion that the
Defence wishes to draw at this stage of the proceedings is that the
evidence that is now arriving today from Kigali cannot be accepted,
because they did not follow your orders.  They did not respect justice
and, therefore, they should be rejected.  Thank you very much.
JUDGE REDDY:
Mr. Kouengoua, could you please explain to us how does the Prosecution
disclose something that they don't have, whether it is within 48 hours
or 7 days or 70 days?  They say they didn't have these documents till
they arrived ion Saturday in Kinyarwanda, and they have to translate
it before they could give it to you.
MR. KOUENGOUA:
Thank you, Your Honour.
Madam President, Your Honours, the question that was put to the
Prosecutor was whether they could disclose evidence relating to these
persons.  The Prosecutor did not refuse to disclose the information
but, rather, send us a summary of everything we had asked for. And all
of the Judges, the Trial Chamber, the Defence received these
summaries, and we replied by saying "You cannot summarise a text that
you do not have available to you in full.  And that is when the Trial
Chamber said that unless the Prosecutor said he didn't have the
documents, but then he should come before the Trial Chamber and
explain, for example, what he is saying today, he will bring the
document whenever he has it.  The Prosecutor did not do anything.  A
decision -- an order was made, and when orders are thus rendered, they
are binding to myself, to the Prosecutor, to everyone.  They didn't
disclose any document to me within 48 hours, no, he didn't.  After the
hours, did he come before the Trial Chamber to explain himself?
No, he didn't.  That is your decision.  That was your order; not mine.
And therefore, I am saying that he is foreclosed -- the matter is
time barred.
(Pages 50 to 62 by Haruna Farage)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Our order stays.  The documents the Prosecutor have in its possession,
we cannot expect the Prosecutor to disclose documents he does not
have.  He has explained that he received the documents on Saturday,
therefore, the documents needed to be translated between Saturday and
today.  There was only Sunday, and it was today that he was able to
obtain the documents in French and he disclosed them to us.  That is
what the Trial Chamber orders, and we therefore ask the Prosecutor to
proceed with his examination-in-chief.
MR. JUMA:
Mr. Witness, could you please stand up?  Please raise your right hand
and repeat the following words after me.
(Declaration made by Witness TBJ in Kinyarwanda)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We would like to thank the witness for making a solemn declaration,
and we would now like to ask the Prosecutor to proceed with his
examination-in-chief.
MR. KAREGYESA:
May it please Your Honours, I would move this Chamber into closed
session to establish the particulars and dissidence of this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well, we shall now move into closed session, and we regret to
inform the public of this.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 70] was extracted and sealed under separate cover as the session
was heard in camera)
(Page 63 by Regina Limula)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are presently in open session.  Counsel for the Prosecution, pray
continue.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Thank you, Madam President, Your Honours.
BY MR. KAREGYESA:
Q.   Witness, as you have heard, we are now in open session.  You should
be cautious in answering the questions I shall be putting to you so as
not to divulge your identity.
Witness, you have told this Chamber that you knew the bourgmestre
Sylvestre Gacumbitsi prior to the events of 1994.  Now, can you tell
Their Lordships whether during the month of April 1994, subsequent to
the death of President Habyarimana, you had occasion to see or
otherwise meet the bourgmestre, Sylvestre Gacumbitsi?
A.   Yes.  On the 14th of April 1994 Gacumbitsi found us at the trading
centre that I mentioned.
Q.   Do you remember what day of the week it was, the 14th of April 1994?
A.   I remember that it was a Thursday.
Q.   And around what time of day did you see Gacumbitsi at the trading
centre?
A.   Although I was not wearing a wristwatch at the time, I would say it
was approximately -- I saw him approximately between 10 a.m. and noon.
Q.   And, Witness, what were you, yourself, doing at that trading centre
on that morning?
A.   We were talking, drinking; really, nothing else.
Q.   Witness, did I understand you to say that you were drinking, or
others were drinking?
A.   It is the others who were drinking banana wine because I do not drink
banana wine.
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  And you have told Their Lordships that
Gacumbitsi found you at that centre.  Did he arrive on foot or was he
in a motor vehicle?
A.   He came aboard a vehicle.
Q.   Do you recall what kind of vehicle it was, Witness?
A.   I did not pay sufficient attention to have identified the make of
vehicle.  I had no particular interest in whatever make of vehicle it
was.
Q.   Was it a lorry, a small car, a pickup; do you have any recollection,
Witness?
A.   It was a small vehicle that we at the time called a double cabine,
double cabin.
Q.   And was this double cabin, a saloon car or a pickup vehicle?
A.   It was a camionnette, a pickup, that had an open space at the back.
Q.   And, Witness, do you recall the colour of this double-cabin pickup?
A.   Sort of whitish.  I really do not know how to describe the colour,
really.  It wasn't white-white, but it was whitish.
Q.   And was Sylvestre Gacumbitsi alone or was he accompanied by others?
A.   He was with others.
Q.   And do you recall or did you know the others in his company, Witness?
A.   I remember some of those that accompanied him.
Q.   Can you tell Their Lordships who you remember as having been in the
company of Accused Gacumbitsi?
A.   Yes.  The first person I remember was the policeman whom we used to
call Rukara, I don't remember what his real name was.  There was also
Kazoba, who was an assistant policeman -- I don't know his proper
first name either -- and there were other policemen, but the only one
I can name was called Berakumenyo.
Q.   So, Witness, you have given us the names of three policemen.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Your Honours, Rukara is spelt R-U-K-A-R-A.  Kazoba is found at No. 99
on the Prosecutor's list.  Berakumenyo is spelt B-E-R-A-K-E-M-E-N-Y-O.
I notice, Your Honours, that it is approaching five minutes after
time.  I would be ready to continue, but only if you oblige;
otherwise, we could continue tomorrow morning.  I have mostly -- most
probably, just about 40 minutes with this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well, Counsel for the Prosecution, we shall adjourn until
tomorrow morning and you can pursue your examination-in-chief at 8:45.
MR. KAREGYESA:
Most obliged, Your Honour.  I just want to correct maybe a
misunderstanding.  I have been advised that I may not have been clear.
I said 40, as in four-zero, not 14; forty minutes, four-zero, almost
three-quarters of an hour.  Most obliged.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The hearing is adjourned until tomorrow morning, 8:45.
(Court adjourned at 1705H)
(Pages 71 to 72 by Verna Butler)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Regina Limula, Verna Butler, Judith Baverstock and Haruna Farage,
Official Court Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, do hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-
entitled cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was
taken in shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer;
that the foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of
said proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________  Regina Limula
___________________________  Verna Butler
___________________________  Judith Baverstock
___________________________  Haruna Farage
