P R O C E E D I N G S
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Court is in session.  Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Yesterday we listened to Mr. Sahiri, the investigator, give testimony.
First of all, I would like to ask
Mr. Townsend whether he will waive his right to a re-examination of
this witness.  This was not determined yesterday.
MR. TOWNSEND:
We didn't seek any re-examination, Your Honour.  Thank you.  I would
have otherwise stood up.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Before the next witness is brought in, do the parties wish to raise
any motions?
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Yes, Madam President.  Your Honours, good morning.  The Defence has a
concern, Madam President.  A while ago, while we were coming to court,
we received the response of the Office of the Prosecutor to our two
motions that we raised before this Trial Chamber.  This report -- or
this response is dated Tuesday, 28 September, but we received it at
midday.  So obviously, as we told you yesterday, we are not in a
position to respond, but I am going to try to do so orally because we
cannot do it in writing.
I'm sorry to repeat myself, Madam President, but I respectfully noted
with your Trial Chamber that I did not share your optimism.  What is
at issue here?  We raised two motions on the disclosure of documents.
The first is a motion in which we ask the Office of the Prosecutor to
disclose to us and forward to us in full the documents pertaining to
the various witnesses who were -- who testified in Rwandan courts on
the Seromba trial, especially in Kibuye and Ruhengeri; and we added
another motion, which was a request for not only the files of accused
persons, but other persons who may have appeared as witnesses.  What
have we been told?  We were told, Madam President, Your Honours --
please note this.  I was told -- we were told that our request is
becoming tiring for its repetition.  We were told peremptorily that
everything has been disclosed to us; that is, the Office of the
Prosecutor has nothing to do about this and this had already been done
in full.
I shall stop here because I wish to read what the Office of the
Prosecutor is saying in its motion.  It states that our request is
baseless and that we should use our own means to approach the Rwandan
authorities in order to obtain the documents that they intend to use;
and if our approach is fruitless, then we may ask for the disclosure
of these documents.  This is surreal to me.  Madam President, there is
no need to recall before this Trial Chamber that in the case in point
our request is based on positive law in our court, meaning the
provisions of Article 24 of the Statute and Rule 66 (A)(ii) of the
Rules of Procedure and Evidence, which have been constantly and
verifiably applied by the various Chambers.  We are often asked or
often accused of not referring to the texts or the instruments on
which we base our claims.  I have just exposed this as a lie.
Permit me to recall before this Court, to support our requests,
various aspects of case law which have been used in this Court and
which cannot be denied.  The first which I will use to illustrate is
the decision of Trial Chamber III which was issued on the 2nd of
November 2001 in the Kajelijeli case.  In this decision, the Trial
Chamber considered that the statements of Prosecution witnesses under
detention, especially confessions, are necessary to preparing the case
of the Defence and are key to evaluating the credibility of witnesses.
Consequently, all statements regarding this judicial procedure must
be disclosed to the Defence pursuant to Rule 66 (A)(ii) of the Rules
of Procedure and Evidence.
In the Nyiramasuhuko case, the Trial Chamber states in recalling the
Kajelijeli case law:  "In the interest of justice, the Chamber
considers that it is the duty of the Prosecution to obtain the
statements from the Rwandan authorities and disclose them to the
Defence, under Rule 66 (A)(ii) of the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence."  So the conclusion is clear in the above-mentioned decision
and asks the Prosecutor, and the Prosecutor is requested to do
everything in his power to obtain the documents from the Rwandan
authorities.  If any doubt -- if there were any doubt, the 8 June 2001
judgment in the Bagilishema case and the Bagambiki case of 8 March
are also there to buttress our support.
Lastly, in Trial Chamber III, that is the Augustin Bizimungu,
Ndindiliyimana, Sagahutu, which case has been suspended since 20
September 2004, there is a decision in which I see the following.  The
Prosecutor will write to the Rwandan authorities -- I beg your pardon.
I beg your pardon.  May we continue?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
I believe there was a problem with the interpreting, madam.
MR. MONTHÉ:
So I shall repeat what I was saying.  Madam President.  I am sorry.  I
apologise to the interpreters.  I was saying that in the Bizimungu et
al case, the Office of the Prosecutor promised to obtain from the
Rwandan authorities that these documents be disclosed to the Trial
Chamber as soon as possible.  In the Simba case, we know that it has
been suspended because documents need to be disclosed to the Defence
to enable it to do its work.
Madam President, I would like to conclude by underlining a certain
number of principles.  Your
Trial Chamber, based on the Statutes creating it, is not only a
custodian but a guarantor of the Accused right to a fair and equitable
trial.  It means that the right of the Accused in respect of
disclosure of documents should be carefully protected.  This is what
Rule 20 states, that is, Rule 24 of the Statutes, to which I alluded.
And I think, Madam President, that today the witnesses that the
Prosecution wishes to present cannot be heard by your Trial Chamber.
If you read our additional motion, and I am sure that you are able to
do so, you will realise that in a bid to be more efficient, we
suggested, and the Trial Chamber will judge for itself, that the
witnesses who must come in, who are not involved in trials in Rwanda,
should be called -- and who are to be called by the Prosecutor before
this Trial Chamber will be
cross-examined by us, willingly.
In a few words, Madam President, Your Honours, this is what I wish to
say in regard to this trial.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel Monthé.
Yes, Madam Prosecutor, do you wish to respond?
MS. ARBIA:
Yes, Madam President, Your Honours.  My answer is very brief, simple
and clear.  The Defence in its two motions, that is, the one of the
th of September and the one of the 28th of September, has made the
same -- drawn the same conclusions, which are requesting the Trial
Chamber to order the Prosecutor to disclose fully and immediately all
documents to the Defence, which is of Kayiranga, Nturiye, both for the
first Trial Chamber, court of first instance, and in appeal.
I shall not mention pseudonyms here because, as I indicated, as I
emphasised in my response which I filed yesterday -- that is my
initial response, there is a violation in the two motions because in
the second motion the Defence persists in establishing a link between
the pseudonyms of Prosecution witnesses who are protected witnesses
and particulars of witnesses who testified in the trial against the
two priests.  This might identify witnesses because in Rwandan
procedure, witnesses are identified by name.  And in the second motion
there is even more detail to leading to the identification of these
witnesses because there are categories of witnesses:  those who are
detained, those who went to court, and those who did not go to court.
So there is a very real possibility of identifying these witnesses.
And to this end, I would like to ask the Trial Chamber to adopt
measures to maintain confidentiality in the meantime.
But I would like to repeat that in the first motion and the additional
motion, the conclusions are the same, and this means that the
application of the Defence is aimed at having an order issued to the
Prosecutor to disclose to the Defence the documents pertaining to the
trial of the two priests in Rwanda.
There are other -- there's other evidence to be disclosed, and I would
like to refer to the disclosure of evidence or documents regarding
detained persons because I think that this is what is likely to be
subject to discussion, because since the witnesses who testified in
the case against the two priests, who are not detained, who did not go
to court, I would say that for these witnesses, there is no obligation
on the part of the Prosecutor to disclose the witness statements.  The
jurisprudence here is clear regarding the Prosecutor's obligation that
is under Rule 66(A)(ii) and of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
which means that the Prosecutor must disclose to the Defence within
the prescribed time limits all statements in his keeping pertaining to
witnesses.  And case law clearly indicates that these statements
included, of course, all statements that witnesses may have given
before this Court.
That said, the Prosecutor has performed its obligations and has
disclosed to the Defence all the statements in its keeping in respect
of witnesses who are not under detention and who are not currently
being tried by the Rwandan authorities.  I shall now come to the
second motion.
I filed a response, but I shall plead orally for the second motion.
This indicates several situations of first, second, and third
categories of witnesses.  But in doing so, that is, in making these
indications, the Defence seems to have confused both situations; that
is, the obligation regarding detained witnesses for which it cited a
certain amount of case law, but it wishes to use this case law to
apply to other situations, that is, for witness who are not under
detention, who are not under trial in Rwanda.  So there is a lot of
confusion and there is also on the part of Defence a certain approach,
a certain attempt to obstruct procedure, because they have already
received an explanation a detailed explanation, from the Prosecution,
by letter, on disclosures already made.
A long time ago, the Prosecutor asked the Rwandan authorities -- and I
am referring here to detained Prosecution witnesses who are undergoing
trial in Rwanda.  The Prosecutor asked for all documents pertaining to
these detained persons and confessions, if necessary.  So the
Prosecutor was able to obtain, based on this request, some documents
which were disclosed to the Defence on the
th of September 2004.  We said this in our letter and we are saying
it today to respond, to confirm, the obligations that the Prosecutor
has fulfilled.
If the Defence wants the Prosecution to do its job, that is, conduct
investigation to prepare its cross-examination, I think that from the
information I got, the Defence has an investigator since the 15th of
December 2003, and it is therefore in a position to carry out all
investigations prior to its cross-examination.  And I am referring
here to witnesses who are not currently under detention.
Those are the arguments that the Prosecutor wishes to make.  And I
would like to confirm that disclosures were done -- were done at the
dates -- on the dates I indicated.  So, to conclude, there is no
reason whatsoever that the testimony of witnesses already on the
witness list be put off.  For Rwandan documents pertaining to detained
persons, there is perhaps a problem with translation.  I think that in
a few days, we should be able to obtain a translation.  But original
documents as
received -- I repeat this -- were disclosed from the 27th of
September, when they were received.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, did you wish to add something?
MR. POGNON:
I just want to add this, Madam President, that we have not violated
any obligation aimed at protecting witnesses by requesting the
Prosecutor and by raising a motion referring to witnesses that the
Prosecutor herself disclosed to us.  All we did was to ask the
Prosecution -- considering that the files coming from Rwandan courts
were disclosed to us.  So we asked the Prosecutor to make sure that
the -- all these documents, including the statements of the various
witnesses, amongst them those who are here, be disclosed.  That is
what we asked for.  But her response was only to say that this is a
separate trial of our Accused.
When you read the decisions that are produced, you see that our client
is amongst the accused, even though he was not tried.  You will see
that in these files, his ears range because in Florence where he was --
because people kept giving testimony about him.  Consequently, it is
clear that we need to have the entire file of the Rwandan court
proceeding.
I have written this several times and the Prosecutor has shown
understanding of this by disclosing to me decisions of Rwandan courts,
whereas such decisions are only conclusions of motives and
discussions.  So we want the disclosure of these documents.  It has
not been done.  It should be done, and case law in this Tribunal is
very clear on that point.
As concerns jurisprudence, I think that my learned colleague cited
this at length.  I do not wish to confuse matters.  There are detained
persons amongst the Prosecution witnesses whose files we must have in
keeping with the Rules of this Tribunal.  Secondly, the Prosecution
has amongst the witnesses people who testified in the Rwandan courts.
So we must have all the files pertaining to the courts in Rwanda so
that we should see what was said in Rwanda so that we can compare it
with what would be said here.  That is the problem.
Seromba is being tried here.  Other people have been tried for the
same reasons in Rwanda.  It is clear that the Prosecution should
disclose this evidence.  This is the mission of the Prosecutor
because, for many years it is the Prosecutor who has been trying to
accuse our client.  It is the Prosecution that has the means to go all
over the world to carry out investigations.  It is the Prosecution
that has the wherewithal to contact Rwandan authorities for this case.
So we cannot be told that you have had an investigator since the 15th
of the December.  It is the Accused (sic) who has to provide the proof
and give it to the Defence.  The Rules cannot be reversed, Madam
President.  It is not in the trial of Father Seromba that the Rules
will be reversed.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.
We would like to put a question to the Prosecutor.  Do you have any
solution to the problem raised now?  For instance, could you envisage
a review of the order in which the witnesses appear, for instance?
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, this is somewhat difficult because the witnesses have
been here for a few days, and also the difficulties you are aware of.
It is difficult to describe these difficulties concretely.
Regarding the detainees, who could perhaps -- postpone them until when
the witnesses who are not detained are heard.  The witnesses who are
here cannot be returned.
I don't want to repeat my arguments, but the Prosecutor is of the
opinion that there are no particular problems for the three witnesses.
As for detainees, we can see when the translations are available and
try to indicate an order for appearance of those witnesses, depending
on which translations are done first.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you for that information.  We will adjourn for five minutes and
resume in five minutes, only five minutes.  It will be very brief.
(Court recessed from 1432H to 1440H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is in session.
The Chamber, after acquainting itself with the documents and arguments
of the parties and relying on the provisions of Rule 66 (A)(ii) of the
Rules, finds that the Prosecutor disclosed on the 27th of September
a voluminous file, in Kinyarwanda, which seems to be in line with
the judicial records requested by Defence and has undertaken to
disclose all documents obtained by Rwandan authorities.  The Chamber
finds that the documents requested by the Defence seem important for
cross-examination, and, accordingly, enjoins the Prosecutor to do all
it can to obtain prior statements given by witnesses before Rwandan
authorities and to transmit them to the Defence.
The Chamber in the instant case considers that the motion of
disclosure raised by the Defence cannot obstruct the proceedings.
Therefore, it decides to hear the Prosecution witnesses while
reserving the Defence's right to seize the Chamber of an application
for cross-examination of witnesses called in the motion on the basis
of the documents disclosed by the Prosecutor.
The Chamber also directs the Prosecutor to make all necessary efforts
to translate documents that have just been disclosed to the Defence.
The Chamber also invites the parties to a meeting with our assistant,
Mr. Gogo, in order to take stock of all disclosures and find out what
documents have to be disclosed to the Defence.
Madam Prosecutor, you informed the Chamber that you could reveal the
order of appearance of witnesses insofar as that would not overly
disrupt the arrangements you have already taken with regard to hearing
those witnesses.  Who are the witnesses you have here now?  Today, for
instance, who are the witnesses waiting to be heard?
MS. ARBIA:
Thank you, Madam President.  The witnesses on the list, according to
the order of appearances to be disclosed, are YAU, and the second
witness could be YAT, Witness YAT.  These are the witnesses here
present.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.  Do you want to say something, Counsel?
The witnesses are, therefore, YAU and YAT.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, as far as the Defence is concerned, we can only
accept Witness YAT, who did not appear in a case in Rwanda and who is
not a detainee.  That witness can be heard.  We are ready to hear that
witness.  And since Witness YAU testified in Rwanda in the trials
there, that witness cannot be heard by the Defence.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, do have you any problem with that?  Counsel Pognon
requested we should start with Witness YAT, and after that which of
the witnesses will appear?
MS. ARBIA:
They have been waiting for long.  That is a free witness, not a
detained witness.  Why should we hear only YAT?
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, that accused has been free for two years before this
Tribunal and the Prosecutor has had more than three years, more than
four years, to prepare her case.  So if we hear
Witness YAT and we accept that YAT should be heard, as for YAU, he
cannot appear because he testified in trials in Rwanda and this
Chamber is there to confirm that.  We cannot admit this manner of
doing things.  We cannot do this.  We cannot.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Madam Prosecutor.
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, I believe you have just issued a very clear decision
and acknowledged the Defence's right to cross-examine the witness,
particularly if they are documents that have been provided.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, I believe we should proceed.
Counsel, as we said a while ago, you do not only have the right to
cross-examine now, but you will still have a right to cross-examine
the witness again when you obtain the documents.  It is your right,
and you are entitled to request that the witness reappear before the
Chamber for an additional
cross-examination on the basis of new documents.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, this is a problem we are encountering.  We thought
about it when we were reflecting on the manner a while ago.  When this
witness will be before us, and we know that their case files exist as
they did in Rwanda, and we have to cross-examine the witness here, and
the witness (sic) will examine this witness in-chief, but we wouldn't
able to cross-examine that witness because we don't have the witness's
case file as regards the case in Rwanda.  When will they return?  They
will still be Prosecution witnesses, and at that time the Prosecutor
will have all latitude once the documents on Rwanda arrive to take
such-and-such measures it wishes to take with that witness.
There is inequality of arms.  There is something happening, and other
Chambers have suspended proceedings regarding persons who are involved
in one way or the other in trials in Rwanda.  We are dealing with
witnesses who are detained, they were in trials in Rwanda, and in
Rwanda, there has already been a case in which Mr. Seromba would have
been judged or tried had he been in prison.  And I think that is not
correct, and that is why he is here today.
I haven't finished my submissions.
And the Prosecutor wants to give us the documents of that person once
that person has already been heard here.  There is something wrong,
something amiss, in this kind of procedure in examining a person who
was in Rwanda and cross-examining him again.  It is still the
Prosecution witness.  There is something happening here which is
unprecedented.  We would insist that it is only witnesses who have not
been tried in Rwanda, who have not given evidence in Rwanda, who
should be
cross-examined here.  Cases were suspended, adjourned, for that
reason, and the Prosecutor made commitments in this Chamber.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Have you completed your submission, Counsel?
MR. POGNON:
In the case of Augustin Bizimungu, the Prosecutor committed himself to
request a letter from the authorities such that all the case records
of the witnesses should be provided.  That is clear.  That is clear.
They want to take us unawares, and they want to cross-examine the
witness twice.  What we have said, Counsel (sic), is very clear.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We have enjoined the Prosecutor to obtain those statements which you
are requesting and to disclose them to you, and we reiterated that
point, and we said we are ready to go ahead and allow you to recross-
examine the witnesses who appear here.  It is normal that we should
start with those witness who have been waiting for a very long time,
who are not detainees before we come to the witnesses who are
detainees.  And we have reserved your right.  You can cross-examine
them now and subsequently as well, once you obtain those documents.
I think that our decision is in line with the practice of the
Tribunal, and it cannot violate the rights of the Defence.
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, I do not want to argue on the issues raised by
Counsel Pognon, because they are not admissible.  I'll only talk about
other trials, the Butare trial.  When documents were disclosed
regarding the detainee, the Chamber authorised the Defence to recall
the witness in order to
recross-examine them.  I don't think it is against the practice of
this Tribunal to do so.  Thank you.
MR. POGNON:
Yes, Madam President.  I don't want to argue with the Office of the
Prosecutor.  We are faced with what we would call some kind of bad-
faith practice which is aimed at throwing Defence off guard.  We are
facing something which is not fair play, and we cannot work with
people who do not practice fair play.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Please, Counsel, we will call the first witness, and, if it is
necessary, we shall all meet for a short meeting.
Please call the witness.
MR. MOSES:
Yes.  Thank you, Your Honours.
If the registry could please make arrangements and bring Witness YAU
into court.
(Witness ushered in)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Another issue was raised a while ago about witness protection.  All
those documents are confidential, so we remind registry that since
those documents are confidential, they should be kept under seal.
Good morning, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You are a protected witness, and we will address you under the
pseudonym YAU.  Before giving your evidence, you shall make a solemn
declaration.  Please, make sure you do not provide any information
that could lead to the discovery of your identity.  You could call the
Chamber's  attention if a question seems to reveal your identity if
you were to answer it.  You will now make a solemn declaration with
the assistance of the registrar.
(Declaration made by Witness YAU in Kinyarwanda)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you, Madam Witness.
Counsel for the Prosecution, you have the floor.
MR. MOSES:
Thank you, Your Honour.  I wonder if I can commence, if I could have a
document which I handed the registrar which contained the personal
details of this witness just shown to her to confirm that she signed
that document and that the details contained therein were correct.  I
understand it's with the witness.
WITNESS YAU,
first having been duly sworn,
testified as follows:
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Good afternoon, Witness YAU.
A.   (No interpretation)
Q.   Do you have a document before you which was translated for you and
that it contains your personal details?
A.   Yes, the document is before me.
Q.   And did you sign that document and date it the 27th of this month,
indicating that the details in that document were true and correct?
A.   That is correct.
MR. MOSES:
Your Honours, at this stage I would ask that that document be produced
by the witness as Prosecution Exhibit No. 9.  And I would ask that
Your Honour place that document under seal, as it contains the
personal particulars of this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Maîtres Monthé or Pognon, do you have any objection to the admission
of this exhibit?
MR. MONTHÉ:
No objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Counsel.  The documents bearing the particulars of the
protected witness YAU is entered as a Prosecution exhibit under the
number P. 9, under seal.
(Exhibit No. P.9 admitted, under seal)
MR. MOSES:
Thank you, Your Honour.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, after hearing of the death of President Habyarimana, did
you remain living at home during the month of April 1994?
A.   No, I fled.
Q.   And where did you flee to?
A.   I went to the Nyange parish, which is located on the Kivumu hill.
Q.   Why did you leave your home area and go to Nyange parish?
A.   Following the death of President Habyarimana, that is during the
night, a press release was read over the radio and people were not
allowed to gather together, and we realised that security was not good
in the neighbourhood in which I live, and it was then that we started
fleeing and leaving the place.
Q.   Do you remember the date on which you fled your home?
A.   It would be difficult for me to recall the date.
Q.   Approximately how long after hearing the news of the death of
President Habyarimana did you flee your home?
A.   A few days had gone by following the news of the president's death,
and after a few days, therefore, I fled.
Q.   Did you go to Nyange church with any other members of your family?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Now, without --
MR. POGNON:
(No interpretation)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We did not hear the French translation of what the Prosecutor said.
MR. MOSES:
Would you like me to repeat the question, Your Honour?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, please.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Did you flee from your home to Nyange church with any other members
of your family?
A.   Yes, I fled with members of my family:  my father, my mother, the
daughters-in-law in our families, and other members of my family.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Maître Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
I would like that the questions shouldn't be leading.  It should have
been better to ask the witness with whom she fled.  Like that, she
will give the names because if you ask him (sic) if he (sic) fled with
members of his family, that would be leading because that has the
answer already embedded in the question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, can you please be careful not to lead the witness, or
to give minimum leading questions in any way.
MR. MOSES:
I'll do that, Your Honour.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   When you arrived at Nyange parish, were there any other people
already present at the parish?
A.   I found refugees there, and subsequently other refugees came and met
us there.
Q.   What were the ages of the people who were refugees at the parish?
A.   There were people of all ages.  There were young persons there; there
were men who were well on in age; there were old men and women and
middle-aged persons, so all age brackets were represented there.
Q.   Once again, without mentioning any names, did you recognise any of
the people who had taken refuge at the church?
A.   Yes, amongst refugees there were some that I was able to recognise.
Q.   Did you know what ethnic group they belonged to?
A.   They were Tutsi.
Q.   How long did you remain at Nyange parish?
A.   I stayed there for three days.
Q.   During those three days, what did you do in respect of water?
A.   At a certain point in time -- well, I am talking about refugees in
general.  We asked the
Father Athanase Seromba for water, and he answered us saying that he
cannot give us water because we were going to die.
Q.   Do you remember which of the three days that Father Seromba said
that?
A.   I think it was immediately when we arrived at the scene.
Q.   Is this something you heard with your own ears or something someone
told you?
A.   No, those were statements that I heard myself, and I was seeing him,
and I was witness to the circumstances under which the statement was
made because I was there present.
Q.   Are you able, with reference to something or someone in this
courtroom, able to point out to
Their Honours, the Judges, how far away you were from Seromba when you
heard him say these words?
A.   I can give you an estimated distance, say, from where I am sitting to
the board behind the Judges, the board bearing the emblem of the
United Nations.  I think this would indicate the distance that
separated us.
MR. MOSES:
For the record, Your Honour, I don't know, perhaps six -- six metres.
I don't know if my friend is happy with that estimate, six or seven
metres.  I don't see any objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  The sketch shows that the distance is six metres 80.
MR. MOSES:
Thank you, Your Honours.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, did you see if the refugees who were at the parish
carried anything when they arrived?
A.   Yes, they had sticks that they used to -- while they were marching.
Q.   And did the refugees retain those sticks for the period -- entire
period you were at Nyange parish?
A.   No.  At a certain point, Father Seromba asked the gendarmes to come
and to take away those sticks, which is what the gendarmes did, and
they went and placed them somewhere in the buildings.
Q.   Were you told why the sticks were being removed?
A.   When the gendarmes took those sticks, they were saying, "Give us
those sticks because we cannot protect ourselves while you are armed
with sticks."  That is what they were telling us.
Q.   Once again, do you recall which day of the three days you were at the
parish that happened?
A.   I don't recall the date on which that happened.
Q.   And, once again, was this statement you say that Seromba made to the
gendarmes, is that something you heard yourself or something someone
told you?
A.   The truth be told, I was on the spot and I heard the statement.  I
was a witness to the circumstances under which the statement was made.
Q.   Now, I've asked you about what the refugees did in respect of water.
What, if anything, did the refugees do and you do in respect of
obtaining food?
A.   We put money together and we asked that the bread be bought for us.
We gave this to Fulgence, the criminal investigation inspector of
police.  There was also Ndahimana, the former bourgmestre of Kivumu,
who was also present.  Also present was Kanyarukiga, Gaspard, a
trader, and some other persons I remember were there.  We asked them
the money (sic), therefore, to buy bread for us, but we neither
received the bread nor was the money returned to us.
Q.   I now want to focus your attention to the second day you were at the
parish.  Did anything happen to the refugees on that day?
MR. POGNON:
Objection.  Madam President, so far the witness has not been able to
recall any dates.  She did not pinpoint any date, and I would like to
recall that she doesn't -- that she says she didn't remember the
dates, and now she is being suggested something that was supposed to
have taken place on the second day of her arrival.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We feel that no date was proposed, so you may carry on, Mr.
Prosecutor.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, do you want me to repeat the question or do you remember
what that question was?
A.   I will be most obliged if you can repeat your question, Mr.
Prosecutor.
Q.   I want to focus your attention on the second day you were at the
parish.  Did anything happen to the refugees on that day?
A.   On that day, attacks were launched, and the attackers were Hutu.  And
on their side, the Tutsi refugees had to fend off those assailants by
throwing stones at them.  At a certain point,
Father Seromba asked them to stop the fighting, and he was talking to
the Hutu attackers.  He told them to stop the fighting because, "You
are in inadequate numbers," and it was at that point that the attacks
stopped.
Q.   Did you see what the attackers were using in their attack?
A.   They were armed with spears, and they were carrying dresses that
usually were worn by the
intore dancers.
Q.   And just to assist the Trial Chamber in understanding what you mean
by what they were wearing, what was the dress made of?
A.   Normally, the intore wore around their head when they were dancing
specialised clothing, and around their waist there is another specific
dress wear that they carry.
Q.   What is the dress --
MR. MOSES:
Sorry, Your Honour.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The idea was to ask the interpreter to spell the word intore.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Intore is spelled I-N-T-O-R-E, intore.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   And what is that dress made of -- made from, what material?
A.   Around the head, the dancers wear crowns usually worn by former
traditional dancers, and the crown usually is made of woven banana
leaves.  This is the same tofore (sic) the clothing that they have
around the waist.  It is made of banana leaves.
Q.   Now, you have described hearing Seromba speaking to the attackers.
How far away were you from Seromba when you heard him speak to them?
A.   It would be difficult for me to give you the approximate distance.  I
did not measure it using a metre, as it were, but I can give you an
estimate going from where I am sitting.  I think the distance could be
like from where I am sitting up to where I am pointing to.
Q.   Where are you pointing to?
A.   I don't know how we call that device that I am seeing there.  I am
referring to the device behind the Prosecutor, at the level of the
ceiling.
MR. MOSES:
Your Honours, I am not sure if the registry can assist in terms of the
distance, perhaps, to the booth at the back end.  We can, perhaps,
take, perhaps, a metre from that distance.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Can you point to it on the sketch that you have?  Or, rather, is the
distance indicated on the sketch you have, Registry?
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, we have not been availed of a copy of the sketch.  We
have been forgotten.  I think we normally should be given a copy of
that sketch.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Please, you can show the counsel for Defence the sketch.  And, by the
way, that document should be Xeroxed, like that -- each party should
have his or her own copy, and I think this should expedite matters.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, we pray you.  We would like to know exactly what that
sketch represents because it is rather strange to us.  We don't
understand anything about it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
As a matter of fact, there is a sketch of all courtrooms, and it is
usually used to help us make an assessment of distances because
witnesses are wont to say, "Well, the distance could be like from
where I am sitting to this or that position or to where this or that
person is sitting."  So we made a sketch of the courtroom so we can
easily accept distances.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
MR. MOSES:
I think it's going to involve some mathematics, Your Honours, and to
save time, if we indicate a distance of approximately ten metres.  I
don't know if my friends have any objection to that estimate.
MR. POGNON:
Objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
I am objecting because to propose that that distance covers ten
metres, we would like to know what ten metres would represent in the
understanding of the witness.  She's given us an approximation only on
the basis of this -- the configuration of this hall.  So I don't know
if when the Prosecutor is saying ten metres that would represent
anything in the mind of the witness.  Why not five metres, for
instance?
MR. MOSES:
I am happy with five metres, but I thought that wasn't so accurate.  I
am simply trying to make the record indicate the distance, approximate
distance, that the witness has indicated with reference to something
in the courtroom.  I am in Your Honour's hands.  I don't know if I can
take it much further than that.  I've given an indication.  If Your
Honour thinks it's something further, then I am happy with ten to 15
metres.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We think that that distance should measure about ten metres.  You see
from where the witness is right up to the interpreters' booth, because
from where she's sitting up to here, the distance is about seven
metres.  So I think from where the witness is sitting to the booth is
about ten metres.  Well, you can go ahead and measure the distance.
It's probably better to do so.  The measurement should be taken
following the diagonal direction.
(Pages 1 to 16 by S. Eboe-Osuji)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Are you achieving anything?  Now, the registry, can you say out loud
what you just said because we didn't hear you since you didn't use a
microphone.
MR. FRY:
Eight metres and 40 centimetres.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, where were you when the attack on the refugees took
place?
A.   I was near the church since the attack was launched from a place
called Jubilee.
Q.   And during the evenings that you spent at Nyange, where did you
sleep?
A.   Would you please repeat the question, Mr. Prosecutor?
Q.   For the first two nights that you stayed at Nyange, where did you
spend the night?
A.   On the first night I was inside the church, and on the second night --
and it is during this second night that I took flight, I left, but
before I left I was in a room of the house where Seromba lived.
Q.   Right.  Well, I'll ask you about that a little later on.  During the
night that you stayed at -- the night at the church, were there any
other people inside the church?
A.   Yes, there were other people.  There were many refugees and they were
mostly female.  The men were often outside.
Q.   Right.  Can I now ask you about the last day that you were at the
church.  Did anything happen on that last day that you were at the
church?
A.   There were many large-scale attacks and it is at that time that they
began to kill people.  Many attacks were launched by the Interahamwe
at that time.  They began to kill on the third day.
Q.   All right.  Now, in respect of the attackers, were there the same
amount of attackers as the previous day?  More or less?
A.   At that time there were many attacks, and afterwards many Interahamwe
came, and they were accompanied by Father Kayiranga.  They were aboard
a bus.  Father Kayiranga therefore brought the Interahamwe on a bus
and those of us refugees who were in the church began to applaud
because the father is coming to save us.  He came out of the bus and
he talked with Father Seromba as well as Ndahimana, and Flugence
Kayishema, as well as Vianney the conseiller of Nyange and
Kanyarukiga.  I don't know what they said to each other.  Once more,
Father Kayiranga went into the bus and came out with Interahamwe.
They threw tear gas and they began to throw grenades and began to
kill.
Q.   Approximately what time of day did the killing commence on the third
day that you were -- the last day that you were at the church?
A.   I was not wearing a watch, but I can estimate it.  It was about
midday, perhaps.
Q.   How did the number of people involved in the attack compare to the
number of refugees?
A.   I had the impression that the number of assailants were hired.  They
were everywhere.  They had surrounded the church square.
Q.   What did you do after that -- the killing began?
A.   I left.  I broke down a door that was in the priests' office and I
entered Seromba's house in the ground floor and that is where I hid.
Q.   Was there anyone else in the room that you went into?
A.   There were other refugees.  There were women and children.
Q.   Was the door to the room that you went into open or closed after you
went inside the room?
A.   When I went in the door was not locked, and once I was inside the
door was locked by someone whom I did not know, but I heard Father
Seromba talking to his seminarian who was in Nyange and whose name I
do not know.  He said to him, "Open the door", and the seminarian
refused.  And he said, "If you open this door I'm going to shoot you."
Q.   Who said "If you open the door I'm going to shoot you."?
A.   It was the seminarian who said it.
Q.   From your position inside the room in that house, were you able to
see what was happening outside?
A.   No, I could not see anything, but I could hear.
Q.   Did you recognise any voices outside?
A.   I heard the voice of Father Seromba and he was calling his man
servant, and he was saying, "Papias, try and mop this blood off the
floor.  You must wipe the blood off the floor."
Q.   Thank you.  Did you hear Father Seromba's voice at all again that day
whilst you were in the room?
A.   The Interahamwe were looking for everyone who -- he said,
"Interahamwe, find all these people who are hiding in here and take
them out and kill them."  He was talking to an Interahamwe who was one
level higher than the room where I was, and this is what he said it to
her.
Q.   You have said that "He said it to her."  Do you know the name or any
name of the person he was addressing?
A.   I know the servant, his was called Papias.  He was a cook.  And the
person he was speaking to and who was at the higher level was
nicknamed Nyirandayimbusi.  This is the person who was at the higher
level of the building.
MR. MOSES:
Perhaps -- I don't know if we need that name spelt on to the record,
Your Honour.  The spelling I have is N-Y-I-R-A-N-D-A-Y-I-M-B-U-S-H-I.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness, just so that I am clear, can you recall the first thing that
you heard Father Seromba say when you were inside that room?
A.   "Papias, wipe that blood."
Q.   How long did you remain in that -- stay inside that room?
A.   We spent the day there, and at nightfall Father Kayiranga told us
that the Interahamwes had left -- they had not been able to overcome
us, and that they would return at midnight to find the people who were
in the church tower, and he advised that we should go to Gitarama, but
the places that he was directing us to were dangerous places where
there were attacks, but thanks to providence we were able to note that
the places where he was indicating were lit by torch light, so I went
on and I went to seek refuge in Gitarama.
Q.   Once again, without giving any names, are you able to indicate to the
Trial Chamber if any of your family members who went with you to
Nyange were killed at Nyange?
A.   My father and mother; my brothers; the wives of my brothers; and
other people whom I had found there, and that is especially my uncles,
and many other people.
MR. MOSES:
At this stage in the proceedings, Your Honour, I'd like to briefly go
into a closed session to ask the witness some questions which may lead
to her identity.  So if we could -- I can indicate I won't be long.  I
only have a few questions.  I shouldn't be more than approximately
five minutes in a closed session.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
After the closed session, will you have finished your examination-in-
chief of the witness, or would you have other questions to put to the
witness in open session?
MR. MOSES:
Yes, Your Honour, I will be asking for a formal identification of the
witness after I've asked a number of questions in closed session if
she has -- after I've laid a foundation as to how she's able to
recognise or know the Accused.  And once I've done that in open
session, all I will be wanting to do is to show her either five or six
photographs and ask her to point out various places in those
photographs, Your Honours.  So I've -- I shouldn't be too much longer
after we come back into open session.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel Pognon, any objection?
MR. POGNON:
Yes, Madam President.  I don't see why there is a need for a closed
session so the witness can identify the Accused, who is here.  I don't
know.  I don't see why there should be a closed session to enable the
witness to identify locations, whereas we have described these places
at great length in open session, so I don't see why.  I think it is a
bit theatrical.
MR. MOSES:
Your Honour, I'm not wanting to do the photos in a closed session.  So
far as identification is concerned, the matters to lay a foundation as
to how this person would know the Accused may draw out information
which could lead to her identity.  It is for that reason that I wish
to ask such questions in a closed session.  If there is no issue as to
identity, then I can shorten the amount of questions that I will ask
in the closed session, but my friend certainly hasn't indicated to me
that his client is admitting that he was the person in question --
that this witness knows him.  And unless he does, I'm going to have to
lay a foundation, which will require me to ask questions about the
personal details of this witness.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I have never, absolutely never -- I have never stated
here, and my learned colleague will bear me witness, that the witness
or a Prosecution witness does not know.  I'm still alive.  People
should not say things that -- ascribe to me when I did not say them.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Prosecutor, to save time, could we hear the witness in open session
for everything that may not reveal the witness's identity and then we
shall return to the last questions in closed session?  Is that
possible?
MR. MOSES:
Perfectly possible, Your Honours.  However, I do need to indicate that
to lay the foundation I will have to ask questions in closed session
and we will have to return to open session, in any event, for the
formal identification, unless my friend's happy to do that in closed
session.
Be that as it may, I then now ask for the curtains to be drawn and for
the witness to approach the overhead projector here and I would ask
that the registry please place 3-21 on the screen.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Mr. Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
Did you already order the closed session?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I don't think so.  I think that it is the registry that went a little
too quickly -- not the registry, I think it is the court officer who
closed this.  But, in any case, this is to enable the witness to go to
the overhead projector because if the witness stands up, then the
witness might be seen from the hall.  Perhaps the registry went a
little quick with that.
Madam Witness, would you please approach the overhead projector so you
may identify the photographs.  Would you please stand up.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Now, Witness YAU --
MR. POGNON:
Objection, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, do you have a problem?
MR. POGNON:
In regards to this photograph.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Questions have not yet been put, so you may object to the questions
when they are put, yes.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, do you recognise the building that is shown in that
photograph?
A.   Yes, I know this building.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Pognon, what is your objection?
MR. POGNON:
My objection is this: concerning this photograph during the
preliminaries, during the investigation, or the testimony of Witness
Sahiri, we expressed all our reservations.  We maintained, for one,
that this is not a photograph of Nyange, so it should not be
recognised as a photograph of that, and it should not be put to the
witness, and she should not be able to recognise it.  I think the
matter is still at issue.
MR. MOSES:
I must say, Your Honours, in almost 20 years of practice, I have never
heard such an objection to try and prevent a witness identifying a
photograph which is shown to her.  It's already in evidence.  It's
been produced.  My friend can make submissions at the appropriate
time, once Your Honours has heard the evidence, but it's not a valid
objection to prevent this witness commenting on a Prosecution exhibit.
MR. POGNON:
Yes, Madam President, I would like to recall that this photograph was
entered provisionally until research was conducted to find a
photograph of the presbytery because, up until now, we felt that it
was approximate data.  Nobody was sure that this photograph that has
been presented to us here was indeed the photograph of Nyange.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber overrules the objection.
Counsel Pognon, during the cross-examination, you may put questions to
the witness to challenge what the witness is saying.
Please proceed, Mr. Prosecutor.
MR. POGNON:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, I think you are going to have to stand up so you can
speak into the microphone there.  Witness YAU, do you recognise the
building shown in that photograph?
A.   I know the building.  I see that it is Nyange church.
Q.   Thank you.
MR. MOSES:
I'd now ask that Prosecution Exhibit 3-1 be placed on the screen.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, do you recognise the building shown in that photograph?
A.   I know this building.  This is the secretarial offices.
Q.   Do you see on the left-hand side of that building a doorway?
A.   To the left, Mr. Prosecutor?
Q.   Yes.
A.   Yes, I can see it.
Q.   Do you know where that doorway leads to?
A.   That is the door that I used to go inside to the fathers' house.
MR. MOSES:
Mr. Registrar, could I ask you now, please, to show the witness
Prosecution Exhibit 2-23.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, do you recognise the view that is shown in that
photograph before you?
A.   I know this place.  I see a building, a storey building, where the
priests slept.  I can see the kitchen and I see a garden inside.
Q.   Now, you've told the Trial Chamber that you went into a room in the
priests' house.  Due to that photograph, are you able to see the
position or the room that you went into?
A.   You can see two doors.  You see those two doors on the ground floor.
I don't know whether it was one or the other, I no longer remember,
but it is one of the two.  The door which is on the ground floor.
Q.   Thank you.  Yes, thank you.  Witness, if you could now please return
to the witness box.
MR. MOSES:
Your Honours, there's one small thing that I want to ask the witness
about before we go into closed session.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness, you spoke about seeing Father Kayiranga arriving on a bus on
the last day that you were at Nyange.  Do you remember telling the
Court about that?
A.   Could you please, Prosecutor, repeat your question?
Q.   You have told the Trial Chamber earlier in your evidence that you saw
Father Kayiranga arriving on a bus at Nyange on the last day that you
were at the parish.
A.   Yes.
Q.   Had you seen any other vehicles at all on that day?
A.   I saw a pick-up which was moving about on the grounds of the church.
It had a loud speaker.  It was horning, and people were incited to
come and kill the people who had sought refuge at Nyange church.
Q.   Did you recognise anyone on or in that vehicle?
A.   No.
Q.   Was this before or after the bus that arrived with the priest?
A.   I saw that vehicle moving about in the surroundings after the bus
arrived.
Q.   Yes, thank you.
MR. MOSES:
Your Honours, for the reasons I indicated earlier, I would ask that we
briefly go into a closed session.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So we are back to the problem of closed session.  Now, since the
Prosecutor would like to ask questions that could lead to divulging of
the witness's identity -- and there's no problem with the Defence.
Very well then.  So we order a closed session.  We crave the
indulgence of the public, but it will only last for a few minutes.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 26] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the
session was heard in camera)
(Pages 17 to 23 by Roxane Lane)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Could you please -- we are now in open session, Mr. Prosecutor.
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness YAU, I'd now ask you, if you can stand up where you are, and
look around the courtroom, and tell me if you see someone who
resembles Father Seromba.  So if you could stand up where you are.
Now, if you could please look around the courtroom.  Look carefully.
A.   I believe that that person in the middle there resembles our priest
Seromba.
Q.   Now, when you say "middle", could you tell me what that person is
wearing?
A.   He's wearing a jacket, a greenish colour.  He is actually the second
person from the curtain and he is wearing spectacles.
MR. MOSES:
Thank you, Your Honour.  I'd ask for the record to reflect that the
witness has pointed to the Accused Seromba.
Yes, thank you, Your Honours, those are all the questions I have for
this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.  May it be mentioned in the records that the witness has
identified Father Seromba.
We will now take a 15-minute break and resume the proceedings shortly.
The Court is adjourned.
(Court recessed from 1622H to 1640H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in session.
Now, it will be the place of the Defence to cross-examine the witness.
Madam Witness, you will be cross-examined by the Defence.
Counsel Monthé, you may take the floor.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
CROSS-EXAMINATION
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Good afternoon, Madam Witness.
A.   Good afternoon, Counsel.
Q.   I think where you come from they say convova (phonetic).
A.   That is correct.
Q.   My name is Patrice Monthé.  I am counsel for the Defence, at least
one of the counsel for the Defence, and I am going to ask you a few
questions.  I would like to request that if you don't understand my
questions you can tell me so that I can repeat them and try to reply --
answer my questions as concisely as possible.  Thank you.
So you were in Nyange during the month of April 1994; is that correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   You therefore witnessed fully the events that took place in the
Nyange parish?
A.   I didn't live through all the events.  There were events which I
witnessed and there were other events that I did not witness.
Q.   You arrived at the Nyange parish on the day on which President
Habyarimana died, or did you arrive there on the (unintelligible)
date?
A.   I arrived at the church a few days after the death of President
Habyarimana.
Q.   Can you tell us when President Habyarimana died?
A.   It is not in my habit to recall dates.  All that I know is that it
was in 1994.
Q.   If I were to tell you that he died on the 6th of April, would you
confirm that date?
A.   If it was on that date that he died, then it is on that date.  I
don't remember dates.
Q.   From the day of his death, how many days did you count before you
went to the Nyange parish?
A.   I went two nights after the night in which the president of the
republic died.
Q.   When you went there, did you go there from your house?  Did you go to
the parish from your house?
A.   Yes, Counsel.
Q.   Did anybody invite you to go to the parish or did you go there of
your own volition?
A.   Yes, the family conferred and we took the position to take refuge at
the parish.
Q.   Can you tell us why the parish?  Why did you choose to go to the
parish?
A.   We felt that that location was safe.  When you take refuge in a house
of God nothing can happen to you, nobody can attempt to kill you when
you are in such a location.
Q.   Thank you.  You stated a while ago to the Prosecutor and to myself,
by the way, that you do not recall dates.  I agree, but can you tell
us if the events that you are relaying here today, if you've had the
opportunity of relating them to some other person?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Could you tell the Tribunal who are the persons who have had to
interview you in respect of the events that occurred in Nyange in
April 1994?
A.   Those are persons who came from Kigali to Rubera where the office of
the Tribunal is located.
Q.   Can you remember those persons?
A.   Indeed, several persons came to see me and I cannot recall their
names.
Q.   Have you already had the opportunity in respect of this Nyange parish
event to go to -- or before a Rwandan court?
A.   Can you please repeat your question, Counsel?
Q.   I would like to ask you if, on the occasion of the Nyange events, you
have had to appear before a court in Rwanda?
A.   No.  No, except before this Court where I'm appearing today.
Q.   So you're confirming to the Tribunal that you have never appeared
before a court in Rwanda?
A.   I do confirm it.
Q.   Thank you.  Did the Prosecutor's investigators come to interview you
in respect of this case?
A.   Whom are you referring to, Counsel?
Q.   I'm talking about those who interviewed you a while ago.
A.   Are you saying -- talking about when I arrived here in this country?
Q.   Have you been interviewed by the investigators of the prosecutor in
Rwanda?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  You lived in the neighbourhood of the (By order of the
court, this portion of the transcript [page 29, lines ] was
extracted and filed under seal)
MR. MOSES:
Objection.  My friend is going to ask -- I ask that that question be
struck from the record.  If he wants to ask questions about this
nature, he should do so in a closed session.  I don't want matters
which may lead to identity of this witness being raised in an open
session.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Maître, you can always put such questions to the witness in a closed
session.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam president, I will withdraw my question.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Can the witness tell us if in the Nyange commune she heard of the
death of a certain Dr. Juvenal.  I was talking about the Kivumu
commune.
A.   I am not aware of that.
Q.   Thank you.  So you got to the parish a few days after the death of
President Habyarimana.  Can you describe to us what was the atmosphere
there when you got to the place?
A.   We went and met the other refugees.  We used to discuss normally, but
outside the parish tension was building.
Q.   When you reached the parish, did you see Father Seromba?
A.   I saw him.
Q.   In your opinion, how was he on that day?
A.   He seemed to be happy.  He seemed to be happy.
Q.   Was he happy to see you, or was he happy like he was when you usually
saw him in church, as you said a while ago?
MR. MOSES:
Your Honour, I'm sorry, but once again, my friend is going to ask
questions about how this witness may or may not know the Accused.  He
should do so in a closed session.  The question contains information
which was given in closed session.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, I asked a question concerning the Accused and not the
witness.  I don't quite understand what the Prosecution wants.  We are
here to look for the truth.  I asked the witness whether she met
Father Seromba when she got to the church.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are of the opinion that the witness can answer the question without
revealing her identity.
Madam Witness, can you answer Defence counsel's question, please.
THE WITNESS:
He looked happy.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Why, according to you, was he happy?
A.   I did not confer with him to be able to ask him why he was happy.
Usually he looked happy.
Q.   How did he display his happiness when he saw you arrive?  Was he
smiling?
A.   He had an expression of happiness on his face.
Q.   Now, where in the parish did you meet him on that day?  At what
location in the parish did you meet him?
A.   He was in the courtyard in front of the church.
Q.   Towards the entrance of the church or somewhere else?
A.   Courtyard.  But he was not standing on the same spot.  He used to
move about -- or he moved about as usual, around.
Q.   Would you recall if Father Seromba received all the people who were
arriving there on that day?
A.   What exactly are you talking about?  What kind of reception or
welcome?  Normally, in Rwanda, when you welcome somebody, you give him
a chair, you greet him, you ask about news about him, you give him
food, et cetera.  What kind of welcome do you mean?
Q.   In the church did Father Seromba greet you?
A.   No.
Q.   Did you talk to him?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And can you tell the Court what he told you when you greeted him?
A.   We asked him for drinking water.
Q.   So the first thing you did when you arrived at the church, or at the
parish, was to ask for drinking water from Father Seromba; is that the
case?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   Tell me, when you left your home to go to the church, did you go on
foot or were you on board a vehicle?
A.   We went on foot.
Q.   When you left, and on your way, did you meet any roadblocks that had
been set up already at that time?
A.   Yes, there were roadblocks.
Q.   And where were those roadblocks?
A.   We passed by a roadblock that had been set up at Kivumu, that is a
lone -- it was a single roadblock and, at that point, we found a good
Samaritan who had been breast fed by my mother and who protected us,
and we continued on our way.
Q.   In your view, between the Nyange church and the dwelling place of
Father Seromba, what was the distance approximately?
A.   I followed your question.  I would say that the distance between the
church and the presbytery is comparable to the distance between where
I am and the small waiting room where we sit -- where we wait to enter
the courtroom, and that is only an estimate.
Q.   Which room are you referring to?
A.   I'm referring to the place where the security officers are posted.
Q.   Please tell me, madam, I suppose that the church wasn't very far from
the priests' house, was it?
A.   I have a small problem.  I have stomach ache.  I have got stomach
ache.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Would you require five to ten minutes to recover?  What's going on?
THE WITNESS:
I have a problem with diarrhoea and I have a serious stomach ache.  I
don't think I can answer the questions that are being put to me at
this time.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  We shall adjourn for ten minutes.  Please look after the
matter.  Court is adjourned for ten minutes.
(Court recessed from 1703H to 1715H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in session.
Mr. Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MR. MOSES:
Thank you, Your Honours.  The information I have received from WVSS is
that the witness has this stomach problem which would prevent her from
continuing with cross-examination today.  I note the time and I note
that we have already lost a good deal of time for various reasons and
the trial to date.  Certainly, in previous trials where such issues
have arisen, the Trial Chamber has, from time to time, has allowed the
Prosecutor to move on and call his next witness so that valuable
judicial time is not lost.
As we indicated earlier afternoon, Witness YAT is present, and I
believe we would be able to call that witness.  We're in a position to
call that witness now and conclude -- I understand we'd probably
conclude his evidence-in-chief by the end of today.  We can conclude
his evidence tomorrow and move back and finish the cross-examination,
and that way it would be, in the Prosecutor's submission, of good use
of judicial resources, and that's what the Prosecutor submits as an
appropriate course of action.  Thank you, Your Honours.
(Pages 27 to 32 by Roxane Lane)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Prosecutor.
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, out of respect for you, I think this is becoming
abracadabrantesq, as Rimbaud would put it.  With all the discussion
that has been around this, he examined his witness at leisure.
Fifteen minutes after he begins, the witness falls ill.  I don't know
if this is diplomatic illness.  As if this is not enough, we are being
offered a second witness.  I think they are toying with us.  That is
the word for it.
Madam President, we object clearly and formally.  If the witness is
not available, then the Court should adjourn so that this witness will
return tomorrow.  When this case started, we were told that this
witness was there and that he was waiting, and all we had to do was to
start, for them to start saying that the witness is not well.  Mr.
Prosecutor, you are the one that said it's an international court.
This is an international court.  It should be respected, and this is
not what you are doing in this case.  I am very sorry to say this.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I think it should be pointed out that this happens often.  Contrary to
what may be thought, it often happens that a witness falls ill, just
like that, in the middle of his testimony.  We must know that these
are people who have gone through painful events, perhaps these people
feel more at ease with the party that prepares them for testimony and,
all of a sudden, when there is a cross-examination these people fall
really ill.  They are not pretending at all.  We have experienced this
several times, as we told you.  Each time when another witness is
available, we have been able to call this other available witness, to
return subsequently to the cross-examination of the witness who fell
ill.  It is very, very, very common in this court, Counsel Monthé.
That is why we cannot consider this as an insult or any such thing.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, with your leave.  I have some knowledge of this
Tribunal.  I was one of the pioneers here, I may say, in the Akeyesu
case.  We have conceded everything that could possibly be conceded in
this case.  We have raised motions.  You have made decisions which we
accepted.  We have a client who has been detained for three years, and
we are being told -- Madam President, please put yourself in the place
of Father Seromba who is getting the feeling that he doesn't
understand what is going on since this case began.
So our interest here is equity.  If the Prosecutor considers that his
witness cannot be cross-examined, then  witness should be available.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are firmly of the opinion that we have lost a great deal of time
and we are asking the Defence to help us once more, so that we can
make some progress here.  We have a little more than an hour left.
That might help us to examine the next witness, which means that the
cross-examination might continue tomorrow or maybe for the other one --
the other witness who has been taken to hospital, and if she feels
better tomorrow, she may come.  But we are trying to be conciliatory.
I am asking you all to kindly stay so that we can hear the next
witness.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, I do not wish to insist, but I would like you to
understand the concern of the Defence and our client.  He has the
feeling, our client, that for some days now we have not been doing
what we should be doing.  So I respectfully pray the Trial Chamber, we
are being conciliatory, and I am sure Madam President will be aware of
this.
Our concern here is that we have begun a cross-examination.  The cross-
examination has begun.  Then if it stops, we are going to have to
prepare it again.  And then what is it going to be?  This is our
concern in respect of Father Seromba.  We want to save time.  I agree
with that.  But you know this better than I, that justice is an old
lady who can never be hurried.  There are contingencies that should be
considered.  I think that Father Seromba is being penalised.  He is a
detained person.  He came here of his own free will.  He wished to
reveal the truth.  Let's do it according to the Rules without any
hurry, and let's have the impression that the rights of the Defence
are being, in fact, defended.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are not hasty in the way we work, not at all.  And the Prosecutor
knows that he may no longer communicate with the witness when the
cross-examination begins, which means that the witness can no longer
communicate with the Prosecutor.  This is clear and this is one of the
fundamental rules of this Tribunal.
MR. MOSES:
On that basis, Your Honour, I'd ask that my colleague call the next
witness, YAT, who is present outside.
(Witness entered courtroom)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon, Mr. Witness.  You are a protected witness.  Can you
hear me?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I can hear you, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  You are Witness YAT.  You will now take the oath and,
after that, you will be examined by the Prosecutor and cross-examined
after that by Defence.  We ask you to listen to the questions
carefully and answer precisely to the questions that will be put to
you.  At this time we are going to ask you to take the solemn -- the
oath.
(Declaration made by Witness YAT in Kinyarwanda)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Witness.  You may sit down.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you, Madam President.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel.
MR. POGNON:
It would be well if the personal particulars of the witnesses be given
to us, rather than presented to us, as such.  We do not have the
sketch of the Tribunal, and we are supposed to have copies.  We were
not shown them when the witness is already there.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Copies will be given to you.
Did you already give copies of the personal particulars of this
witness to the Defence?
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I understand that, indeed, copies were given to the
Defence and in any event, Madam President, Your Honours, the
information which is on that sheet really is an amalgam of information
gleaned from the statements, all of which have been disclosed to the
Defence.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.
MR. POGNON:
The document as it is presented to us is not identical to the
documents that we have here.  If this is a document that is being
distributed in the Trial Chamber, it should be given to us.  What
Madam Prosecutor is saying is not at all correct.  This is the
practice in this Tribunal.  If you are going to deny us even that,
then I don't know what we are coming to.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You do not have the personal identification sheet of the witness?
MR. POGNON:
We have the personal identification sheet here, but the way it is
presented here, we need to have a copy so that we can compare it with
what was given to us, because what is being presented to us here now
is not being presented in the same way.  Because we have a document
which has certain particulars, so we need to compare it with what was
given to us.  That's how we do it-- do things here.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Normally, when the witness confirms that the information on the
personal information sheet is correct, the witness signs or uses a
fingerprint, and after that a copy is made which is actually
distributed to the parties.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Microphone, please, Counsel.
MR. POGNON:
We did not have this copy for the witness that just went, who was on
the stand, because we also need this for our cross-examination.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
If there are not any changes appearing on the sheet, then it is surely
the same sheet as the one you were given before, but I think the
Prosecution can give a personal identification sheet to the Defence.
It will be the second one for today.
You have the floor, Madam Prosecutor.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, we have no difficulties in giving counsel another
copy.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  You may proceed with your examination-in-chief of the
witness.
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Counsel for the Prosecution.
MS. ALEXIS:
I am obliged.
WITNESS YAT,
first having been duly sworn,
testified as follows:
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness YAT, do you have a document before you?
A.   Yes, I have a document before me.
Q.   And is that document signed by you?
A.   Yes, I signed that document.
Q.   And is it indicated that that document was signed by you on the 27th
of September 2004?
A.   That is correct; that date is mentioned on it.
Q.   And by so signing have you indicated that the contents of that
document are true and correct?
A.   Yes, in signing that document, I confirmed that the document is
exact, apart from a little error I have noted.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
This is an error that the witness has identified.  He mentioned a name
and I don't know whether it is proper to relay that name to the
Chamber, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Would that be the family name?  Do you have the personal particulars
form before you?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
No, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We would, therefore, like a Kinyarwanda interpreter to go to the
witness and find out what the problem is.  Without mentioning the
name, tell us what problem -- what the witness has identified, the
name the witness has identified.
THE KINYARWANDA INTERPRETER:
May I address the Court?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, but avoid giving any information that would lead to any
identification of the witness.
THE KINYARWANDA INTERPRETER:
There is a place name here which is written as follows (Kinyarwanda
spoken).
MADAM PRESIDENT:
That should be struck from the records.
Very well.  If I have understood correctly, the witness finds that the
spelling of that name should be corrected.  Is that all?
THE KINYARWANDA INTERPRETER:
Yes.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  We thank you.
Witness, you may write the name of that place correctly and sign next
to it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Counsel for the Prosecution you have the floor.
MS. ALEXIS:
All right.  Madam President, thank you.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Apart from the correction that you made to that document, the
contents of that document are true?
A.   Yes, the information contained in this document is exact.
MS. ALEXIS:
In that case, Madam President, I would move that that document be
marked as Prosecution Exhibit 10.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Do you have any objection, Counsel Monthé?
MR. MONTHÉ:
No objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  The document containing the witness's personal particulars
is admitted as Prosecution Exhibit P. 10.
MS. ALEXIS:
And for the document, Madam President, which contains the personal
particulars of this witness to be sealed?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The said document, P 10 is placed under seal.
(Exhibit No. P. 10 admitted, under seal)
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged, Madam President.
Madam President, I would ask the Court for me to begin my examination-
in-chief of this witness in closed session so that we do not have a
situation in which we are moving in and out of open and closed
session.  I ask, Madam President, because the questions and, indeed,
the answers which would be elicited from those questions would
certainly point to the identity of this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel Pognon, any objection to the closed session for this part of
the examination-in-chief?
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I do not know.  I simply do not know.  I leave it to
the discretion of the Tribunal.  I do not know.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  The Chamber rules that we should go into closed session
for the first part of the examination-in-chief of the witness.  We
crave, once more, the indulgence of the public.  (At this point in the
proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages 39 to 40] was
extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the session was heard in
camera)
(Pages 33 to 38 by Verna Butler)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are now in open session.
Madam Prosecutor, you may proceed with the examination-in-chief of the
witness.
MS. ALEXIS:
I am grateful, Madam President.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, you mentioned two priests, Father Straton and Father
Seromba.  Can you tell us, Witness, what is the ethnicity of Father
Seromba?
A.   I believe Father Seromba is Hutu.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, what is the ethnicity of Father
Straton?
A.   Father Straton is Tutsi.
Q.   Witness, can you describe, if you know, the relations between Father
Straton and Father Seromba before April 1994?
A.   Before April 1994, I noticed that there was no problem between the
two.  It was in early April 1994 that it was observed that those two
priests didn't get on well.  That was the only time when that was
noticed.
Q.   When you made this observation that the two priests were not getting
along, Witness, can you give us an example of this?
A.   I can give an example in that regard.  In 1994, at one time Father
Seromba went to attend a meeting.  He stayed there for some time and
during mass in church Father Straton said he didn't see
Father Seromba.  When Father Seromba returned he made very improper
statements and at one time Father Seromba said that he had expressed
himself in terms like "those of the Inkotanyi" when he was referring
to him.  At that time I realised that the issues had to do with ethnic
tensions and nothing else.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
The Defence is particularly concerned with this line of questioning
for the following reason.  The witness is trying to establish a link
between something that happened between the two priests.  He is
stating things relating to the tension that existed between the two
priests.  I don't know whether we are going to have Father Straton who
is being referred to as a witness.  Indeed, I find that there is
something particularly worrying here regarding the questions that are
being put to the witness in connection with that relationship.  So he
should stick to what he knows and state what he knows.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel for the Prosecution, do you want to respond to the
objection?
MS. ALEXIS:
Very briefly, Madam President.  We would submit that this evidence is
admissible.  It is admissible, firstly, because it is contained in the
statements and, therefore, the Defence has full notice.  Secondly,
Madam President, Your Honours, it is admissible because it is relevant
and, thirdly, it is admissible because it is direct evidence.  Your
Honour, this -- in this Court, perhaps, today I have heard counsel
say, and rightly so, that it is the Prosecution who must prove its
evidence since it is the Prosecution who has brought the Accused
before the Court.  It is in an effort to do so that we find ourselves
duty bound to lead the evidence that is relevant, that is admissible
and of which counsel has notice.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Chamber allows the Prosecutor to proceed.  Counsel Pognon, you may
examine -- or cross-examine the witness on this point.
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged, Madam President.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness YAT, if I may remind you, you were telling us about the
relation between Father Seromba and Father Straton and I believe the
last thing you said was that Father Seromba said that he was speaking
as an Inkotanyi.  Can you, Witness YAT, complete this example of the
relations between Father Seromba and Father Straton?  What, if
anything else, else did Father Seromba continue to say?
A.   Another example I can give is something that was said in public.
During a meeting of the parish council in the presbytery many things
were said, but they essentially spoke of the death of
President Habyarimana, and at the time Seromba said he had been killed
by the Inkotanyi.
Another thing is that during that meeting, problems relating to PL and
MDR were discussed.  Father Straton had fled and Father Seromba said
that problems had arisen between the two persons (unintelligible) had
fled.  There was problems between Hutus, and when they talked of the
PL they were making mention or referring to the Tutsi.  Regarding
relations between people at the time, they talked about people who had
been killed, and Seromba said they were dealing with political
problems that could not be taken care of.  All this was said in
public.  This was not something that was said in secret.
Q.   When these things were said, were you actually present?
A.   I was present and I was not alone.  There were other members of the
parish council present.  For instance, there was old Kabwana; the
bourgmestre, Ndahimana; the criminal investigating police inspector;
Kayishema; and another person called Uwoyiremye; and members of parish
council as well.
Q.   Witness, can you tell us, approximately, when did this meeting occur?
A.   That meeting was held around the 10th of April.
Q.   And, Witness, you said that Kayishema was present.  Can you tell us
whether Kayishema said anything?
A.   On that day Kayishema told us that, as a matter of fact, it was a
question of taking reprisals, of taking revenge.
Q.   Witness, when you said that Father Seromba said that Father Straton
was acting -- speaking as an Inkotanyi, what did you understand that
to mean?
A.   In our region whenever mention was made of Inkotanyi, they were
referring to the enemy of the country, people who were wicked, liars,
Inyenzi, and many other terms that were used at the time.
Q.   Yes.  And when Father Seromba spoke of the problem in the area, did
he speak of anything in particular?
A.   Apart from the statements that were relayed to me by Fulgence, the
next day I went to see Fulgence because some Tutsi families had been
killed; namely, the family of a certain Martin.  The counsel (sic) of
Gatere had been killed with grenades.  Members of Ndakubana's family
had been killed.  I went to seek the advice of that man.  He was a
friend and he told me that the day before a meeting had been held in
the parish and that a decision had been taken, that it had been said
that Tutsis had to be killed.  He told me that a meeting had taken
place in a building within the parish and Kanyarukiga and Father
Seromba had been present.  And Kanyarukiga had just come back from
Kigali and he returned to that place because he was fleeing the
Inkotanyi.  He said the Bourgmestre Kayishema was there.  When
Fulgence Kayishema made those statements he advised me to take my
children and trust them with a certain
*********************************** so he should provide for their
safety.
Q.   Witness, can you tell us, where did this meeting with Kayishema take
place?
A.   I have not understood your question.  Was it the meeting bringing
together Kayishema and the other fathers, or the meeting between
Kayishema and myself?
Q.   My apologies, Witness.  I would be more clear.  I am referring to the
meeting between you and Kayishema.  Can you tell this Court, where did
it take place?
A.   I met Kayishema at his home.
Q.   After what, if anything else, before April 1994 -- my apologies.
Before April 1994, was Kayishema someone who was known to you?
A.   I knew him very well.  **************************.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, why you went to see Kayishema?
A.   The reason wherefor I went to see him, as I told you before, is that
members of family -- families had already begun being killed.  I have
given you the names of four families: Gatere, Thomas, Ndakubana,
Martin, et cetera.  And we realised that there was no security.  So I
went to see Kayishema
****************************************************************.  I,
therefore, went to seek his advice.  He, as an inspector of the
criminal investigation, had to know quite a bit of what had happened
in the Kivumu commune.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, just so we can be clear, what is the
date when you met Kayishema?
A.   We saw each other on the 11th.  It was on the day following the day
on which we held a parish council meeting.
Q.   And I take it, Witness, that it would be the 11th of April 1994?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Witness, you spoke of the killing of one named Martin.  What was the
ethnicity of Martin?
A.   Martin was Tutsi.
Q.   And, indeed, Witness, what was the ethnicity of Martin?
A.   Martin was Tutsi.
Q.   And did you know what was the religion of Martin?
A.   He was a Catholic.
Q.   You said that Martin was killed.  Did you come to know about the
circumstances concerning the killing of Martin?
A.   Martin had been chased from his property, and for the sake of his
security he left his home and went to Théodomir's house at Ngobangoba,
and when I realised that he had fled, I advised him to go and see
Father Seromba who was in Nyange.  And we had confidence in the priest
because of the advice he used to give to the faithful.  When Martin
returned he told me that as Seromba had given -- advised to him to
flee with his family.  So Martin was killed, I think, on the 11th, in
the afternoon at about 6 p.m., but the members of the population
learnt of his death the next day.
Q.   Did you do anything to assist Martin to see Father Seromba?
A.   Yes, I helped him, like I helped other persons.  I gave him advice.
I asked him to go and see Father Seromba, and I gave him a note
because all the priests who had lived in Nyange had been my friends.
And when he returned, he said the fathers didn't do anything to him
but, instead, had caused his family to flee.
Q.   Can you tell us, if you recall, Witness, what is the family name of
Martin?
A.   He was called Martin Karakezi.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, perhaps I should spell Karakezi as listed.  It is K-A-
R-A-K-E-Z-I.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, after you met with Kayishema, can you tell us whether you
went anywhere or did anything?
A.   After my discussion with Kayishema I went home and I took my four
children, following his advice, and I took them to ***************.  I
even entrusted some of my important gear and devices with him,
especially my electric generator.  Then I realised later that the
fighting was intensifying; for instance, on the 12th people were
killed in public and I, therefore, decided to take flight.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, where did you go?
A.   I went to the Mushubati commune in the Gitarama préfecture where I
stayed for about two weeks in the countryside.  Then I moved on to
Kabgaye where there were other refugees.
Q.   When you were at Kabgaye and there were other refugees, can you tell
us what was the ethnicity of these refugees?
A.   The refugees there were mostly Tutsi.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, whether anything happened to the
refugees whilst you were there?
A.   Many things happened there while I was there.  Many people were
killed.  Some persons were killed by Interahamwe and others by
soldiers.  On two occasions, people were brought with buses -- were
taken by buses to go and kill elsewhere, and other people died of
hunger.
Q.   Can you tell us, without naming your commune, Witness, whether --
after Kabgaye, whether you ever went back to your commune?
A.   After my stay at Kabgaye I continued to flee.  I went to Ruhango, and
after Ruhango I went to the commune referred to as in Ngenda commune,
and later I went to Butare, and after that I returned to the Kivumu
commune.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, what had become of your children?
A.   I had eight children, six of whom died during the genocide, so I
still have only two children.
Q.   On your return, Witness, were you given any position in your commune?
And this is without naming your commune.
A.   ********************.
Q.   And, Witness, are you to date the *********?
A.   No, I am *************.
Q.   Whilst you were ************* can you tell us, Witness, whether you
know if people -- whether you found out whether people had been
trained to handle firearms before April 1994?
A.   I learnt of this because I saw a document, a memo,
*********************, inviting them to undergo training in handling
weapons.  That memo was signed by the inspector.
Q.   And can you tell us, if you may, Witness, what was the name of this
inspector?
A.   His name was Aloys Uwoyiremye.
Q.   And did you see any other letters whilst you were ******************?
A.   I did not see any others because it was said that when the Inkotanyi
were advancing into the country some documents were burned and other
documents were taken away ********************** who had changed
offices.
Q.   Witness, without mentioning the name of your commune, can you tell us
the geographical area of your commune?
A.   If I tell you that those who know the area would know which commune
is my commune.  But I don't see why I shouldn't say it.  (By order of
the Court, this portion of the evidence [page 45, lines 34 and 35] has
been struck from the record and filed under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The impression that the witness -- I am under the impression that the
witness has given lots of positions insofar as the location or area is
concerned.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I had envisaged that the witness could answer this
question without giving detail that would identify the location of the
exact commune.  Perhaps I can withdraw this question for now and,
perhaps, at a later stage, Madam President, I can ask just for this
one question if we can go into closed session.  But for now, Madam
President, I can continue.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, but probably we need to expunge your question and the answer
thereto from the transcripts.
MS. ALEXIS:
Thank you very much, Madam President.  That would, indeed, be very
appreciated.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So all those details should be expunged from the records.  You may
carry on, Madam Prosecutor.
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged, Madam President.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness YAT, can you tell us whether you think that the attacks in
your area on various families could have been prevented by the
authorities?
A.   I believe so.
Q.   Witness, in Rwanda, before 1994, was there ever any unrest?
A.   Yes, there had been times of trouble, and this on several occasions.
Q.   And did -- some of those occasions, did they occur in your lifetime?
A.   Yes, I was alive.  I realised in 1959 while I was in primary school,
and in 1961 I was in form one, secondary school.
*******************************************************.  What this
means, therefore, is that I was witness to those events.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, whether -- or what was the difference, if
any, between incidents in 1994 and those other times which you
mentioned?
A.   Yes, there is a difference between those events.  Before, we realised
that authorities never got involved, but in 1994 all the authorities
or officials at all levels utilised the population and taught them to
take part in the events.
Q.   Witness, if I were to return to an answer you had given some time
ago; you had mentioned some persons who were killed, including Martin.
Can you remind us, please, Witness, of the names of the other
families who were killed?
A.   I also talked about Martin, but he was forced to leave his residence.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Madam Prosecutor, probably you can ask the question again so that the
witness can repeat his answer because the microphone was not on.
MS. ALEXIS:
Pleasure.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, I must apologise; the microphone was not on and everyone in
court did not get an opportunity to hear you.  Can you please repeat
for us the names of those families who had been killed?
A.   When people were attacked it was obvious that there was a security
problem.  Two grenades were thrown at Gatare's house, and some cows
were wounded.  In Thomas's house, a cow was eaten.  Ndakubana's house
was also attacked and two members of the family were killed.  Later,
Martin's home was also attacked and he was forced to flee his
residence.
Q.   You mentioned someone named Thomas.  Can you tell us what is his
family name?
A.   I do not know his family name.  I don't recall his family name.  He
used to live at Ngobagoba, but there, today, there is a settlement.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, those persons who had been killed, what was
their ethnicity?
A.   Those people were Tutsi.  The four families that were attacked were
Tutsi families.
Q.   Witness YAT, you have spoken on several occasions of Father Seromba.
Can you describe -- or can you give this Court the physical
description of Father Seromba?
A.   The last time I saw him, Father Seromba was a person who was neither
very tall, nor short, and he had a pudgy face.
Q.   Witness, if you were to see Father Seromba now, would you be able to
recognise him?
A.   Even if much time has elapsed, in fact, ten years, yes, I think if I
saw him today, I would be able to identify him, if he hasn't changed.
He has -- I notice that many people have changed the colour of their
skin.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, with your leave, might this witness be permitted to
stand so that I may ask him to look around the room and see if he
recognises anybody as Father Seromba?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness YAT, can you stand, look around this room and carefully look,
and tell this Court whether you see that person you spoke of as Father
Seromba.
A.   Thank you.  I can see him.  He has even looked at me.  We know each
other.  I saw him smile.  He is sitting between two men, near the
person who took the floor to speak a while ago.  He has a dog collar
on.  Thank you.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, Your Honours, might the record reflect that this
witness has identified Father Seromba.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
It should be inserted in the minutes that this witness has identified
Father Seromba.
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged.  Madam President I would like to get the directions of the
Court.  I am looking at the time.  I am almost finished, but I have a
few photographs which I would have liked to have had this witness
shown.  There also be, Madam President -- okay.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
I simply want to raise the issue of the security of Father Seromba
that I have raised before you already.  I think we can look at those
pictures tomorrow because we have to have due regard to the security
of Father Seromba at all times.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, we are going to adjourn now.  You may proceed with your in-chief
tomorrow.  We have just been told that the room -- the courtroom of
the fourth floor will be free tomorrow during the entire day.  So we
can have a sitting during the entire day of tomorrow so that we can
catch up with time that has been lost.
We can therefore, meet from four -- from nine o'clock to 12:30 p.m.,
and from 2:30 p.m. -- from 2:30 p.m. to 3.30 p.m. (sic).   Is that
okay with everyone, with all the parties?  What did I say?  Yes, 2:30
to 5:30;  I'm sorry, I think I was mistaken.
I was saying there that we can sit tomorrow from nine o'clock to 12:30
p.m., and then from 2:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m.  Is that acceptable to all
the parties?
MS. ALEXIS:
Certainly, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  I would like to thank you.
If the witness who took ill is available, Maître Monthé can continue
with the cross-examination of this witness.  Probably, you would tell
us which witness would be taking the witness stand after this one.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, it would be Witness CBI.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
CBI.  Very good.  So we take due note of that.  Are there any
subsidiary questions?  Apparently, there's a small problem, so the
witness who will be coming after this one will be CBI.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, Witness CBI testified in the trial in Rwanda and we
will -- that it shouldn't be that witness who should be testifying.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, is it possible to have an alternative witness
because it would appear that that witness had already testified before
in Rwanda?
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, if I may have a moment to confer with my seniors.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
As concerns CBI, the only reservation made by the Defence concerned a
statement that was not redacted and that was made on the 11th of April
.  Is that it?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Eleven March, I beg your pardon.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I understand that statements of this witness were
disclosed to my learned friend in French on the 9th of August 2004 and
in English on the 24th of September 2004, both.  So at this juncture,
the redacted and unredacted versions have both been disclosed to my
learned friend.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, admitting that they were disclosed to us 9th of
August and that -- we do not have it, and we are insisting on this
because the Prosecutor has those documents, I don't know why they
cannot be disclosed to us.  This is unimaginable.  These things should
be very easy.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good.  If the Prosecution doesn't find any objection to giving another
copy to the Defence tomorrow morning, I think we will continue with
the witness tomorrow and hear CBI after conducting the cross-
examination of the witness.
So thank you all.  Have a good evening.  The session stands adjourned.
We resume tomorrow at 9 a.m.
(Court adjourned at 1836H)
(Pages 41 to 49 by Verna Butler)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Shannon Eboe-Osuji, Roxane Lane and Verna Butler, Official Court
Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, do
hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-entitled
cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was taken in
shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer; that the
foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of said
proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________ Shannon Eboe-Osuji
___________________________ Roxane Lane
___________________________ Verna Butler
