P R O C E E D I N G S
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. The Court is in session.  This
afternoon we will have the cross-examination of a Witness CDK.
(Witness entered courtroom)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon, Witness.  We would like to remind you that you are
still on the solemn declaration and the Defence counsel will proceed
with your cross-examination.
MR. POGNON:
Yes, thank you, Madam President.  Good afternoon Madam President, good
afternoon Your Honours.  Witness CDK, good afternoon.  Good afternoon,
Counsel.
WITNESS CDK
CROSS-EXAMINATION
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   I am going to put some questions to you, and please kindly tell me if
you do not understand the question so that I rephrase them.  I will
also pray that you give as short answers as possible without going
beyond the answer that you want to give.  Can we proceed?
A.   I have no problem, Counsel.
MR. POGNON:
There's no translation.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Counsel for Defence is complaining that the translation is not coming
through, so I do not know what's happening.
MR. MOSES:
I think both the English and French translations were both coming
through on channel 1.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Normally, French is on channel 2.
MR. POGNON:
Can you follow the English translation?  Thank you.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Counsel for Defence says he can hear, but he's not hearing the
translation, that is the French.
Witness says --
MR. POGNON:
Thank you.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness, you made a first statement to the investigators of the
Prosecution, I think on the 11th of October, 2001.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  In that statement, you stated initially that -- well, you
were asked if you knew Kanyarukiga, and you said that you knew him
well.  Is that correct?  Do you confirm that?
A.   (No interpretation)
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
I think there is a problem here, Your Honours, because I cannot hear
the French translation.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, you talked about Kanyarukiga last time around.  Can you
please answer the question.
THE WITNESS:
(No interpretation)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I didn't hear.  I think there's a problem with the channels.  It's
unfortunate that every day we have to deal with this same problem,
whereas technicians must ascertain before the session that everything
is in order so that we are in a position to follow the various
interpretations.  Now, try to see to what problem it is and iron that
out as soon as possible, please.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Madam President, you are saying that the Honourable Judge can not hear
the English booth.  Can the Honourable Judge hear the English booth
now?  Very good, thank you.
The Witness was saying that we can resume proceedings if there's no
problem.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, we can hear you.  So we may resume.  Counsel Pognon, the floor is
yours.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness, my first question is as follows, and it has do with your
statement of 11 October 2001.  You were with investigators of the
Prosecution, and you answered them by saying, "You asked me if I know
Gaspard Kanyarukiga.  I know him."  Did you make such a statement?  I
am reading the transcripts of your statement of 11 October 2001, and I
refer you to page K0249799, page 2024.  Do you acknowledge having made
such an answer?
A.   Yes, that was my statement; that was my answer.
Q.   Thank you.  You also stated, and that's on the next paragraph, "On
the first day of the attacks, I heard the noise of fighting, and I
went to see what was happening.  I saw that there were major -- there
was major fighting outside the church.  The Hutus were attacking; the
refugees were fighting back."  That is your statement of 11 October
.  Do you acknowledge that statement?
A.   Yes, that is my statement.
Q.   Thank you.  In the next paragraph, you stated, “I had -- I must have
reached the church at 11:00 in the morning.  I stayed there watching
what is happening.  I saw Kanyarukiga.  The area in question was close
to his pharmacy.”  Did you make that statement?  Did you acknowledge
it?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  You continued by saying, and you are the one speaking
here, "From observations, I concluded that there were three persons
leading the oppressions on that day, Kanyarukiga, Telésphore
Ndungutse, a teacher; and Fulgence Kayishema, a police inspector."  Do
you acknowledge that statement?
A.   Yes.
Q.   You continued as follows:  "I am saying so because I was able to see
that they were the ones who were giving orders and instructions to
those conducting the attacks.  They had an important status in their
community, and it was obvious that -- from observation it was clear
that the crowd was urged on by the words of these people and reacted
whenever they said something."  Did you make that statement?
A.   Counsel, can you repeat what you said because I didn't quite
understand.
Q.   Fine and good. You said, therefore -- this is the transcript.  I am
only reading what you stated.  You said, "I said so -- that is you
said that Kanyarukiga, Telésphore Ndungutse, and Kayishema, the police
inspector, were those leading the oppressions.  And you explained by
saying, "I am saying so because I was able to observe that they were
the ones who were giving orders and instructions to those who were
carrying out the attacks.  They had an important status in the
community, and it was obvious that, from observing the scene, it could
be seen that the crowd was urged on by what these people said and
reacted whenever they said something."  Did you make that statement?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  My question is as follows: in acknowledging this
statement, at what point in time did you, yourself, go there of your
own accord, that is, to the church, when you heard the noise resulting
from the fighting?  On what day and at what time did you go there?
A.   I went there when Kayishema, the police inspector, called us to go
there.  It was not of my own volition that I got there.  I went there
following the orders that he had issued to us.
Q.   If you went there following the orders that were given to you, why
can you state, "I heard noise and I went to see what was happening.  I
saw significant fighting.  The Hutus were attacking the refugees, and
the refugees were fighting back."  My question is as follows:  in
expressing yourself in those words, aren't you inferring that you went
to the parish of your own accord, and willingly so?
A.   I think I had explained that I went up there because a certain
Kayishema had called me.
Q.   Why therefore didn't you say so, and why did you make that statement
which shows that from all respects, sir, you went to the parish of
your own volition?  Why?
A.   When the persons who took down my statement, they didn't do so
correctly.  They did not write down my statements as I made them.
Q.   Thank you.  I will now turn to your statement, the last statement you
made, because you made two statements.  I'm talking about your
statement of 29 January 2003.  You stated -- rather, you recognised in
your statement that you had already met the investigators of the
Tribunal on 11th of October 2001.  You did make that statement.
A.   What did you say, Counsel?
Q.   In your statement, that is, in the second statement that you made on
the 29th of January 2003, you acknowledged having already met the
investigators of the Tribunal on the 11th of October 2001.  Did you
make such a statement?  Did you acknowledge having met them, that is,
the investigators of the Tribunal?
A.   Yes.  I said that I had met them.
Q.   Thank you.  Once you made that introduction -- I am going to read
what you said after that.  You say the following, "I realise -- I do
not take note of my error or omission in the document because
; and I repeat K0219296, K0219297, and K019298, that is the
statement that I read to you that we resumed these proceedings.  Do
you recognise having said that there was no error, no mistake, in the
statement that you made on 11th of October 2001?
A.   As it was read to me, there was no mistake in it.
Q.   Good.  If there is no error, how come, therefore, that you have just
said that the investigators did not capture faithfully exactly what
you told them on 11th of October 2001?  Was the question translated?
Did you hear my question?
A.   That question cannot be easily understood.
Q.   Fine.  You made an initial statement on the 11th of October which
shows that you went spontaneously and of your own accord to the parish
because you heard noise and shooting from the fighting.  I read it out
to you, and you said, no, it is Kayishema who had invited you to go
there.  There is therefore an error in the transcription of the
investigators. That is what I said.  The second time that you met the
investigators on the 29th of January 2003, you acknowledged that there
was no error in the statement that you had made on 11th of October
.  How can you explain that?
A.   I believe things happened the way I explained them to you.  I did not
make any error in that regard.
Q.   You mean, therefore, that you made no error in your statement of
October 11, 2001?  Is that what you are saying?
A.   That is it.
MR. POGNON:
The Defence hopes that the transcripts will reflect this moment in
time in this trial.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   When you stated on the 11th of October -- I'm referring to the
transcript on page 2224 when you stated, "I must have arrived in the
church at 11 a.m.  I stayed there to observe what was happening." Is
that also an error, or that is exactly how things happened?
A.   That is how things happened.
Q.   Right.  So where did you stay once you got to the church in order to
start observing what was happening?
A.   It was on the road leading to the parish.  That road goes up towards
the parish.
Q.   Where?
A.   I don't see where you are going.
Q.   Where on the road did you stop?
A.   I stopped on the left-hand side on the road leading to the parish.
Q.   Very well then.  Can you give us a description of the road?  Was it a
tarred road?
A.   No, it was not a tarred road.  It was an ordinary road on which
gravel was thrown.
Q.   Well, was there anything near the road that can help us to situate it
without having to look at a photograph?
A.   Today there is a signboard on which is written "Memorial to persons
who perished at the church".
Q.   Madam President, at this stage, I would wish that the Witness be
shown photograph number -- because I wasn't expecting this answer.
That is why I'm looking for it.  I believe it's P. 3-13, photograph P.
-13.
MR. MOSES:
Just one thing I would ask, and that is that the technicians do
something to try and repair the screens in front of the Prosecutor's
benches because they don't seem to be working.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.  Madam President, it is rather P. 3-16.  P. 3-16.
Can the photograph not be put on the screen?  The Defence can make do
with the ordinary facilities of the Tribunal.  With the Chamber's
leave, the Witness could move over to that photograph.  Could you
please draw the curtains to enable the Witness to move over to the
overhead projector.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   So, can you show us where you stopped?
A.   You stopped at that spot; that is the spot which is on the side with
buildings.  As a matter of fact, it is opposite the buildings.  That
is the side of the road which is opposite the buildings.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, it should be confirmed that the Witness is pointing
to a spot on which there is a white signboard which is today the
signboard indicating Nyange parish.
MR. MOSES:
I just think for the record, Your Honours, we need to make it clear,
because there's more than one signboard in the photograph, and in the
future, if someone is looking at the transcripts and says it's beside
the signboard to the church, I think, could it be more eloquently
described as the white sign above the shops in the centre of the
photo?  Otherwise, there's another signboard on the left.
MR. POGNON:
Counsel for the Prosecution, Counsel for the Prosecution, I do not
want that during my cross-examination you should turn to the Witness
and give him answers.  And I don't accept this.  Please, please.  I
crave the court's indulgence -- Court's indulgence.
MR. MOSES:
(Overlapping microphones)
MR. POGNON:
I am not craving your indulgence but the indulgence of the Court.  I
can not crave your indulgence when you interrupt my cross-examination
and (unintelligible) an answer to the Witness.  I crave the Court's
indulgence and not the Prosecution's indulgence. (Microphones
overlapping)
You have made mention of the signboard, indicating the Witness has
made mention of the signboard indicating the parish, and that is why I
showed him the Witness, and I do not accept that the Prosecutor should
suggest answers to the Witness.
The Witness has made mention of the signboard indicating the parish,
and that is why I show the Witness and I do not accept the Prosecutor
should suggest answers to the Witness.  With the Chamber's leave.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, we are of the opinion that the Prosecutor did not try to
prompt answers to the Witness.  All he sought to do was to ensure that
we are more precise as to which signboard we are referring to because
there are many signboards and we don't know which one we are referring
to and which one is indicating the direction to the church.
MR. POGNON:
With all due respect for the Chamber, the Witness is taking answers --
is answering the Prosecution's questions, and if he does not
understand, he can make the Defence know that that is the case.  And
we do not tolerate the situation in which the Prosecutor prompts the
Witness.  If the Witness does not understand anything in the course of
this cross-examination, let him tell us so.
Now, Witness -- Madam President, may I proceed?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Counsel.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness, please specify exactly where you were.  Specify the
signboard you were referring to, please.
My question is as follows.  Leave your pen pointed to that spot.  Is
that indeed the spot on which the signboard indicating Nyange parish
is found?
A.   This is the road leading to the parish.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
However, Madam President, we do not quite understand what the Witness
says to Kinyarwanda interpreters.  There is a problem with his
microphone.
The Witness is not properly heard.  Could someone check his
microphone.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, you have just pointed to a spot.  We see something which is
whitish.  Would that be the signboard indicating the direction to the
church?
THE WITNESS:
The signboard in question, I pointed out that that signboard was
erected to guide people going to the parish to visit the scene on
which those victims perished.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Counsel.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  Is that the area that is close to Kanyarukiga's
pharmacy?
A.   That road leads to the parish.  As regards to the road close to
Kanyarukiga's pharmacy, that particular road is start -- I believe I
have made a mistake somewhere.  I believe that even the road leading
to the parish is currently tarred as well.  But it was not tarred
before.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I would like the Witness to be shown photograph
number P. 13 .  P. 3-13.  P. 3-13.  P. 3-13.  Photograph K0231713.
K0231713.  It is not very legible.  In any case it is photograph P. 3-
, K0231 -- it's rather 1713.  Not the photograph on the screen.  So
it's 1713.  K0271713.  K0271713.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So the handwritten number is 12 then?  That is P. 3-12.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Yes.  On this photograph, can you see where you were, Witness?
A.   No, I can't see the spot in question.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, the Witness can return to his seat.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, you may return to your seat, and registrar, could you open
the curtains.
MR. POGNON:
We are still having this problem, the buzz in the earsets.  Could the
technicians assist us, and this sound is really unbearable, Madam
President.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness --
A.   I am listening to you, Counsel.
Q.   Do you think the position you have indicated on the photograph, on
photograph P. 3-16 -- that is the spot on which you said you were
standing.  Is that where Kanyarukiga's pharmacy is found?
A.   If you want me to show you where Kanyarukiga's pharmacy is, show me
the photograph and I will show you where the pharmacy is.
MR. POGNON:
I'm sorry, Madam President.  Let him return to the overhead projector
to view P. 3-16.  With your leave, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Could you please draw the curtains again so that the Witness can go
over to the overhead projector.
MR. POGNON:
I am sorry, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Witness, could you move over to the overhead projector, please.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Please, kindly show us where Kanyarukiga's pharmacy is or show us
Kanyarukiga's pharmacy.
A.   It is this building I am pointing to.
Q.   This building you are pointing to?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Very well.  I thank you.  Do you think the place you indicated is
close to that pharmacy?
A.   No.  The two locations are not close to one another.  I did not say
so.
MR. POGNON:
The Witness may return to his seat so that we should proceed.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
It should be -- the record should reflect that it is the building in
front of which is the stop sign so that we should be able to find
where we were subsequently.
MR. POGNON:
Yes, where there is a stop sign.  Yes, may the records reflect that.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   You state that you never said that that spot where you were was not
close -- was close to the Kanyarukiga's pharmacy.  Do you assert that?
Did you confirm having said that?
A.   The two locations are not close to one another.
Q.   Let me read your statement.  This is what you stated: "I saw
Kanyarukiga.  The area in question was close to his pharmacy."  What
should we take from what you stated?  Today you are saying that that
statement which you gave is not correct.  Is that what you are saying?
A.   Put your question clearly to me, Counsel, so that I should
understand.
Q.   My question is as follows: on the photograph you showed us
Kanyarukiga's pharmacy.  You expressed an opinion, stating that that
area where you were was not close to the pharmacy.  And in the
transcript of the 11th of October 2001, you asserted that “I saw
Kanyarukiga.”  The area in question, that is where you were, was close
to his pharmacy.  Now, what is written in this statement?  Is it
different from anything you ever said, and you never stated what is
written here and which is attributed to you?
MR. MOSES:
Your Honours, I think to be fair to the Witness, this whole paragraph
needs to be read to him so that he knows the context in which he said
he saw Kanyarukiga.  In my submission, the way it has been put to the
Witness is unfair him because we may be talking about two different
incidents or points in time.
MR. POGNON:
Counsel for the Prosecution, I stand corrected.  Let me read the
sentence.  I will do better.  I will read the beginning of the
sentence, and the Witness will say what he makes of it.
This is what he stated:  "I must have arrived at the church at 11 a.m.
I stayed on to observe what was happening.  I saw Kanyarukiga.  The
area in question was close to his pharmacy."
There we are.  I have read it.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Witness, did you give that statement?  Did you make that statement?
A.   There is an area you are referring to, but the two areas are
different.  I stated that I saw Kanyarukiga while I was standing
opposite his pharmacy.  I did not state that I saw Kanyarukiga when I
was on the road leading to the parish.
Q.   Thank you.  So it can be said in reformulating what you said, what I
would call you observed, that you saw Kanyarukiga in front of his
pharmacy or in his pharmacy?
A.   He was opposite his pharmacy.
Q.   I thank you.  So you saw him with whom?
A.   You mean on which side I saw him and in whose company?  In any case,
you want to lead me into error.  You want to induce me into error.  I
have just said what I said, and I think this has been written down.  I
said that I saw Kanyarukiga, Father Seromba and Fulgence Kayishema and
Telésphore Ndungutse when they were coming out of the Codekoki
operative building where they had held a meeting.  I do not know what
you are talking about now.
Q.   I am talking about your statement of 11 October 2001.  I am still
dealing with that.  I will address your other statement later.  This
is what you stated:  "I saw Kanyarukiga.  From observation I got to
the conclusion that there were three persons who were directing
oppressions on that day, Kanyarukiga; Telésphore Ndungutse, the
teacher; and Fulgence Kayishema, a police inspector."  That is what
you stated.  That is what you said on the 11th of October 2001.
A.   Continue to read out that statement to me, and you can ask me
questions after.
Q.   Mr. Witness, I am sorry before the entire Tribunal, before the
Prosecutor that I also respect.  I am the counsel here and the one who
learned to asked the questions rather than ask them the way you like
them.  But I would like to ask the questions and take into account
what you said.  And I will be very clear.  So you made that statement
to the effect that the persons that you saw were Kanyarukiga,
Telésphore Ndungutse, Kayishema Fulgence.  You did not only make that
statement; you explained your conclusion to the investigators.  This
is what you said, "I say that this because I could see that they were
the ones giving orders."
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, aren't those questions you already asked?  You want to ask
the same questions?
MR. POGNON:
No, Madam President.  It is because the Witness is saying – or,
rather, we should try to get him to say that he made the statement on
the 11th of October 2001, and that after he made another statement on
the 29th of January and says there is no error in the statement of 11
October, and now he is trying to deny the statement of 11 October.
That is what I merely wanted to establish.  I can continue.  All that
has been said has been written down in the transcript.
THE WITNESS:
In any case, I have not denied the statement that I made.  I made it
willingly.  I wasn't paid any money.  I did this in order to help the
Tribunal.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Counsel did not speak into the microphone.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Now, this takes me to the statement that you made on the 23rd -- on
the 29th of January 2003.  And I would like to ask you this question.
At what time upon your arrival were you able to observe the persons
that you mentioned, that is, Ndugutse, Kanyarikiga, Gaspard Ndugutse,
Fulgence Kayishema, and Seromba come out of the Codekoki building?  At
what time?
A.   I saw them at about 11:00.  I wasn't wearing a watch.  I only gave
you an estimate, an estimated time.
Q.   Fine.  Well, you saw them at about 11:00.  Where were you when you
saw them?  Were you on the spot you pointed at on the photo?
A.   I had not yet arrived at the spot that I pointed to on the
photograph.  I was on the road.  The place I told you about, that is
opposite Kanyarukiga's pharmacy.
Q.   Fine.  Do you mean -- or rather, how did you find yourself in front
of Kanyarukiga's pharmacy?  How did you get there?
A.   I was there in the company of other persons.  We were waiting for the
end of the meeting so that they can tell us why they had called us up.
Q.   How did you find yourself there to wait for the end of the meeting?
A.   Ask me your question correctly, Counsel.  Explain it to me so that I
can understand exactly you want to say.
Q.   You stated that you were in front of the pharmacy and you were
waiting for the end of the meeting.  Now, my question is: how did you
find yourself directly in front of that pharmacy?  How did you get
there?
A.   You are asking me how I got there, or are you asking me under what
circumstances I went to the place?  In the statement that I made, I
stated that I left my home when Kayishema called us up.  He was asking
the citizenry to go and beef up the strength of the attackers in the
church because they were being attacked.
Q.   Your answer is okay for me.  Now, if that is your answer, was it
under those circumstances that you were carried in the car up to the
pharmacy?
A.   I did not say that I went there in Rwamasirabo's vehicle.  Rather, I
left my house on foot and I went to that spot on foot.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Interpreter makes a correction.  It was Rwamasirabo's vehicle and not
the pharmacy vehicle the first time around.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   You left your house.  Do you mean by this that Kayishema did not
invite you to come?
A.   Kayishema is the one who called me.  But I did not get into
Rwamasirabo's vehicle.
Q.   And when you got there, who told you to wait in front of the pharmacy
and that there was a meeting in progress in the Codekoki building?
A.   I heard.  Members of the oppression that I found there said so.
Q.   Good.  And is it the members of the population or citizenry who asked
you to wait there?
A.   I have told you that I found members of the population who were
saying that there was a meeting going on, and I remained there with
them.
Q.   Good.  Who were the persons you met when you got there -- I mean the
persons you met when you got there?  That is, amongst the members of
the population that you know.
A.   I met an old man called Kagina, a certain Célestin Munyaneza.
Q.   I'm waiting, you found -- I want to be able to write down the names
that you are giving.
A.   I found Michel Kagina.
Q.   Kagina, Michel?
A.   Munyaneza, Célestin.
Q.   Yes.
A.   Alexis Higaniro.
Q.   Yes?
A.   Fidel Ndabananiye.
Q.   Yes?
A.   Alexis Ngarambe.  Those are the people I was able to identify.
Q.   Thank you.  Did you know those people before, or that is where you
got to know them?
A.   I knew them well before.
Q.   You said that after the meeting -- and I'm reading your transcript of
-- rather of 29 January.  After the meeting in front of the statue,
Ndungutse Telésphore, Kanyarukiga Gaspard, Ndahimana the bourgmestre,
Fulgence, and Father Seromba moved towards the church.  Was it after
the meeting that took place in the Codekoki building?
A.   Yes, that happened after the meeting.
Q.   Fine.  You said that after that, you did not know who opened the
doors of the church, and the people who had taken refuge there came
out of the church and started throwing stones.  Do you want me to read
the statement to you?  Do you acknowledge saying that, or do you want
me to read the statement?
A.   Yes, I made that statement.
Q.   Fine.  And somehow that is when fighting began.  Is that correct?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Fine, thank you.  During the examination-in-chief that was led by the
Prosecutor, to the question he put to you, you answered by saying that
after the meeting when they came out of the Codekoki building,
Kanyarukiga talked to the assailants, and that from a signal by
Kanyarukiga, there was an attack, the refugees who started by throwing
stones.
A.   I think you are bumbling the questions that you put to me.  You talk
about the parish and then you talk about this place.  Those are
different incidents.
Q.   So at what time were the doors of the church opened and the refugees
came out and started throwing stones?
A.   You are talking about what took place in the church.  I understand
that you're going to ask me where I met Kanyarukiga.  Ask me where we
were when Kanyarukiga asked us to attack.
Q.   In your statement here, your statement of 29 January 2003, and I'm
going to read it to you.  You stated the following:  "After the
meeting, Ndungutse Telésphore, Kanyarukiga Gaspard, Ndyagwama
Ndahimana the bourgmestre went to the church.  I saw them discuss with
the gendarmes who were standing in front of the church.  After their
discussion, I do not know who opened the church doors, allowing the
refugees to come out.  Suddenly, I saw the refugees come out of the
church and start throwing stones at Hutus who had assembled near the
statue.  This group threw back stones at the refugees." That is what
you said?
A.   Yes, that is my statement.
Q.   Now, if such is your statement, was it at that moment that the attack
you described to us when the Prosecutor questioned you, and you even
indicated on the picture where the Tutsi were who were attacking and
where the Hutus were who were fighting back, you know; is that the
moment?
A.   Yes, I made that statement.
Q.   Can you say at about what time that attack took place?
A.   I can not recall the hours, the precise hours because I wasn't
wearing a watch.
Q.   You arrived at 11:00 at the parish -- you arrived at the parish at
:00.  Do we agree on that?
A.   At the parish, I said that I arrived near the statue at about 11:00
and I was in the company of the people I mentioned to you and who were
waiting for the end of the meeting.
Q.   And after how much time did -- after how much time did you see the
people who were holding a meeting come out?
A.   About five or ten minutes.
Q.   About how much time -- after about how long did the Tutsi and the
Hutus start throwing stones?
A.   Quite some time had elapsed.  I wasn't wearing a watch.  I cannot be
precise insofar as the time or the hour at which the Tutsi started
throwing stones was.
Q.   Try to give an estimate, an estimated time so that we can make some
progress.
A.   I have told you that I wasn't wearing a watch.  I can give you an
hour and you'll take advantage of it to ask me many questions.
Q.   Mr. Witness, I'm here to be asking questions, and you came so that
questions can be put to you.
A.   I have told you that I wasn't wearing a watch.  Why are you insisting
on asking me questions regarding time?
(Pages 1 to 13 by Kelsey Farnalls)
H
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   How, therefore, did you know that you arrived at 11 o'clock?
Secondly, how did you know that the meeting lasted ten minutes?
A.   I did not say that the meeting lasted ten minutes.  When I arrived at
the place, I waited for about ten minutes.
Q.   While you were able to assess or appreciate the ten minutes, or
estimate that it took ten minutes -- so try to estimate to how much
time.  After about 10:00, 11:00, the attack took place.  You can try
to imagine how much time elapsed after the eleven o'clock -- ten
minutes before the attack started.
A.   When the attacks began, the time was between 12 midday and 1 p.m.
Q.   So between midday and 1 p.m.?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Good.  Can you tell us what you were doing during the attack?  Were
you one of the attackers, that is, those who were fighting back?
A.   I was on the side of the attackers and I was wounded.  I was behind
them.
Q.   For roughly how long did the attack last?  For how long, roughly, did
the fighting go on?
A.   About an hour or an hour and a half.  About an hour or an hour and a
half.
Q.   Right.  So if we stay within this timeframe -- it was ten past 11:00,
and the attack took place after 12 noon and 1 p.m. -- it lasted for an
hour to an hour and a half, and you were not in the attack because you
were wounded.  Where were you?  How --
A.   I was present.  I was behind the attackers because I was wounded.
Q.   You said so.  What happened thereafter?
A.   A man called Rukara went on the roof top and threw a grenade amidst
the refugees and they started dying.
Q.   Rukara climbed up where?
A.   He went on top of the building using a ladder that had been found in
Kanyarukiga's house.
Q.   I asked the question again because I heard you say he went up the
church.  And what happened?
A.   As a matter of fact, Rukara went on the building that is close to the
statue, not to the church.
Q.   You said so the last time.  My question was: what happened
thereafter?
A.   I stated that after he climbed up the building, he threw a grenade at
the refugees and they started dying.
Q.   You said so.  You even specified that there were three grenades,
isn't it?
A.   Yes.
Q.   I'd like to follow what you're saying.  I understand that you were
wounded, you could not attack, and you were an assailant who did not
have the means to take part in the fighting.  I would like you to
describe to the Chamber how you proceeded up to the time when you left
the parish.
A.   If you would allow me, could you please, counsel, repeat your
question?
Q.   You were behind the assailants; Rukara threw grenades; people died.
What happened thereafter?
A.   Subsequently, the assailants went up close to the refugees.  They
went right up to the church.
Q.   Was the church opened or closed?
A.   I don't know because I had not yet arrived at the church.
Q.   And when you got to the church, was the church opened or closed?
A.   When I got there the refugees had already gone inside the church and,
once they got inside, they shut themselves in.
Q.   Right.  Can you tell us roughly at what time those refugees were shot
inside the church?
A.   It was at about 2 p.m.
Q.   You made the following statement -- even before we get there, when
you got there, who was with you?
A.   Where I was standing, I was slightly aside.  There were many people.
I didn't know most of the assailants.
Q.   Does this mean that the people whose names you gave, Higaniro,
Alexis; Ngarambe, Alexis; Ndabaniye, Isidore; Kagina, Michel;
Célestin, Munyaneza.  Are you saying that they had disappeared and you
had no longer saw them?
A.   We were scattered.  Each person was in his own corner and we didn't
know where the others were -- each person didn't know where the others
were.
Q.   Why?  Since the refugees were inside the church and you succeeded to
repel them, how come everyone was scattered all over the place?
A.   We were scattered because of the hostilities, because of the stones
that were thrown at us.
Q.   When you got to the church and you found yourself, all of a sudden,
in the midst of people you did not know, people you no longer knew,
the refugees were already inside the church, stones were being thrown.
Why did you remain there whereas you were wounded and you could not
take part in the attack?
A.   The attack continued, but I told you that I was behind the attackers.
Q.   How can you explain the fact that, as a wounded person, you answered
Kayishema's call -- invitation knowing that there's nothing you could
do?  You found yourself in an attack in which you were powerless;
there was nothing you could do, stones had been thrown at you, and you
could not fight back, whereas, the attackers had repelled the attack
and the Tutsis had shut themselves in.  You continued to remain there
in front of the church.  Why?
A.   I believe that at one time I explained to you that Kayishema called
me from my home.  I was not the only person called by Kayishema, by
the way.  He invited all members of the population.  Anyone could have
-- could not have made a mistake to stay at home.  Their homes had
been destroyed, their cattle looted, and that is why I went up there.
Q.   How then did you manage to get out of it wounded and powerless as you
were?  How then could you have escaped from Kayishema?
A.   No, I did not escape from him because I heeded his call.  I never
said that I escaped from him.  I was wounded but I heeded his
invitation.  I did not want my house to be destroyed.
Q.   Did anyone's house get destroyed because he did not take part in the
attack, because he did not heed Kayishema's invitation?
A.   I do not remember their names, but I know that some houses were
destroyed.
Q.   Where were those houses situated?
A.   Those people resided in my village.
Q.   So let me put the question to you again: how did you manage to get
out of the church premises?  How did you manage to get out of the
church premises?
A.   I finally left the church premises by passing through a banana
plantation because I wanted to avoid running to Kayishema.  I am
referring to the end when I wanted to go back home.  I passed through
the banana plantation and I headed home.
Q.   Can you give us, roughly, the number of attackers who heeded the
invitation?
A.   There were more than 600 of us.
Q.   If there were more than 600 of you, in a situation of clashes, do you
think Kayishema has 600 pairs of eyes to observe everyone and to
prevent you, who was wounded and could not participate in the attack,
to slip away during the attack?  Why did you not do that?
A.   Can you repeat your question, Counsel?
Q.   If there were 600 of you in an attack, how come you continued to stay
in the attack, which there were 600 people, whereas, you could have
left immediately after the attack started since you were powerless?
A.   I was there as a bystander observing the scene.
Q.   I just want to say this: were you a war journalist?  Now, since you
remained there, tell us what happened thereafter?
A.   What happened was that Kanyarukiga and Kayishema arrived.  They went
up to Seromba and asked him whether they could destroy the church.
Q.   Right.  Just a moment.  You gave a name a while ago.  We'll return to
that.  A while ago you mentioned the name of ****************.  How
related are you to this person?  What are your relations with this
person?  Just a minute.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President -- I'll take care of that, Counsel for the
Prosecution.  For purposes of protecting the witness, I'd like a piece
of paper to be given to the witness so that he can write down his
relationship with that person.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Registrar, could you please give the witness a piece of paper.
We request the Kinyarwanda interpreter to simply translate what is on
that sheet of paper in French without reading it, as well as in
English if it is possible.
Counsel, do you still have many other questions for the witness?
MR. POGNON:
Yes, I still have questions for the witness, Madam President.  I am
sorry, I didn't turn on my microphone.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
For how long do you think you still have to question the witness?
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I think I'll be through at the end -- at the top of
the hour.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You mean at the end of this afternoon's session at 6:30?  Oh dear,
that's going to be long then.
MR. POGNON:
Well.  It may well last that long because --
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, counsel, you were saying something.
MR. POGNON:
I think I will need all that time.  I will need all that time.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Right.  That person whose name you wrote down, did that person know
you were wounded?
A.   No, he knew nothing about that.
Q.   You were therefore not seriously wounded?
A.   Yes, I told you I was wounded.  I believe I have already told you so.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Madam President, the interpreters did not hear what counsel said
because his microphone was not lit.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
This document which has been translated into English and French should
be placed under seal.  Do you want us to give it a number?
MR. POGNON:
D. 23.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
If there's no objection to that, it will be D. 23, placed under seal.
(Exhibit No. D. 23 admitted, under seal)
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   A while ago that was the first person you mentioned, that is, the
people you saw in front of the pharmacy.  How come he did not know
that you were wounded?
A.   I did not show him my wound.
Q.   Right.  So you arrived in front of the parish offices?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
This is the time perhaps for us to take a break, and you can proceed
with your cross-examination later.
MR. POGNON:
Yes.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We shall observe a 15-minute break.  The proceedings stand adjourned.
(Court recessed from 1600H to 1620H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in session.
Counsel Pognon, you have the floor.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Microphone, Counsel Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
I'm sorry.  At this stage of my cross-examination I will request for a
closed session because I have a number of questions that are put to
the witness and which would require that we call out names in order to
ascertain a number of things.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, can you tell us how much time that will take?  I am talking
about the closed session.
MR. POGNON:
Let's say I may take some 20 minutes, at the most, if he answers the
questions directly.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Does the Prosecution have any problem with that -- any objection?
MR. MOSES:
No objection, Your Honours.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  So we're going to go into closed session in order to
protect the witness and in the interest of justice.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 27] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the
session was heard in camera)
(Pages 14 to 18 by Roxane Lane)
H
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are in open court.  Counsel, you may continue.
MR. POGNON:
Thank you.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   A while ago you recognised or acknowledged that you made your
confession; is that correct; you confessed to your crimes?
A.   Yes, that's correct.
Q.   Is it correct that you also confessed to your participation in the
attack of the Nyange church?
A.   When you say that I had a share of responsibility in the attack of
the church, you would be speaking the truth, but don't add anything to
that, anyways.
Q.   What did I add to it?  Well, I'll read out your statement, your
statement of 22 January – 24 January 2002, I'm sorry. The truth
commission of Kivumu commune --
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I simply wanted to ask if that document is not confidential.
MR. POGNON:
No, it is a disclosure from the Prosecution.  It's K0334991, and the
page is 2317 bis in manuscript writing, in handwriting.
May I carry on, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel.
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   "The truth commission of the Kivumu province – commune, care of
Kibuye, 24 January 2002.
"Subject: to shed light on the event that occurred at the Nyange
church in April 1994.
Question: "(By order of the Court, this name has been extracted and
filed under seal)  is being asked to say what he knows of the events
that took place in Nyange” --
MR. MOSES:
Can we strike the name from the record?
MR. POGNON:
I stand corrected.  It is a very difficult exercise, my learned
friend.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
That name should be stricken from the record.
MR. POGNON:
I will read -- make the reading, but in any case I will tender the
document.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
But please also try not to mention names.
MR. POGNON:
I will try, Madam President.  The spirit is unintentioned -- the mind
is unintentioned and the body is not in one piece.
Well, CDK was asked to say something about the events that took place
in Nyange in 1994 and that he should say what was his responsibility
and his answer: "Friday 14 April; I saw a certain Kanyarukiga, in the
company of Télesphore Ndungutse, Fulgence Kayishema, bring together --
or assemble people from Nyange.  He asked them to go and find the
Tutsi who had taken refuge in the Nyange church.  There were many
people there.
"Now, an employee of the pharmacy that belonged to Kanyarukiga took a
ladder that was in the back yard.  Using that ladder, a certain
Théophile Rukara climbed on the roof of houses where he started
throwing grenades on Tutsi.
"These ones come down, throwing stones at the Hutu that were fighting
them.  This took place at around eleven o'clock."
Question: "Concerning the other persons that he was able to recognise
during the attack ..."
Answer: "I saw Niyitegeka, Adrian, who was shooting with a gun, with a
firearm.
"2.  Boniface Kabarisa, who at a certain point brought a firearm and
used it, after having taken it from a policeman called Gicadi, en
liberté; Appolinaire Rangira, Kibuye prison, who was carrying a gun
but couldn't use it.  When they started shooting, the Tutsi retreated
back to the church immediately.  We followed them then, and killed
those who couldn't enter the church in the courtyard.  Amongst the
members of the population that we were with, there was that --
Ndabananiye in custody -- or amongst the members of the population who
were with Ndabananiye who was in custody; Donat Nkulikiyinka who is
free; Alexis Higaniro, who is not in custody; Callixte Ujeneza and
many others.
"Towards 2 p.m., they still continued to shoot at the church in order
to bring out people who were taking refuge there, but this was to no
avail.  Then Ndungutse, who was carrying a big machete as sharp as a
spear, called Arnold and pointing (sic) the machete towards him.  He
was threatening to kill in the place of Boneza if he couldn't be found
-- that is, if Boneza couldn't be found.
"Arnold took a pump and started spraying fuel on the church.  A
certain Faustin Uwolinaniye took a box of matches and lit a fire.  The
time was about 5 p.m.  Kanyarukiga immediately went on board
Kayishema's car.  They came back with a mechanical machine and went
away immediately.   I don't know what they did with the -- I don't
know what they did with the mechanical shovel and I -- and this is the
end of my statement."
BY MR. POGNON:
Q.   Do you recognise having made this statement?
A.   I made the statement.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, I would like to tender this in the record -- that is
be entered as an exhibit under number D. 24; Defence Exhibit D. 24.
This exhibit obviously will necessarily be placed under seal.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, do you have any objection to that?
MR. MOSES:
No objection.  I do wonder whether the original document should go in,
together with that document which is, in fact, a translation of the
original which is in Kinyarwanda.  I just think as matter of
completeness that it should go in as, perhaps, Defence Exhibit A, and
with the French translation as B.  That's the only comment I would
make.  I have no objection to that document being produced.
MR. POGNON:
I believe that so far we have only been tendering translations, and we
have been fighting hard to get the translation of documents that come
in Kinyarwanda.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
But do you have the document, the original of the document?
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, it is a disclosure that was made to us by the
Prosecutor.  You will recall that we requested the document of
detained persons.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Prosecutor, do you have the original of the document?
MR. MOSES:
We disclosed the original in Kinyarwanda to the Defence two to three
weeks ago, Your Honours, on the 27th.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, Madam President, Madam President.  We had disclosed --
we have been disclosed up until now exhibits which we read in the
courtroom so that they are clear for everyone.  We had requested the
records of detained persons.  Finally, we got them.  Some are still
being translated in this Tribunal and not anywhere else and, by gosh,
this exhibit is an exhibit like any other one that was tendered -- as
the records of detained persons that we have already tendered.  And I
don't think there should a problem because it's the Prosecutor himself
who disclosed the document to us.  It has a number.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Mr. Witness.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President --
THE WITNESS:
Madam President, Your Honours, I will like to tell you that the
document concerning my statement, when I met the Prosecutor, that
document was not available and I told him to go to Kibuye to get the
document.  And that document was taken -- is therefore a problem if I
have been unable to look at the document.  In any case, the content
reflects what I said, but I don't have a copy of that document.
MR. MOSES:
Your Honour, the only reason, if I can say for the record, that I
wanted the document, in the past we have already had a situation where
there was a translation issue between the French and Kinyarwanda
documents; the previous witness.  I just think, as a matter of
completeness, both should go in.  But, as I say, the witness has
accepted that that reflects his statement.  I have no objection to the
French going in.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Chamber admits that document as an exhibit of the Defence under
number D. 24, but we would like to have a Kinyarwanda document that
should be appended to the French translation.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, we are going with the Prosecutor to make sure that
the Kinyarwanda document, which was disclosed to us -- at least, the
translation that was disclosed to us with this Kinyarwanda version --
we have to make sure for them to be there because the problem is this:
the document was read in the courtroom; you heard the witness say that
it is his statement, but he wasn't given a copy.  He doesn't make any
objection.  And I hope my colleague on the other party is not going to
make an objection.  He didn't make an objection.  He only made a
statement, and it's a document that was disclosed to us by the
Prosecutor.  All that we need to do is that the translation should be
the translation of the document that was disclosed to us.
Madam President, I think I am through with the time -- I am through
with my examination.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So this document will be under seal.
Yes, Mr. Witness.
THE WITNESS:
My concern is that we looked for that document but did not find it.  I
stated that the content thereof is indeed my statement.  My only
problem is that I was unable to have access to that document to
examine it, but all that I -- I said is that I got to that place.  Ask
the Defence counsel to say where he found the document.  I wonder why
the Prosecutor did not show me that document.  The Prosecutor did not
find that document.
(Exhibit No. D. 24 admitted, under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, Mr. Witness, have taken note of what you said to the effect that
the document does reflect the statement that you made in Kinyarwanda.
THE WITNESS:
Now, as concerns the document, I think the Prosecutor knows that I was
able to come up the document and he disclosed it to the Defence, as is
customary.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We would like to thank you.  I don't know if the Prosecutor would like
to add something.  As far as we are concerned, we are done with the
witness.
Do you want a redirect of the witness?  Do you have any additional
examination -- a re-examination?
MR. MOSES:
There was just one very brief matter I was going to raise, Your
Honours.
RE-EXAMINATION
BY MR. MOSES:
Q.   Witness, you had referred to the fact that you were injured, that you
had an injury on the day that you were at Nyange.  Can you just very
briefly describe the nature of that injury and how you obtained that
injury?
A.   At that time I had just spent some days with the wound.  I was -- I
was splitting wood and I wounded myself with an axe.  If you want, I
can show you where I wounded myself.
Q.   No, that's all right.  Perhaps if you can just say which part of your
body you injured.
A.   I wounded myself on my toes.  If you want, I can remove my shoes and
I can show you which place it is.
MR. POGNON:
The Defence agrees with that.
MR. MOSES:
I don't consider it necessary unless Your Honours do.  But I don't
believe it is necessary, Your Honours.
That's the only matter I was wanting to raise in re-examination,
unless Your Honours have some questions for the witness.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, concerning the issue of the wound, the Defence would
like the witness to show where he has the wound, in the interest of
justice.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, we do not deem it necessary to see his scars.
MR. POGNON:
So for the purpose of the record, it should be stated that the Defence
asked to see that wound, following the re-examination of the
Prosecutor.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Okay.  That is fine; it is so recorded.
So, Mr. Witness, thank you for coming here and for having answered the
questions that were put to you.  Now we would like to wish you a safe
return trip to your home.
THE WITNESS:
I would like to thank you, too, Madam President.
(Witness excused)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, do you have another witness waiting?  We can lead
this one out and bring in the next one.  Which one will that be?
MR. MOSES:
As is outlined in the letter that we sent, Your Honours, it is Witness
C, B for Bravo, J.  That witness is present and will be led by my
learned friend Mr. Townsend.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
If I understood well, we were told that CDK would be coming in, not
CBJ, and this was announced in front of you a few days ago.
Initially, Madam Prosecutor had set CBJ, but when we came to your
office on Friday morning they set us CBJ.  So I think they should be
reasonable and courteous towards us.
MS. ARBIA:
That is true, Madam President.  I will answer that, Madam President.
Well, it was CBJ that we mentioned about in 19 -- in the meeting, and
my idea was to speed up the discussion, and in order to anticipate, we
said we should bring in CBK.  That is what I said, but immediately
after I disclosed to the Defence that next witness -- and there is a
letter to that effect that is addressed to the Chamber and to the
Defence -- that I would be calling in CDK -- CBK after, so in
accordance with the letter -- in accordance with the terms of the
letter, we had decided to bring in CBK earlier and, after that, it
would be CNJ.
So the three witnesses that would follow, that will come after CBK
(sic), would be CBJ, CBN, CNG.  And after that we will have CBK ,who
has come earlier than scheduled, according to the calling order.  So
that is the offer that we made in order to put the witnesses in
sequence, and this was sent to the counsel for the Defence as well as
to the Chamber.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, they actually want us to create an incident, and if
we have to create an incident, we will, because you were kind enough
to convene both parties at your office on Friday.  And we came in in
time, and we were told, under your control, that we would be having
Witness CBK, and this instead of CBJ.  And since we have been in court
since 2 p.m., we are being told that there is a letter that was sent
to us, a letter which we didn't see, but I would like to say, Madam
President, that the Defence will not accept this hide and seek,
because for more than a month that we have been here, we have just
been playing hide and seek.  I will not tolerate that today.  Either
we follow the order that was retained by all the parties -- I am
talking about the calling order of witnesses.  We will not accept that
we change it.  And I think, with all courtesy, we felt that after your
mediation, Madam President, things will go on normally, but we regret
to say that we will not accept this, Madam President, and thank you.
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, the list of witnesses had been disclosed for a long
time, and during the last hearing we also disclosed the calling order.
My statement during the meeting in your office was in order to
expedite things and, indeed, I had said that CBK was going to testify
after the -- CDK.  And the idea was in order to look ahead of the next
witness, CDK, but all -- but I think I -- all I did was confirm an
order that was earlier disclosed.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Well, you did not disclose anything to us, madam, and we have been
here since 2 p.m., and you didn't tell us anything.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, Counsel, I think we should remain serene and try to understand
what happened.
MR. MONTHÉ:
I think we are the ones that are sitting on the fire.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Well, I think we did meet and, Madam Prosecutor, you said you were
going to try to call in CBK.  We also asked you to meet and confer,
and if there is a need to change the order of witnesses, this should
be done, you know, by mutual consent; that is, both parties should
agree so that we don't have an incident here in court.  That is what
we asked.  Now, the letter that you sent, it is a letter of 8th of
October, but I realise that letter was received on the 11th of
October; that is, it is only today that we received this letter.  It
is therefore possible that the Defence might not have received this
document in time.
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, I see here the stamp of the registry which shows 11-
zero-nine.  That is the time at which the application was received.
In any case, I wouldn't have any problem, since it is normal that in
any court proceedings there should be the possibility of examining any
witness on the Prosecution list -- or on any list.  And I think I
should point out that it is the examination-in-chief that will be
carried out today, and the Defence will be cross-examining tomorrow or
later.  The Prosecutor has made the effort; that is, CDK will testify
well ahead of the time the witness was scheduled to testify in the
previous disclosure.  And I think we were able to do this following
the meeting because I had said that CDK was going to testify on the
th, but there were many other things to be taken care of and see what
could be done.
I also tried to call Counsel Pognon, but his mobile telephone was not
working -- at least we were not able to enjoin him by mobile
telephone.  But I'd like to repeat that this morning a new disclosure
of what had been disclosed before was made; it is nothing new.  We
only confirmed what had been disclosed before.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, I think I believe that cross-examination cannot --
you know, cannot be guesswork.  That is, we have to examine the
statements well and come and -- for the trial in front of you.  And I
think this is scheming because we didn't ask for anything from the
Prosecutor on Friday.  We did not ask the Prosecutor for anything on
Friday.  It was of her own volition that in her office she told us
that the witness that will be called on Monday would be CDK.  We
didn't ask her anything.  Now we are being put before a fait accompli
and to put us in difficulty.  And this has been the case since the
beginning of this case.  And I would like to tell you, Madam
President, that we cannot accept this.  This is unacceptable because
we are men of honour and when we give our word we want to honour it.
And, Madam Prosecutor, I think you have been making fun of us.  I
would like to say that we can't accept this.
MS. ARBIA:
Madam President, I will not accept what the Defence is saying
concerning the Prosecution.  I think the Prosecutor must see on a
daily basis what is possible, what are the possibilities insofar as
the calling order is concerned.  So it is normal that in a trial,
especially when we are dealing with a very short list of witnesses,
the Defence should be ready to cross-examine any witness.  But, then,
today we are not dealing with the cross-examination, but we are asking
them just to attend the examination-in-chief.  So I think the witness
has been eliminated.  CBO has been eliminated, and this following the
interview we had with the Judges last Friday.  I think we shouldn't
add other considerations.  This is a normal procedure -- this is a
normal practice; that is, if a witness is called earlier than planned,
I think the Defence or the other party should be ready.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, it is not up to the Prosecutor.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Please, just wait a second, please.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very briefly.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Yes, Madam President, we are very brief.  But when we have to defend
the rights of the Defence, we have to rise up.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So, no insurrection.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, no one will teach us our job here.  I don't think our
learned friends have the experience we have.  I say this: it is a
matter of honesty.  It was announced on Friday in your office that CBK
would be heard today.  But today, as if it's a game of cards, it has
been changed.  I said that this is not serious.  Whether we anticipate
witnesses -- or change witnesses or change the other, is not our
business.  Our business is to announce CBK and send us today CBJ.
Madam President, it is a matter of honesty.  We are dealing with
fairness of arms, equity.  We are prepared to work with CBK.  We are
not (unintelligible) to work with CBJ.  We will continue like this and
eventually find ourselves in a difficult situation where we have
sleepless nights.  We are dealing with a situation, which we want
Father Seromba to have the maximum guarantees under Rule 24, as well
as other Rules governing this Tribunal.
I think all this is not (sic) serious.  It does not give the
Prosecution and this Tribunal a good image, and we will not accept
this.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Chamber notes that the Prosecution certainly promised to change
the order of appearance of witnesses by calling CBK before, but it
was, nevertheless, provided for that CBJ would be the witness
testifying after CDK.  I, therefore, believe that the Defence must
have prepared to receive this witness.  We simply regret the fact that
the Prosecutor, contrary to our suggestions to her, did not confer
with the Defence as to the order of appearances of the witnesses.  To
ward against any surprise today, the letter was sent out today.  But
what is certain is that that letter was only received today.  And this
is quite close to this time.  It is possible that you did not receive
it -- I said so -- because I received it myself at midday.  So it is
possible that you did not receive that letter before you came here
today.
So, what we are going to do is to proceed to examination-in-chief of
that witness, but we will not cross-examine this witness.  The more so
as we still have about 45 minutes, I think we should avail ourselves
of this time and examine this witness in-chief.  And since we are not
meeting tomorrow morning and meeting only in the afternoon I,
therefore, request you to kindly show proof of conciliation.  And I
have to say so by allowing the Chamber to proceed to receive the
examination-in-chief of this witness.
I reiterate my request to the parties, particularly Madam Prosecutor,
you should consult with the Defence in order to present a list that
doesn't pose problems.  We are losing too much time on these matters.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, please, in a few seconds, we swallow -- a serpent
will end up having indigestion.  Madam President, the consultation you
have asked for -- you are asking for hasn't taken place, and it will
not taken (sic) place, and it is pointless.  As to the cross-
examination tomorrow, it doesn't change your problem because we are
forced to bow to it.  Unfortunately, the Defence is working under very
difficult conditions, and which the Chamber doesn't want to accept.
If you want to get this trial out of the way hastily, let us do so,
but let us not give ourselves an alibi.  We don't want to be alibis
because we have never been alibi advocates.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
And we hope you are not alibi advocates,  because we do not want any
of that here.
Very well.  We are going to start.  I cannot very well see the
witness.
(Witness entered courtroom)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good morning (sic), Madam Witness.  Is it mister or madam?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
It is Mr. Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning (sic), Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I see you are on your feet, Maître Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
Yes.  Increasingly, because of the Chamber, we find that --
increasingly because of the Tribunal, and for no other reason, the
Defence is having to yield.  We also have our plans and we will also
modify our plans in accordance with the poor working habits of the
Prosecution.
Madam President, we demand that the examination-in-chief of this
witness should only start tomorrow because, according to our work
plan, we -- you see, our work is well divided amongst one other so
that we can have a good break.  We have started.  We have to consult
with one another in order to know who of the two of us will cross-
examine this witness, and we have not done that.  We never have
weekends, we lock ourselves up to work, and we only see the sun in the
morning.
So, Madam President, what I am saying is that we have to consult with
one another for at least ten minutes in order to know -- in order to
organise ourselves at a level, because on the other side we have the
feeling we are not dealing with organised people, but we are organised
people, and we have been that organised for very many years, for a
very long time.  So we request the Chamber to grant us ten minutes to
consult with one another in order to decide who will cross-examine
this witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, I think you don’t need ten minutes in order to know who will
cross-examine this witness.  We are asking you to ensure that the
Chamber does not lose a lot of time.  You have considered we lose a
lot of time in cross-examination -- we give you a lot of time in cross-
examination.  Unfortunately, time is slipping by and we have to meet
our objectives.  So, once more, I request you to be conciliatory at
this time because it is true that it had been said -- it was said that
another witness would come, but we said that it was possible that
changes could occur in the order; sometimes witnesses take ill.
So all we want, that the witness who was been scheduled should be
heard, and that witness was supposed to appear after the one who has
just been heard.  So I want you to be patient.  We are going to start
the examination-in-chief of this witness.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, are you refusing us the ten minutes?  Please, give us
the five minutes, then.
MR. TOWNSEND:
If I could make one observation, Your Honours.  Witness CBJ is a long
witness and the estimate of the testimony in direct examination was
one full day.  I don't anticipate cross-examination would begin before
Wednesday, or if half days, maybe even Thursday.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good morning (sic), Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning (sic), Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You are a Prosecution protected witness and you will be called by the
pseudonym CBJ.  The Prosecutor will now examine you in-chief.  Please
answer his questions, and then the Defence will cross-examine you.
But before answering the questions that will be put to you, we request
you to kindly make a solemn declaration.  And you will be assisted
with your solemn declaration.
(Declaration made by Witness CBJ in Kinyarwanda)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you, Mr. Witness.  Please be seated.
Counsel for the Prosecution, you have the floor to proceed to the
examination-in-chief of Witness CBJ.
MR. TOWNSEND:
May it please the Trial Chamber.  Thank you, Your Honours.
WITNESS CBJ,
first having been duly sworn,
testified as follows:
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   CBJ, is there a document before you that bears your signature?
A.   Yes, Mr. Prosecutor, I can see the document.
Q.   By signing that document, are you attesting the accuracy and
truthfulness of the personal identifying information that appears on
that document; yes or no?
A.   Yes, Counsel for the Prosecution.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Your Honours, I'd move that this document be admitted into evidence as
a protected information sheet, and be placed under seal, as it
contains the personal particulars of Witness CBJ.  A copy has been
provided to the Defence.  The original bears a blue-ink signature.
May it be marked and admitted with the subsequent or next exhibit
number, please.  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you, Counsel for the Prosecution.  No objection from the
Defence to the admission of that document.  Yes, Counsel Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
No objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you.
This document is admitted as a Prosecution Exhibit under number P. 15,
placed under seal.
(Exhibit No. P. 15 admitted, under seal)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel for the Prosecution, please proceed.
MR. TOWNSEND:
Thank you, Your Honours.
I'd ask that photograph Exhibit 3-21 be displayed on the projector and
that the photograph can also be shown from the album to the witness.
It can be put on the projector and an album of that same photograph be
shown to the witness.  I note that there is no monitor available for
the witness in this courtroom.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   Witness CBJ, looking at the photograph before you, can you tell us
what you see?
A.   Yes, Counsel for the Prosecution.
Q.   What do you see?
A.   I can see on it Nyange church.
Q.   In April 1994, did you go to Nyange church?
A.   Yes.
Q.   On what date?
A.   On the 10th April 1994.
Q.   Do you recall which day of the week was 10 April 1994?
A.   It was a Sunday.
Q.   When you arrived at the parish on 10 April 1994, did you see any
food?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What did you see?
A.   I saw food in the CARITAS store.
Q.   Can you explain what you saw, what food specifically?
A.   Yes, I can.  I saw beans as well as cornflour.
Q.   That CARITAS food storage, where was it located?
A.   The store is found inside the parish, near a water tank, and slightly
below are the latrines of the parish.
Q.   Does that storage have a door?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Does that door have a lock?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Does that lock have a key?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Who possesses that key?
A.   Father Seromba.
Q.   What's the first name of Father Seromba?
A.   Athanase.
Q.   On that day, did you see anyone use that key?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you explain to the Judges?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Please do.
A.   I saw Father Athanase Seromba accompanied by a trader called Jean
Kayiranga, a Tutsi who had sought refuge at Nyange parish.  So he
brought a bag of rice, as well as other objects that were in a
package.  He came with Father Seromba.  Father Seromba opened the
store, and what was brought by Kayiranga was kept inside that store.
Q.   Did you merely see inside that room, or did you actually go inside it
at that time?
A.   Yes, I looked inside the store.  I even went inside.
Q.   What did Kayiranga bring?
A.   He had brought a bag of rice, as well as other foodstuffs which were
packaged in a plastic bag.
Q.   Was the door closed after those items were deposited?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Who closed the door?
A.   It was Father Seromba.
Q.   Was a key used?
A.   Yes.
Q.   By whom?
A.   It was Father Athanase Seromba.
Q.   In 1994 what was Father Seromba's job?
A.   He was the parish priest of the Nyange parish.
Q.   Is it the Nyange -- I'm sorry; is the CARITAS storage the same place
or a different place from the CARITAS restaurant?
A.   No.
Q.   My question is: are they the same or different places?
A.   No, those are two different places.
Q.   Did you see any food distributed while at the parish?
A.   No.
Q.   On what date did you depart or leave Nyange parish area?
A.   On the 16th of April 1994.
Q.   And what day of the week was the 16th of April 1994?
A.   It was a Saturday.
Q.   Okay.  You are turning to the next day, Monday, the 11th April.  Did
you see Seromba at Nyange, yes or no?
A.   Yes, I saw him.
Q.   Did you hear him say anything on that Monday?
A.   Yes, I heard him say something.
Q.   What did you hear?
A.   He asked me, "What did you flee from?"; that's the question he asked
me.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Please, can you repeat it because we didn't hear -- we didn't
understand what the witness said?
THE WITNESS:
He asked me the question -- that is, Father Seromba asked me the
question as to what I had fled from.
MR. MONTHÉ:
We still didn't understand the question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, can it be repeated please?  Probably, you had a good translation
into English -- because we didn't quite understand it in French.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   Witness, can you please repeat slowly the words you heard Seromba
say?
A.   Father Seromba asked me, "What did you run away from?"
Q.   And what did you say?
A.   I told him that I fled because I was afraid.
Q.   I'd like to turn to the next day, Tuesday, the 12th of April.  Did
you see Seromba on that day, yes or no?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Can you explain what you saw on Tuesday, the 12th of April?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Please do.
A.   On the 12th of April 1994, I saw the employees of the commune, who
were representing the Interahamwe.  So I saw them come to the parish.
They found Father Seromba inside the parish and then they went up to
the priests' room where they held a meeting.
Q.   Can you name some of these people who you saw present there with
Seromba, please?
A.   First of all, there was the bourgmestre, Grégoire Ndahimana.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Maître.
MR. POGNON:
Can we make a verification for the purpose of record?  I think the
answer that I heard is that, "I saw the employees of the commune who
represented Interahamwe".  Is that really what he said?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Probably, we will ask him to repeat because that's not what I heard.
Mr. Witness, can you repeat what you said with respect to the commune
staff and the Interahamwe?
THE WITNESS:
On that day, that is, on the 12th of April 1994, I saw the leaders --
officials of the Interahamwe in the Kivumu commune.  They came to the
parish.  They met Father Seromba and then they went up to the
presbytery; that is in the building 2 of the presbytery.  And, there,
they started conferring with the priest.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   Can you please continue to name those individuals you recognised
after Ndahimana?
A.   I also know Ndahimana.  There was Gaspard Kanyarukiga, Kanyarukiga, a
businessman.
Q.   Can you name the others, if any?
A.   There was also the judicial police inspector, Fulgence Kayishema.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
(No interpretation)
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
I don't think -- I'm not hearing the translation into French, so I
don't know if he was talking or not.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, there was also a teacher called Telésphore Ndungutse.  There was
a judge of the canton tribunal called Habiyambere, but he was usually
nicknamed Gaca-Butelezi.  There was also the commune brigadier, named
Christophe Mbakirehe; a communal policeman called Munyantarama; and
many other persons whose names I did not know.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   Where were you when you saw that?
A.   I was there on the premises of the parish.  I was moving about in the
external courtyard of the parish --- of the courtyard of the parish,
yes.
Q.   Can you estimate at what time you saw those people meet?
A.   It was at about ten o'clock.
Q.   Just for clarification, is that 10 a.m., in the morning, or 10:00 at
night?
A.   It was at about ten o'clock in the morning.
Q.   You mentioned a room.  Did you see them go inside the room?
A.   No, I did not get into any room whatsoever.
Q.   So where, precisely, did you see them standing?
A.   I saw them on the second floor, on the balcony of that floor.
Q.   Can you estimate the duration of time of that gathering?
A.   They discussed for about between  minutes.
Q.   I'd like to turn to Wednesday, the 13th of April.  Yes or no, did you
see Seromba that day?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Did you hear Seromba say anything?
A.   Yes, I heard him say something.
Q.   What words did you hear Seromba say on Wednesday, 13 April?
A.   Seromba was telephoning and I heard people at the other end of the
call.  His people were asking him about news about Nyange, and even
he, himself, was talking about the situation prevailing in the area --
or where he was.
Q.   Did you hear Seromba say anything else, or was that it?
A.   Yes, I heard other statements.  What he said is that he was being
given information concerning the priest of Nyundo who had been killed
by the Interahamwe and, on his part, he was telling him that the
refugees who were in the Nyange parish weren't very many.
Q.   If there's more, tell us; or tell us that's it.
A.   There are other things I heard.  They telephoned him telling him the
names of the priests who had been killed, and there were many priests
and, amongst them, was the name of Silvère Mutiganda who had been
killed in the Murundi parish.  And at that time I was standing up in
the company of the priest's younger brother Mutiganda, and his name
was Rwagasore.  Rwagasore didn't feel happy with the news and he
appealed to Father Seromba, Athanase, to lend him the telephone he was
using.
Q.   Did Seromba say anything in response to Rwagasore's request to make a
phone call?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Please, tell us what you heard.
A.   He replied to him that, "I don't have a telephone which can be used
to facilitate communication amongst Inyenzi."
Q.   Where is that telephone located?
A.   The telephone was installed at the higher floor of the building, of
the upper floor of the building.
Q.   Where were you at the time you overheard those words?
A.   I was near Father Seromba in the upper floor; that is, room (sic) 2.
Q.   I'd like to turn to the next day, the 14th of April -- let me
withdraw that.  In April 1994 was any food growing at Nyange parish?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What food?
A.   There was a banana grove that belonged to the parish.
Q.   Did anything happen to those bananas on Thursday, 14 April?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Please explain.
A.   What happened with respect to that banana plantation is that, before,
we had requested from Father Seromba to assist us by giving us food
because the children and the patients had started dying, and Father
Seromba refused to give us the food.  After that, we went and
harvested bananas in the banana plantation that belonged to the
priests.
Q.   When you say "we harvested bananas", to whom are you referring?
A.   I'm referring to myself and to the Tutsi who had taken refuge in the
Nyange church.
Q.   Was there any reaction to your Tutsi having bananas?
A.   Yes.
Q.   What?
A.   Father Athanase Seromba found us after we had brought down the
banana, and we were with it in the courtyard and he was angry.  He
said that we had disobeyed him and added that, "Right now, I am
capable of handing you over to the gendarmes", and, having said that,
he turned towards the gendarmes and talked to them saying, "Whoever
goes back to the banana plantation to cut the bananas, you should
shoot at the persons."
Q.   Did he speak in a low voice, or a high voice, or can you describe the
volume of his voice?
A.   When he made the statement, he was very furious as he said the words.
He didn't appreciate what we had done; it was obvious.
Q.   Were the refugees hungry?
A.   Yes.
Q.   How -- can you describe what you saw to lead you to that conclusion?
A.   I said that we were hungry because we were not receiving any food.
We did not have the possibility of going beyond the parish because in
the vicinity of the parish, beyond the road that leads to Kibuye,
there were barriers  -- or roadblocks at which Tutsi were killed, so
nobody could leave the church to go and buy food outside the church.
Q.   You mentioned before that some children were dying.  Were those the
only persons -- let me rephrase.  You mentioned some children were
dying.  Of what we were they dying?
A.   Those children were dying of hunger.
Q.   Do I understand that it was only children who were dying of hunger at
that time?
A.   Not only the children; there were other people who came and took
refuge there after the death of father -- of President Habyarimana on
the 7th.  And up until that time they hadn't eaten anything.  The
patients and the old persons were also dying from hunger.  There were
even -- even children whose mothers had died, and we realised that
there were children who were feeding on the breasts of their mothers
even though they had already died.
Q.   What was the ethnicity of those that were seeking refuge at Nyange
church?
A.   Those people were of the Tutsi ethnic group.
Q.   Did anyone listen to the confessions of the refugees when you were at
Nyange church?
A.   No, nobody.
Q.   Did anyone ask for that?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Please explain briefly.
A.   There was a person called Cansilida Mukaruburika.  That person asked
Father Seromba to administer to them the sacrament of confession.
Q.   Was anything said in response to Cansilida?
A.   Father Seromba answered in these words, "The church is littered with
dirt", or that ,"the church is hunted by demons; I cannot hear your
confession.  I cannot hear your confession."
Q.   Prior to Cansilida asking to confess, what were you doing?
A.   I was near the place -- or the spot at which Cansilida was.
Q.   And what were you in the process of doing, if anything?
A.   I was at the spot near those people.  I wasn't doing anything in
particular.
Q.   Where was that?
A.   It was outside in the courtyard.
Q.   Can you be specific as to which courtyard?  I'm sorry.
A.   I was referring to the courtyard found between -- or in front of the
church, between the church and the office of the secretariat of the
parish.
Q.   What did you understand Seromba was referring to when he said "dirt"
and "demons"?
A.   What he meant was -- in fact, we are the ones he was calling dirt.
When he talked about "demons" he was referring to us.
MR. TOWNSEND:
This is my last question, Your Honour, I think, before I take the
break.  I note that it's 6:30.
BY MR. TOWNSEND:
Q.   When you say "us", to whom are you referring?
A.   "Us" refers to myself and the refugees who had taken refuge at the
parish, and these refugees, they were of Tutsi origin.
MR. TOWNSEND:
I thank you, Your Honours.  I note it is 6:30 at this time.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  Thank you, all of you.
Mr. Witness, we would like to remind you that you are still under
oath, under solemn declaration.  Tomorrow you will be coming back for
the continuation of the examination-in-chief, and when we would have
been done with the examination-in-chief, you will be cross-examined by
the Defence.
We would like to thank all of you.
And the Court will stand adjourned.  We will be resuming proceedings
tomorrow at 2 p.m.
Thank you, everyone.  The Court stands adjourned.
(Court adjourned at 1834H)
(Pages 28 to 47 by Verna Butler)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Kelsey Farnalls, Roxane Lane and Verna Butler, Official Court
Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, do
hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-entitled
cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was taken in
shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer; that the
foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of said
proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________ Kelsey Farnalls
___________________________ Roxane Lane
___________________________ Verna Butler
