P R O C E E D I N G S
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good morning, everybody.
Mr. Registrar, would you please open the proceedings?
MR. HOMETOWU:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Trial Chamber III of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
composed of Judge Dennis Byron, presiding, Judge Emile Francis Short,
and Judge Gustave Kam, is now sitting in open session, today,
Wednesday, February 22nd, 2006, for the continuation of the trial in
the matter of the Prosecutor versus Karemera, et al, Case No. ICTR-98-
-T.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Appearances, please.
MR. WEBSTER:
Good morning, Your Honours, and good morning to the parties and to the
registry.  The Prosecution is represented by myself, Don Webster, as
the trial leader, Gregory Lombardi, Gilles Lahaie, Takeh Sendze, and
the record should also reflect the presence of Investigator Baghel,
Upendra, and our legal researcher, Elena Rubinov.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Has Mr. Morley been removed from your team?
MR. WEBSTER:
No.  That was an oversight, Your Honour.  Mr. Morley is still unwell,
so he's not with us this morning.  He may be able to join us at 2:00.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honours.  I am Dior Diagne-Mbaye,
lead counsel for Édouard Karemera.  I'm assisted by Leopold
Nsengiyumva.
MS. HOUNKPATIN:
Good morning, Mr. President, Your Honours.  Good morning, everyone.
I'm Chantal Hounkpatin, lead counsel for Mathieu Ngirumpatse, assisted
by Anta Guissé.
MR. ROBINSON:
Good morning, Mr. President.  Peter Robinson for Joseph Nzirorera,
along with Leopold Nsengiyumva.  My co-counsel has returned to Belgium.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
Mr. Diagne, I note that Mr. Karemera is not with us this morning.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Quite correct, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I'm just going to ask the registrar -- we have got a copy of a medical
report which was provided, and I'll just ask the registrar to put it on
the record for us, please.
MR. HOMETOWU:
Thank you, Mr. President.  It is dated February 21st, 2006, addressed
to the Presiding Judge, Trial Chamber III, from Dr. E.G. Maya,
consultant orthopaedic surgeon, KCMC Hospital.
Subject, Detainee Édouard Karemera.
"One, following evaluation by Dr. P. Mhando, I was requested to do a
detailed orthopaedic neurological evaluation.
"Two, examination done today, 21st February 2006, revealed that he has
a mild nerve-root irritation that does not prevent him to attend the
court session.
"Three, he can continue with physiotherapy, at the same time attend
court sessions.
"Four, he says he is allergic to cold, so his session should be
conducted without AC.
"Five, in this regard, I recommend that a break every two hours during
the court session be granted to him.
"Six, if he does not improve with physiotherapy and medication, a CT
scan investigation is recommended.
"Seven, best regards."
Copied, Dr. M. Epée, chief medical section, and signed by Dr. E.G.
Maya, consultant orthopaedic surgeon, KCMC Hospital.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much, Mr. Registrar.
Just as a formal enquiry, Mr. Registrar, was Mr. Karemera duly notified
of his attendance at the trial today?
MR. HOMETOWU:
Mr. President, Mr. Karemera was duly notified.  As is the usual
practice before each court session, we transmit to the UNDF
(unintelligible) removal order, and I have before me a copy of the
removal order, dated 8th February 2006, "Instruction for the Removal
and Transportation of a Detainee," case name, Karemera, et al, from the
registrar to the commanding officer, UNDF, and the content is as
follows:  "Please be advised that Mr. E.(sic) Édouard Karemera, Mr.
Joseph Nzirorera, and Mr. Mathieu Ngirumpatse are required to be
present at the Tribunal's headquarters on Monday, 13th February 2006,
to Friday, 24th February 2006, at 800 hours, unless otherwise
instructed.  You are, therefore, instructed to remove them from the
Tribunal's detention for the appropriate period of time, including the
time necessary for transportation and subject to necessary security
requirements and to transport them back to the UNDF.  Under my hand and
seal -- and the seal of the Tribunal," signed for Adama Dieng,
Registrar, signed by myself.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Registrar.
Ms. Diagne, well, it seems to us that the medical situation has been
clarified to some extent, and that Mr. Karemera's non-attendance today
is not attributable to a medical condition.  Now, in the circumstances,
I don't know if there's any other representations you'd like to make,
but we have to consider at this stage whether to proceed with the
hearing in his absence.  As far as I understand the powers of the Court
in this context, they are set out by Rule 82 bis of the Rules of
Procedure, which I presume you have already perused.  And in that
context, I don't know if you'd wish to make any representations before
we proceed under the provisions of that Rule.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Yes, Mr. President.  I think that Article 82 you have just referred to
speaks of refusal by the Accused to attend.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
This is the English channel, English channel, testing testing, the
English channel, testing, testing.  The English channel, testing,
testing, the English channel.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, thank you, it's working now.
Ms. Diagne?
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
I'm sorry.  I didn't understand that I was supposed to speak again.
Please forgive me.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We had a slight technical problem with the translation, but it's now
corrected, and we are ready to hear you.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I was saying, Mr. President, that I did not
have the impression that I'd fallen under Rule 82, which is somewhat
delicate, because 82 speaks of when an Accused refuses to appear before
the Trial Chamber, and that theory I completely refute because not an
iota question (as interpreted) of Karemera for refusing to attend,
because there is absolutely no reason why he should refuse to attend.
But I am not a doctor, and I cannot claim to discuss here medical
reports with you.  But I note that each time, and whatever Dr. Karemera
(sic) consults, medicine is prescribed, and I don't think you can
prescribe to a patient medicine and then say, as Mhando did, either
that he has nothing, or in the case of the second doctor from Moshi,
that his pain does -- would not prevent him from appearing before you.
I don't know who, but someone yesterday made a very pertinent comment
when they said that pain is highly subjective (sic).  The degree of
pain, only Édouard Karemera can measure it.  And at the time of my last
conversation with him yesterday, when I asked him whether he'd gotten
worse, he said no, not at all; it hadn't gotten word (sic).
When Dr. Mhando appeared before you yesterday to tell you that he'd
given him medicine, what he did not tell you, or omitted to tell you,
was that he'd forgotten to leave the prescription so they hadn't been
able to purchase the medicine for him.  So the first time he took any
medicine was last night at 7 p.m.  What he told me was what he intends,
after first day of treatment, is to appear before you.  So I don't know
how you can invoke refusal of the Accused to attend, which is, I
believe, a very grave illusion.  What I should say, and on his behalf,
on Édouard Karemera's behalf, is that he has never refused to appear
before you.  As for the rest of it, the Trial Chamber is sovereign,
and, of course we shall comply.
Mr. President, excuse me.  My colleague, Counsel Guissé, told me
something very important.  The registrar reminded us of the order for
appearance before your Trial Chamber.  The fact is that since then, and
since he has been bed-bound, has he been informed of that report of
that assessment of his state of health?  I asked him what does he think
-- "What do you think of the doctor's opinion of your ability to appear
or not?"  He told me that he was not informed thereof, and, therefore,
only the Trial Chamber can inform us as to what the medical
practitioner has opined as to his ability to appear or not,
notwithstanding the pain that he was suffering yesterday, and that I
also feel to be important, Mr. President.  Thank you very much.
MR. ROBINSON:
Mr. President, excuse me, may I be heard briefly on this point?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, Mr. Robinson.
MR. ROBINSON:
Okay.  I'm taking the Chamber's preference to avoid confrontation to
heart, and I think that this can be a good opportunity to apply that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Is this an isolated incident?
MR. ROBINSON:
Well, we'll see.  Only time can tell, but I think that this is an
opportunity to avoid confrontation, given that the Prosecution is
unable to proceed this morning because of Mr. Morley's absence, and I
would ask --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Why did you make that assumption?
MR. ROBINSON:
I make that assumption because Mr. Morley represented yesterday that he
was unable to proceed -- or perhaps the Prosecutor can advise us
differently if I'm wrong, but if that is the case, then it seems like
it would be unnecessary to make a ruling on Mr. Karemera's non-
appearance if we're, in fact, unable to proceed here in any event.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Webster, Mr. Robinson has put the ball in your court.
MR. WEBSTER:
The ball seems a lot like a Trojan Horse to me.  I don't see that this
is really an opportunity for a lack of confrontation.  Am I
understanding that Mr. Robinson is joining in what I assume is Ms.
Diagne's application that this be put over until tomorrow?  Or I'm
actually not sure what Ms. Diagne --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Diagne has not made any application yet.  What I understand her to
be saying is, she's saying that it would be premature for us to decide
that Mr. Karemera has refused to attend court.  That is what I
understand her to be saying.  Simply that.  Now, what Mr. -- we think
that we may be able to rule on that question, but Mr. Robinson has said
that you are not ready to proceed with Witness UB.
MR. WEBSTER:
Well, Your Honour, in theory the Prosecution is always ready to
proceed.  The case has started.  But as a practical matter, Mr. Morley
is unwell.  We communicated that to the Chamber yesterday, and this
morning he's not present in court.  I spoke to him and he tells me that
he was on his way to the doctor, and this is a conversation of
approximately an hour ago, and that he thought he would be able to
return at 2:00.  But given Ms. Diagne's concerns and the position that
it puts the Court in to decide whether Mr. Karemera's absence is a
refusal or an inability, maybe it would be in the best interest of all
parties and of the Trial Chamber to address this issue tomorrow morning
as opposed to forcing the issue at this time.  So I think as a
practical matter, we are in a bit of a disability on this side as well,
but I would rather not address the issue of whether Mr. Karemera's
voluntarily withdrawing his presence, or whether he's refusing, whether
he's disabled.  I don't think the Court has to address that issue at
this time, given the practical limitations of the situation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Okay, thank you.
Mr. Webster, we are not satisfied that Mr. Morley's absence should
prevent the Prosecutor from continuing, but in the spirit that both
yourself and Mr. Robinson have evinced, we will -- we think that we
should go -- we should split the differences, and we would want to be
in a position to start after the luncheon adjournment at 2:00, whether
Mr. Morley is here or not.
Ms. Diagne, in light of your statement that the -- that Mr. Karemera
may not be -- may not have been informed of the medical report, we will
ask -- direct the registrar to send him a copy of the medical report of
-- that has just been read in court and require him to attend at 2:00
this afternoon.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Mr. President, is that a decision, or can we continue to make
submissions?
MR. PRESIDENT:
It was a decision, but if you wish to add anything to it, I can hear
you.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Mr. President, I wanted to say that as well as Mr. Morley, who went to
see the doctor and doesn't know what he'll be able to do this
afternoon, and Mr. Karemera who began his -- taking his medicine
yesterday at 7 p.m., I think it would be best if we could all agree to
meet here tomorrow.  Because what is going to happen, Mr. President,
even if you summon us after the lunch break, it will be with all the
uncertainty of the circumstances.  So I didn't know whether it was a
decision you made.  I thought we could still exchange views on the
matter, which is why I take the liberty of saying what I said, and I
thank you for having given me the freedom to speak.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  Under normal circumstances, Mr. Morley's absence would not
have been a reason for postponing the continuation of the examination-
in-chief.  We would think that the Prosecutor ought to be in a position
to proceed with their case even if Mr. Morley is not present in court.
So we would not have accepted that as a reason for postponement.  So we
don't think that there should be any uncertainty at 2:00 as far as the
ability of the Prosecutor to proceed as concerned.
I don't know if our position is going to be different in a factual
sense at 2:00, and I don't know -- I don't think our position will be
any different at 2:00 or at 8:00 tomorrow morning.  The position seems
to be very clear, that the doctor said that Mr. Karemera can attend
court, that he will be suffering some mild discomfort, and he has made
recommendations as to how this discomfort could be alleviated.  The
position at 2:00 will be roughly the same as it will be at 8:00
tomorrow morning.  At the end, he will have to decide whether he wishes
to attend under those circumstances or not.  There's nothing the Court
can do to compel his attendance, and that's a decision which he will
have to make for himself.  If he decides not to attend court, then we
will proceed.  We will take adequate steps to ensure that he gets daily
reports of the proceedings in the best fashion that the Tribunal can
provide them.  And we will also ensure that the other facilities, that
he gets which will assist him to conduct his Defence properly.  But his
-- a decision that he takes not to attend court under these
circumstances will not stop us from proceeding, and I think that the
position at 2:00 will not be any different from the position at 8:00
tomorrow morning.  And so we think that we should give him the time to
consider what his position is and decide whether he wants to attend
court or not.  So that is what we think should happen.
Now, we have some rulings on the matters that were argued yesterday,
and we can deliver them now.  The first ruling has to do with the
testimony of Witness UB, and this is the oral decision that we deliver.
Immediately after the Chamber delivered its decision on 16th February
, refusing a stay of proceedings, Nzirorera filed two written
motions on the 17th of February, requesting that consequent on the
finding that the Prosecution violated Rule 68, in relation to matters
which may impeach the credibility of Witness UB, the Chamber should
exclude the testimony of Witness UB, both as a sanction and to deter
future violations; and as an alternative, that the Chamber postpone the
witness's cross-examination to allow for the investigation of
information arising from the late disclosure and subsequent translation
of Witness UB's Rwandan judgement.
Oral argument was heard on 21st February 2006.  The Defence for
Karemera and the Defence for Ngirumpatse supported, and the Prosecution
opposed these motions.
The Chamber is still of the view that the exclusion of the testimony of
UB is not an appropriate response to the disclosure violations as was
discussed in our decision of 16 February, and it is not necessary to
repeat our reasoning.
Nzirorera contends that he is not prepared to cross-examine Witness UB
because of new material that has arisen from the translation of his
Rwandan judgement on the 15th of February, and which he needs to
investigate, and which may affect his overall theory of cross-
examination of this witness.  He submits that the Prosecution's failure
to disclose this judgement earlier was due to a lack of diligence.
In his written submission, Nzirorera points to the statements of 14
individuals which contributed to UB's judgement and who may have
information regarding the witness's activities during the events in
Rwanda in 1994.  When pressed for details at the oral hearing, he
pointed specifically to the summary of allegations made by a communal
policeman against Witness UB, and suggested that he may be able to
provide information about UB's whereabouts at times relevant to his
testimony.
As previously stated in our oral decision of 16th February, the
indictment against the Accused was confirmed on 22nd August 1998.  The
initial appearances were on the 7th of April 1999, and the trial
originally commenced on 27 November 2003.  This is a de novo hearing
which commenced on 19th September 2005.  The Defence has received
significant disclosure over this extended period of time regarding
Witness UB, including his testimony in other cases before this
Tribunal.
The Chamber notes that the Rwandan judgement came into the possession
of the Prosecution on the 10th of February and was disclosed to the
Defence on the 13th of February.  The translation took place on the
th of February, some seven days ago.
At this stage, the Chamber is not persuaded that new material contained
in the judgement, as pointed out by counsel, will handicap the
effective cross-examination of the witness.
Unlike the Chamber in Karera, we are faced with a situation where the
Defence has the required judgement, which was translated into both
French and English over seven days ago.
Now, the Chamber will continue to monitor the situation as the evidence
unfolds.  In any event, if the Defence subsequently discovers new
material which could affect the credibility of the witness, the Court
will order his recall for further examination.  The Defence should be
able to move forward at this stage without infringing the right of the
Accused to a fair trial.  Consequently, the request to exclude the
testimony of Witness UB, and to postpone his cross-examination, are
denied.
Now, we move to the motion to -- which required certification of
compliance with Rule 68, filed by Nzirorera on the 20th of February
.
On the 20th of February 2006, the Defence of Joseph Nzirorera filed a
motion, moving the Chamber to order each member of the Prosecution team
in this case to certify, under penalty of perjury, that the Prosecution
has fully complied with its obligations pursuant to Rule 68 of the
Rules of Procedure and Evidence.  Mr. Morley responded orally to this
motion on behalf of the Prosecution on the 21st of February 2006.  The
Chamber now decides the motion on the basis of the written and
oral submissions of the parties.
The Defence advances two main reasons for the relief sought.  Firstly,
it submits the relief sought would be a means of addressing the issue
of non-disclosure on a global basis.  Secondly, requiring the
Prosecution to certify to the compliance with its Rule 68 obligations
would be a base from which the Defence could ultimately complain to the
professional associations of which the individuals of the Prosecution
team are members, in the event of any future breach of Rule 68.
The Prosecution opposes the Defence motion, submitting that the motion
is unnecessarily confrontational.  Relying on the Blaskic decision of
the ICTY Appeals Chamber, which dealt with an application for a similar
type of relief to that sought by Nzirorera in the instant case, the
Prosecution submits that an order of this type is one which should only
be made by a Chamber in very rare circumstances.  The Prosecution
submits that this is not one of those instances.
Nzirorera correctly recalls that the Trial Chamber, in its oral
decision of 16th February, found that the Prosecution had not complied
with its obligations under Rule 68.  However, it is noteworthy that the
finding was made by the Chamber with respect to certain materials only.
The Chamber is of the view that the Prosecution's partial failure to
comply with Rule 68 has already been clearly addressed in the course of
our oral decision of the 16th of February 2006.  The Chamber also
considers it to have been patently clear in its decision that it had
taken into account its powers to impose sanctions upon the Prosecution
and had determined that such an avenue was not appropriate in the
circumstances.
In particular, the Chamber noted that the remedies available to it, in
dealing with the Prosecution's partial failure to comply, included the
remedy of imposing sanctions against counsel.
It also said that if it was established in the future that the
declarations made by the Prosecution concerning its fulfillment of
disclosure obligations were inaccurate, the Chamber would revisit the
issue to see whether there had been misconduct on behalf of the
Prosecution.
The Chamber also said that in the event of future problems arising, it
would make any necessary orders on a case-by-case basis.
And it also said that in the event of lack of diligence or other
default being shown in the future, the Chamber might be required to
consider whether the conduct wilfully interfered with the
administration of justice, obstructed the proceedings, or was otherwise
contrary to the interests of justice.
The Chamber, therefore, considers that it is not in the interests of
justice to grant the relief sought by Nzirorera.  The Chamber notes in
this respect that the Prosecution's obligations under Rule 68 of the
Rules are of a continuous nature, as already noted by this Chamber in a
number of its previous decisions on disclosure-related matters.
The Chamber further notes that the Prosecution has made a number of
declarations in open court to the effect that it has complied with its
disclosure obligations under Rule 68.  The Chamber is, therefore,
satisfied that the assurances already given by the Prosecution, that it
is fulfilling its obligations under Rule 68, as well as the passages
just outlined, which were taken from the Chamber's oral decision of
th February, adequately address the reasons for which Nzirorera seeks
certification.  For these reasons, the Defence motion is, therefore,
denied.
Now, the other motion which we have something to say on at this stage
is the oral motion on stay of trial, pending the oral appeal against
the oral decision denying the motion for stay of proceedings, filed by
Nzirorera on the 20th of February 2006.  And our position is that in
relation to the Defence motion for a stay of the trial in this case,
pending the appeal of the Trial Chamber's oral decision on the motion
for stay of proceedings, filed on the 20th of February 2006, by
Nzirorera, and to which Mr. Morley responded yesterday, the 21st of
February, the Chamber advises the parties that it will reserve its
decision on this issue until it has decided the merits of the Defence
motion for certification to appeal the decision on the motion for stay
of proceedings.
The other application which has already been argued, we will probably
be in a position to deliver our decision by tomorrow morning.  We now
take our adjournment.  I'm sorry.
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Mr. President, with respect to the motion to postpone
Witness UB's testimony, in paragraph 21, I had also requested the Trial
Chamber to order disclosure of Witness UB's judgement on appeal, and so
I would ask the Trial Chamber, when it has the opportunity, to address
that combined form of relief that I had added to that motion.  Thank
you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  I'm sorry it did not appear in our decision, but I'll say
something formal about that at the earliest opportunity.  Thank you.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Mr. President?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, Ms. Diagne.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Following what Mr. Robinson has said regarding the judgement on appeal
for Rwanda regarding UB, I'd just like to recall for the Trial
Chamber's benefit that I also made this request in my oral submissions
on the 20th of February 2006.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, Ms. Diagne, we do recall that, and we had considered it, and we'll
say something formal about it when we resume.
Yes, Mr. Webster.
MR. WEBSTER:
I know the Court has already indicated that it will address this issue
later, but simply to clarify for the record, the Prosecutor is not in
possession of any appeals chamber judgement against the Witness UB.  So
we're not in a position to disclose what we do not have.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Webster, one of the allegations of the Defence in this regard is
that UB has the appeals chamber judgement and that it could be obtained
in that manner.
MR. WEBSTER:
I'm not aware of that, Your Honour.  I have not spoken to the witness
specifically on this question, so that's something we'll have to put to
the witness when he's on the stand.  But to my knowledge, as far as I
know, he didn't have a copy of either judgement -- the Trial Chamber
judgement or the appeals judgement.  If he had the trial chamber
judgement in his possession, it wouldn't have been necessary for us to
make efforts for us to get it through the Rwandan ministry of justice.
So I'm not aware that this witness has copies of the judgements.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I just want to clarify something.  I use the phrase "appeals chamber
judgement."  Was that what -- my recollection is that it was not the
judgement.  It was the appeal file.  I wasn't aware that the appeal had
gone to judgement.  Was the allegation that the appeals had gone to
judgement?
MR. ROBINSON:
Yes, the appeal did go to judgement --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.
MR. ROBINSON:
-- and the conviction was affirmed.  And he appealed further to the
Supreme Court, and he's waiting for the decision.  But if you look at
the transcript of the Karera trial, and Mr. Webster can see that, that
he indicated that he had both judgements in his possession in Rwanda.
So that was the situation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  Well, we'll take the adjournment now until 2:00.
(Court recessed at 1038H)
(Pages 1 to 11 by Wendy Molnar)
(Court resumed at 1420H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon, everybody.  Mr. Registrar, would you please open the
proceedings?
MR. HOMETOWU:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Trial Chamber III of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
composed of Judge Dennis Byron, presiding, Judge Emile Francis Short,
and Judge Gustave Kam, is now sitting in open session today, Wednesday,
nd February 2006, for the continuation of the trial in the matter of
the Prosecutor versus Karemera et al, Case No. ICTR-98-44-T.  Thank
you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Registrar.  Appearances first, please.
MR. MORLEY:
Alas, I'm on my feet.  For the Prosecution, my learned leader Don
Webster, myself Iain Morley, Gregory Lombardi, Takeh Sendze -- and if
Your Honour will forgive me for a moment -- and we are also assisted
today by an intern, Elena Rubinov.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Good afternoon, Mr. President, Your Honours.  Dior Diagne-Mbaye, lead
counsel for Édouard Karemera, assisted by Mr. Nsengiyumva.  Thank you.
MS. HOUNKPATIN:
Good afternoon, Mr. President, good afternoon Your Honours, good
afternoon to one and all.  Chantal Hounkpatin, counsel for Mr. Mathieu
Ngirumpatse, assisted by Anta Guissé.
MR. ROBINSON:
Good afternoon, Mr. President, and members of the Trial Chamber, Peter
Robinson and Leopold Nsengiyumva for Joseph Nzirorera.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Morley, you are trying to attract our attention.
MR. MORLEY:
I was simply on my feet to apologise if my absence this morning caused
any inconvenience.  As Your Honour may recall, yesterday I was not at
my best.  I went to see the doctor this morning and I asked him for
some medicine to ensure that I could perform this afternoon.  Rather
worryingly, he immediately told me I should be in bed rather than
anywhere else.  But I have some medicine and I think I will be able to
assist the Court this afternoon.  I do have a sick note, but there is
no point in showing you that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Morley, your absence this morning had one -- at least one good
result in that it prompted Mr. Robinson to lower the flag of
confrontation and make a proposition in compromise.  So, I don't think
you should rule out your absence totally.
MR. MORLEY:
Well, now that I'm back, we'll be back to the old game, so Your Honour
is in trouble again.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Diagne, I note that Mr. Karemera is not here, so I will just ask
the registrar to make a report as to what transpired this morning
first.
MR. HOMETOWU:
Mr. President, the registry sent the medical report and a new removal
order to the commanding officer of the UNDF for the attention of
Karemera.  And at 12:08 this afternoon I received an e-mail, and the
content reads as follows:  "Dear Constant, please be informed that the
removal order and the medical report forwarded to me were delivered to
the detainee, Édouard Karemera, at 1145 hours.  He informed us that he
is sick and he will not attend Court sessions.  Regards."  Sent by
Saidou Guindo.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Mr. Registrar.  Mr. Registrar, could you spell the sender of
that message?  The name of the sender.
MR. HOMETOWU:
Saidou Guindo, S-A-I-D-O-U; Guindo, G-U-I-N-D-O.  He is the commanding
officer of the UNDF.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you spell the surname again?
MR. HOMETOWU:
The surname is G-U-I-N-D-O, Guindo.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
Yes, Ms. Diagne.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Yes, Mr. President.  I had Mr. Karemera, Édouard, on the telephone.  He
has requested me to say to you that he apologises to this august
Chamber, and reiterates to her that he had never had any intention of
stultifying the proceedings.  He also has instructed me to say to you
that his pain has increased, but especially -- what really stopped him
from coming in this afternoon is that the medication given to him since
yesterday throws him into a sleepy state all the time.  In other words,
the whole morning he spent in bed, and he is starting to do the same
thing.  He tells me the medication is very, very -- the medication is
very powerful antibiotics, plus other types of medication that I do not
know.  But he told me that he is not in a position -- he is not
physically fit to follow any session.  He apologises to the Chamber,
and if the Chamber believes that it could go ahead without his
presence, the Chamber may do so.  He says he is well presented, but he
insisted that it is not a refusal, not at all a refusal of appearing
here.  He added emphatically that he is almost permanently
somnambulant.  This is what he said that I should say to you, and he
reiterates his apologies, Mr. President, Your Honours.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, I must say thank you for presenting the matter in that manner.
In terms of providing facilities in time for him, we are in a position
to make an order for him to get a transcript of the day's proceedings
at the close of our sessions, and we also thought that, in order to
facilitate your instructions, that we could start about half an hour
later in the morning which would give you additional time to consult
with him before each morning's session if this condition continues for
a long time.  And that was, again, at this level, I throw it out to you
to see what you say as the facilities that can be provided to assist in
the preparation of the Defence.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Microphone, please.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
Mr. President, so far as my client is concerned, he sent me this piece
of paper that I am showing you simply to ask me once again to see to it
the Chamber comes in and to ensure that the masseur, that is, the
physiotherapist, should continue working with him.  And I was also
requested to call the medical officer to say that Mr. -- my client is
very worried and it is almost affecting his mind.  So far as the
Chamber is concerned, he has asked me to ask you to ensure medical
treatment.  But he has said that this is only temporary, in his
opinion, and that tomorrow he can attend Court and he wants to come.
And if he couldn't come, it would be because of the fact of the
medication.  But he wants to come.  He has also asked me to say this to
Your Honours, and I should like to thank you for your solicitude
regarding him.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
Mr. Registrar, in view of the request for assistance to ensure further
medical treatment, I would be grateful if you could take the
appropriate steps to see that arrangements are put in place.
MR. HOMETOWU:
Very well, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
I think that what I am about to say constitutes a ruling on
Mr. Karemera's absence.  We are grateful for the way in which his
position has been presented by his counsel, Ms. Diagne.  We have been
satisfied by the medical reports on his condition, that he does have a
condition which causes discomfort, but that this does not prevent him
from attendance in Court providing certain steps are taken to alleviate
the position.  Recommendations have been made by the specialist as to
what those steps are, and they are perfectly within the capacity of the
Court.  And we indicate now, as we may have done before, that those
recommendations will be accepted and put into place if the Accused
Karemera does come to Court.
Now, he has not come to Court and has stated that the reason is his
illness.  As we understand Rule 82 bis, refusal to come to Court
doesn't seem to depend on whether there is a good reason or a bad
reason for not coming.  So we do not have to, and we do not need any
judgement, as to whether or not the reason given is a good one or a bad
one.  The fact is that he has decided not to come to Court, and we will
act on that basis.  We interpret that to be a refusal in the context of
Rule 82 bis.
We think that the other conditions of Rule 82 bis apply.  He has made
his initial appearance.  The registrar has duly notified him that he is
required to be present, and his interests are represented by counsel,
Ms. Diagne, and the other members of her legal team.
Now, we think that it is important that provisions are made to provide
adequate facilities in time for the preparation of the Defence as
mandated by Article 24(B) of the Statute.  And in giving effect to
those provisions, we are directing that the registrar delivers the
transcript, the daily transcripts of the trial, to the Accused Karemera
each day of his absence from the trial as soon as practicable after the
completion of the day's proceedings.
In addition, the Chamber will adjust its schedule to sit half an hour
later, that is, we will commence at 9:15 a.m. instead of 8:45, to
facilitate communication between the Accused Karemera and his legal
counsel.
We will continue to monitor his situation to the registrar and we also
invite his counsel to provide any information if there is any change in
his circumstances.  The Chamber remains available to provide any
assistance should there be a need for further intervention.
That's the ruling we have made in regard to this matter.  Perhaps I
should also ask the registrar to communicate this ruling to
Mr. Karemera as a separate note when the transcript for today's
proceedings are communicated and delivered to him.
Now, Mr. Prosecutor, could you call your witness?
MR. MORLEY:
Yes, please.  Can we have UB.
MR. ROBINSON:
Mr. President, before we do that, can I just very briefly ask you to --
with respect to something that came up this morning, in thinking about
your decisions this morning, I want to first give you some good news.
I am not going to ask for certification for the three rulings that you
made, but I feel that I have to insist that there be a ruling on my
motion for stay pending appeal because that's a motion that the trial
stop as of now.  I don't feel that it is necessary that you give your
reasons, but I think I would be remiss, and I would be making a poor
record for the Appeals Chamber, if I didn't call to your attention that
that was a matter that required a ruling before the trial commenced,
and I would call that to your attention at this time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robinson, thank you very much for your other assurances, but we did
think about that in some length, and we thought that it would be
inappropriate for us to rule on the matter for stay until we had
considered the merits of the certification.  I can assure you it is
receiving our current attention, and there is not going to be a delay
in making a ruling.  We don't think that justifies a stay in the
meantime, but you have it on the record that you have made a request,
so your position is protected, I think.
Yes, Mr. Morley.
MR. MORLEY:
Thank you.
Witness, please.
(Witness entered courtroom)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good afternoon, Mr. Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good afternoon, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
After the break, your testimony is going to continue now.  I have to
remind you that you are on the same oath to tell the truth that you
took at the commencement of your testimony.  Do you understand that?
THE WITNESS:
I do understand that, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, before you continue your testimony, there is one matter I would
like to ask you.  It has been represented that you may have copies of
your Rwandan judgement, and particularly the appeal ruling of your
Rwandan judgement, and I would like to ask you if you have that appeal
judgement.
THE WITNESS:
I received a copy of that decision, but I do not have it physically
with me at this time.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, could you clarify which decision?  We know that there was a trial
decision and that there was an appeal decision.  My question, if it
wasn't very clear, related to the appeal decision.
THE WITNESS:
After having been convicted by the court of first instance, I lodged an
appeal, and I received by way of reply that my appeal was not received.
That is what I received.  I subsequently appealed to the Supreme Court
in respect of my case on the main grounds that the appeals court had
not accepted -- had considered that my appeal was not receivable.
MR. PRESIDENT:
What was the position with regard to your appeal to the Supreme Court?
THE WITNESS:
I have to date received no response from the Supreme Court.  My appeal
is, therefore, pending.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
Mr. Robinson, is there any other matter you think I should put to the
witness?
MR. ROBINSON:
Yes, Mr. President.  If you don't mind, at page 86 of the transcript in
the Karera trial, the witness indicated that he had the judgement at
his residence in Rwanda, the appeals judgement, and I would ask if you
could make enquiries as to whether that could be made available to a
WVSS representative, or some other party, so that we could have that
here soon.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, did you hear what Counsel Robinson said to me just now?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I understood what he said.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Could you provide an answer, please?
THE WITNESS:
Counsel has said that, in Karera, I said that I had a copy of the
appeals judgement.  That is not correct.  I said that the document's in
my possession in Rwanda, I mean.  I was told that my appeal was not
receivable.  I had access to the document in question, but it is not in
my possession.  Once notified of that response, I appealed to the
Supreme Court.  Otherwise, I do not have that document in my
possession.
MS. HOUNKPATIN:
Mr. President?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, Ms. Hounkpatin?
MS. HOUNKPATIN:
To add, in agreement with my colleague, Counsel Robinson, the statement
in Karera was quite clear as to those judicial documents.  The witness
stated that he had both the judgement and the decision of the appeal's
court, and both were before the court of cassation, his family held
those documents in Rwanda, but it is in the hands of his family.  So I
don't understand the answer here today.
MR. ROBINSON:
Mr. President, also I would like to read to you the exchange from
Karera.
JUDGE SHORT:
Mr. Witness, did you see this appeal court judgement yourself?  Did you
read it?
THE WITNESS:
It was my lawyer, a member of Lawyers Without Borders, who conveyed to
me the decision of the appeal court.  A while back, counsel said that I
had received a record from the court of cassation, however, that is not
true.  I said I received a copy from the Court of Appeal, but I
received no document from the court of cassation.
JUDGE SHORT:
The document you received from the Court of Appeal, do you remember its
contents?
THE WITNESS:
In that document it was stated that my appeal is not receivable, and
consequently the decision/judgement pronounced by the court of first
instance stands.  That is the context of the document.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Constant, can you put the witness's microphone a bit closer, please?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you, Judge Short, for those questions.
My colleague thinks I should clarify my expression of appreciation.  It
is really to notify the court reporter that Judge Short is sitting on
my right and not Judge Kam.
Mr. Robinson, has the matter been completely addressed?
MR. ROBINSON:
I don't think so, Mr. President.  If I could just recall, for you and
the witness's benefit, a very short excerpt from the Karera case and
then we can try to understand his understanding of these questions.
MR. PRESIDENT:
If you are challenging his truthfulness, that would be a matter for
cross-examination.  So I would not wish to be put in the position of
challenging his truthfulness at this stage.  So the only questions I
would put forward now would be based on clarification, not on
challenge.  Do you understand my position?
MR. ROBINSON:
I do, and I don't think he is lying about this, but I tend to think
that maybe he doesn't understand because of the difference between what
he directly said in Karera and what he is saying now.  But I am not
contesting he is lying.  This goes to credibility.  I don't think he
understands because he directly told the President he had that document
in his possession.
MR. PRESIDENT:
You can ask me.  You can put it to me.  Put it to me.
MR. MORLEY:
Before my learned friend does that, may I just counsel a small note of
caution.  I don't know what it is my friend will put, but we are in
open session, and if we descend into the details of the judgement, it
may be that the witness is identifiable.  It may be that what my
learned friend is about to put from what happened in another trial does
not descend into the details of the judgement.  I am simply counselling
a note of caution as we are in open session.
MR. ROBINSON:
It is noted.  I think I can continue.  So, on page 86 in the Karera
case, the witness said -- was asked by President Møse whether he saw
the document containing the rejection from the appeals chamber --
appeals court, and he said, "Yes, I saw a document in which was stated
my appeal was not admissible."  The President then went on to ask him
if he had himself a copy of the judgement of the 30th of July 1997,
which is the trial court judgement, and he said, "I do not have a copy
with me here, but I have a copy where I live."  And the President
asked, "Do you have it in Arusha or back in Rwanda?"  And he said, "The
copy is in Rwanda."  And then the President said, "And the same as the
situation for the rejection document.  Is that so?  Do you have -- if
you have it at all," and the witness says, "Yes," and then the
President said, "So that's also in your possession back in Rwanda, is
that so?"  And the witness says, "Yes, that document is also in Rwanda.
I do not have it with me here in Arusha."  So I would ask you to
consider those answers and possibly clarify the difference between what
the answers have been today.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, what I would like to ask as a result of that is this:  The
document from the Court of Appeal, which rejected your appeal, do you
have access to it now, either in Arusha or in Rwanda?
THE WITNESS:
I don't know if counsel has correctly understood me.  I said that I had
seen the document, but I didn't have it in Arusha, nor did I say that I
had it at my prison, but my family had a copy of the document.  I was
asked if I had a copy in my possession where I was.  I thought they
meant at the prison.  I said I did not have the document at the prison,
but my family had a copy.  So I don't have a copy, either in Arusha or
where I am imprisoned in Rwanda.  Otherwise my family has a copy of
that document.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I think the factual position is now clarified.  That's as far as we can
take it at this stage.
Mr. Morley.
WITNESS UB,
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF (continued)
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Mr. Witness, last Thursday, as long ago as that now -- bear with me
for a moment.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Sorry for the interruption, Mr. Morley.  You may proceed.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    As long ago as last Thursday, the end of your evidence on that
session offered the thought that the MRND was structured as a pyramid;
do you remember that?
A.    Yes, that is correct.
Q.    And you described the national bureau, containing four members, as
being right at the top of the pyramid; do you remember that?
A.    Yes, quite.
Q.    What I would like to explore with you now is how decisions were taken
within the MRND; do you understand?
A.    I understand your question.
Q.    First of all, how did the four people get appointed to the national
bureau?  What is the process within the MRND, please?
A.    As far as those four people are concerned, they were elected by the
national congress, national MRND party congress.  That congress -- 20
people made up the préfectural committee, and then you must add the
communal MRND chairmen.  Now, there were 11 préfectures, that means 220
people, to which you must add the communal chairmen, that's 145 people,
and they all made up the congress, national congress.  And in the
course of the congress they elected the members of the national
committee, the national MRND committee.
Q.    Just doing the math, 220, plus around 145, brings us to the figure
.  Is it right, then, that a national congress would have somewhere
in the region of 365 delegates?
A.    Yes, that is correct.  And it was all governed by the regulation --
internal rules and regulations of the MRND party.
Q.    Can you remember the year of the national congress in which the
Accused Karemera, Ngirumpatse, and Nzirorera, were appointed as vice-
president, president, and general secretary respectively in the
national bureau?
A.    Those people were elected to that body of the MRND in 1993.
Q.    We will deal with their individual histories with the MRND later, but
for the moment, what I would like to ask you is how were decisions
taken within the MRND as to what the MRND should be doing as a matter
of policy?  Can you describe the decision-making process within the
party, please?
A.    The people in charge of MRND policy at the national level was the
chairman, the vice-chairman, and the national secretary, or president,
vice-president and national secretary, if you prefer.  Those are the
people entrusted with implementing the decisions of the executive
committee which was the policy organ nationwide.
Q.    Who was on the executive committee?  What sort of numbers?  What sort
of level of membership within the MRND, please?
A.    When I speak of the polit buro or executive bureau, which is the
president, Mathieu Ngirumpatse after 1993, assisted by
Édouard Karemera, his vice-president, and the secretary-general,
national secretary, being Joseph Nzirorera.  You have to add also
Froduald Karagema (phonetic), who is deceased.  Those people were the
executive bureau and in charge of executing all MRND party decisions.
Q.    In an attempt to save on some confusion, you have mentioned the word
"polit buro", the word "executive bureau", and last Thursday you
referred to a national bureau.  Are each of those bureaus the same
thing, or are they different?  Polit buro, executive bureau, and
national bureau.
A.    The national committee is different.  It was made up of four people
from each préfecture.  The political bureau was made up of one
préfectural representative, the préfecture chairman.  The executive
bureau was made up of the four people I mentioned, who were in charge
of national party management -- daily management.
Q.    Thank you.  Well, from now on, when we refer to the office, which was
jointly held by Nzirorera, Karemera, Ngirumpatse, and Kabagema, we will
call that the executive bureau.  Do you understand what I've said?
A.    Agreed.
Q.    What was the mechanism by which policy was created for the executive
bureau?  Did the executive bureau create policy of its own, or was
there a committee which met and then dictated to the executive bureau
what MRND policy should be?
A.    As I have stated, as regards MRND policy, the political bureau gave
instructions to the executive bureau, and the executive bureau executed
-- implemented those decisions.  That bureau also headed all meetings
of various party bodies, various party organs.
Q.    How many people were in the political bureau, please?
A.    I said that the political bureau was made up of préfectural party
chairmen, that is, 11 people who met with the members of the executive
bureau.
Q.    It follows, then, that the political bureau consisted of 15 people,
and policy would be created, which would then be in the hands of the
executive bureau; is that right?
A.    Yes, quite correct.
Q.    How often would the political bureau meet?  How many times a year or
a month, please?
A.    I can't recall what the provisions were, but the political bureau met
every time that the party president called a meeting.  I can't give you
any further details as to the number of times, because I did not take
cognisance of the provisions relating to the frequency of meetings of
that body.  I don't know.
Q.    In relation to the political bureau, which consisted of
préfectural chairmen and the four members of the executive bureau,
in whom did the real power lie?
A.    The person who executed party decisions was the president, his vice-
president, and his secretary.  They are the people who held the power
and could execute all decisions taken at party level.
Q.    Did the executive bureau tell the préfectural chairman what to do, or
did the préfectural chairman tell the executive bureau what to do?
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Mr. President.  I am going to object to this for a lack of
foundation.  The witness was not a member of any of these bodies.  It
seems like he is now trying to elicit expert testimony.  So my
objection is to a lack of foundation.
MR. MORLEY:
He is a long-standing member of the MRND and understands its
mechanisms.  He is able to give this evidence.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We will allow the question.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    So, Mr. Witness, if I can ask the question again:  Within the
political bureau, which consisted of 11 préfectural chairmen and the
four members of the executive committee, who told who what to do?  Was
it the executive bureau telling the préfectural committee what policy
should be, or was it the préfectural chairman telling the executive
bureau what policy should be?
A.    The executive bureau gave instructions to the préfectural committees.
That means that orders emanating from the executive bureau came to the
préfectural committees and préfectural bureau.
Q.    Who was responsible for executing orders from the executive bureau
and ensuring that those orders were carried through to all levels of
the MRND?
A.    That fell upon the national secretary of the party.  There was also
the president.  They were the ones who had to ensure that orders were
respected in the préfectures.
Q.    To tidy up use of terms, on Thursday you referred to a national
secretary within the executive bureau.  You also referred to a general
secretary.  Are these two officers the same thing or are they
different?
A.    Yes.  Those terms are the same.  They can refer to the same person,
the same position.  It's a left-over from the one-party state.  When I
say "the secretary" or "the general secretary", in fact, it is the same
thing.  It is the MRND party secretary.  It was the national secretary
of the MRND.
Q.    Can you help us with where it was that the executive bureau had its
offices?
A.    In 1991 until 1994, the executive bureau worked in Kabuga's office
building in Muhima.  In 1994 they were in the building in Kimihuru
belonging to General Ndindiliyimana.  Before that it was in
Rubungura's (phonetic) office building in Ruvuma (phonetic).
Q.    In a sentence, can you tell us, what was the job of the president of
the MRND?
A.    It is difficult for me to summarise the duties of the president of
the MRND, except that he is the supreme chief and spokesman of the
party, and has the responsibility for ensuring that all party decisions
are implemented, executed.
Q.    In a sentence, if you can, what was the job of a vice-president of
the MRND?
A.    He was the MRND party spokesman, both at the national level and
abroad.
Q.    In a sentence, if you can, what was the job of the general secretary
of the MRND?
A.    As we see it, the secretary general was in charge of management --
daily management of the bureau.  At the period of multiparty politics,
he was in charge of daily management of the party.
Q.    Of the four offices within the executive bureau -- president, two
vice-presidents, and general secretary -- which was the most powerful
office, please?
A.    Quite clearly, the president, that is to say, Mathieu Ngirumpatse.
He was the president of the party.
Q.    Thank you.  Of the four offices, which was the second most powerful
office, please?
A.    As provided for in the internal regulations, in the absence of the
president, it was the vice-president that held the power, as he had two
vice-presidents.  It was the two vice-presidents who replaced the
president when he was absent.
Q.    Maybe you misunderstood my question.  I am not looking at the theory
of how the office is supposed to work, if somebody dies or is ill.  I
am asking you about the reality.  You described the president of being
the most powerful of the four.  Who is the next most powerful, as a
reality, in the way that that executive bureau worked?
A.    I just said that he had two vice-presidents, and the person in charge
of the daily management of party business, the secretary-general of the
party in the person of Joseph Nzirorera.  Perhaps to make things
clearer, I could say that before the secretary-general of the party, he
had held all the cards.  He had all the power.  The party had been
directed before by the secretary-general.  But then subsequently the
president -- but at that time the president of the party was the
president, and the secretary-general was more or less the head of the
party.
Q.    Thank you.  Just to help their Honours with that -- I anticipate it
is not in dispute -- it was the case, was it not, that originally the
president of the MRND was the president of the republic,
Mr. Habyarimana; that's right, isn't it?
A.    That is correct.
Q.    And it's right, is it not, that he stopped being president of the
party at the national congress in 1993?
A.    Yes, that was the case.
Q.    And it's right, is it not, that the first president of the MRND, who
was not also the president of the republic, was appointed in 1993 and
that was Mr. Ngirumpatse; that's correct, isn't it?
A.    Yes, that is the case.
Q.    Before the president of the republic -- I will start that again.
When the president of the republic, Mr. Habyarimana, was the president
of the party, which was the most powerful office within the party,
please?
A.    When the president of the republic was leader of the party, it was
the general secretary, whom we called the executive secretary, who was
the most powerful figure in the party.  In 1993, 1991 --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The interpreters had both figures, sorry.
THE WITNESS:
-- which means that all party activities, in rallies or in meetings --
when I say "a rally", it means a public meeting -- they were directed
by the secretary-general.  It was not the president of the republic who
led the rallies, it was the secretary-general, whether they were
rallies or other party meetings.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    It seems to follow that before the 1993 congress, the secretary-
general was the most powerful office.  After the 1993 congress, the
president was the most powerful office.  Can I ask you, who was the
secretary-general leading up to the 1993 congress, please?
A.    The secretary-general of the party was Mathieu Ngirumpatse.  He was
the one that was elected to that post.  He was, therefore, the most
powerful person in the party because he was very close to
President Habyarimana.
Q.    Thank you.  I will just pause there.
MR. MORLEY:
Your Honour, I see the time.  Do you wish me to continue?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Okay.  We will take the mid-afternoon break, now.  Thank you.
(Court recessed at 1535H)
(Pages 12 to 24 by Jennifer Spring)
(Court resumed at 1604H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
We can resume now.
MR. MORLEY:
Thank you.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Dealing with the office of the general secretary within the executive
bureau, do you know whether that was a full-time, employed position or
a part-time hobby, if I can put it that way?
A.    The post of secretary-general was a full-time employment.
Q.    As part of that employment, do you know whether the secretary-general
had a driver and a car?
A.    Yes, he had a car, an official vehicle of the MRND, at his disposal,
referring to Joseph Nzirorera, because Ngirumpatse had an MRND vehicle
when he was chairman and president of the party, and Nzirorera as well
had a party -- an MRND party vehicle.
Q.    Outside politics, what was the profession of Ngirumpatse, please?
A.    He is a legal man.  When he was elected president of the party, when
he was elected, he had his own legal office, as a lawyer.
Q.    Outside politics, what was the profession of Karemera, please?
A.    When I had told you that, I told you that I didn't see him
frequently, but he was a civil servant, a state agent -- a state
employee.  I do not precisely know what he precisely did, but I know
that he was a civil servant.
Q.    Outside politics, can you tell us what the profession or occupation
of Nzirorera was?
A.    Nzirorera was minister in the government, and subsequently he was
MRND secretary-general.  I knew him when he was a minister, then later
on he was appointed secretary-general of the MRND party.
Q.    It may be you misunderstood my question.  I'm talking about outside
politics.  How was it that Mr. Nzirorera made his living?  Was he a
businessman, a lawyer, an accountant, a racing driver?  What was he --
what was his job?
A.    I am not in a position to answer that question, really.  I -- I don't
know what he used to do before he became minister.  At any rate, I knew
that he was an educated man because he occupied a ministerial post.  I
don't precisely know what profession he (unintelligible) because we
didn't know each other enough.
Q.    Now, dealing with politics, can you help us with the sorts of offices
that you recall Ngirumpatse occupied before he became secretary-general
and later president of the MRND?  What sort of other political offices
did he occupy, to your memory?
A.    He occupied various posts within the government, at least within the
civil service.  But when the MRND -- well, he was minister of justice
when the MRND and the PDC became allied parties.
Q.    Turning to Karemera, dealing with politics, can you help us with any
other office which Karemera occupied, apart from being the vice-
president of the MRND from 1993?
A.    Édouard Karemera also occupied various posts, political posts, in
government.  He also served as minister.  I know that he was the
secretary-general of the MRND party.  I don't know the precise posts he
occupied before that.  In 1994 he became minister of the interior for
communal development.
Q.    When you say that Karemera was at one point the general secretary of
the MRND, was that at a time when President Habyarimana was president
of the MRND?
A.    When the MRND was preparing for multipartyism, the people composing
the executive committee of the party were responsible for preparing the
advent of the -- of multipartyism.  And at that time the secretary-
general was Édouard Karemera.  Now, when we were preparing for
elections of the MRND, that was the time that he was appointed the
secretary-general.
Q.    It may be the question was unclear.  When he was the secretary-
general of the MRND, was that at a time when the president of the MRND
was president of the republic, Mr. Habyarimana?
A.    Yes, it was at that time.  At that time the president of the party
was President Habyarimana, and Karemera was the secretary-general of
the party.  He was replaced by Mathieu Ngirumpatse, but the president,
that is, President Habyarimana, was elected president of the party in
at the party congress.
Q.    Thank you.  Does it follow, then, that the three Accused in this
case, Karemera, Ngirumpatse, and Nzirorera, have each at some stage
occupied the office of general secretary of the MRND?
A.    Absolutely.  Each of them has occupied the post of secretary-general
of the MRND.
Q.    Turning now, please, to Nzirorera, within politics, apart from
becoming the general secretary of the MRND, can you recall any other
political offices he occupied, please?
A.    I did say that he was once a minister and then secretary-general of
the MRND.  That was in 1994.  In 1994, rather, he was elected president
of the -- or, the chairman, the speaker of the parliament, within the
transitional government, that was.
Q.    Thank you.  Now, turning to the influence of the MRND on political
offices in Rwanda, prior to multipartyism, is it right that everybody
was considered to be members of the MRND?
A.    That is correct; you are right.
Q.    In 1994, there then being a number of political parties in the
country, there being 11 préfectures throughout the country, can you
help us with how many préfets had remained members of the MRND rather
than join other parties?
A.    That question is difficult for me, but I do remember that at the time
of multipartyism, when the MRND and the -- and the other parties shared
government, the MRND had seven préfets out of the eleven that covered
the entire country.
Q.    In 1994 the préfet of Kigali-ville was Renzaho; that's right, is it
not?
A.    Absolutely.  The préfet was Tharcisse Renzaho, yes.
Q.    Was he a member of the MRND?
A.    Normally, the MRND had proscribed that the soldiers shouldn't join
political parties.  But before that rule, he was a member of the MRND
party, indeed.
Q.    Can you help us, and it may be you can't, how many bourgmestres were
there throughout Rwanda in 1994?  What number?  Are you able to give us
a figure?
A.    I've already said that there were 144 communes in Rwanda, 144
communes -- I'm sorry,
communes, 145 communes.  Now, if my memory serves me right, that
is.
Q.    Thank you.  And for the assistance of the Judges, although it may be
known already, a bourgmestre was somebody who was in charge of the
commune; that's right, isn't it?
A.    That is correct.  It was in charge of the administration of the
entire commune.
Q.    Can you help us, approximately in 1994, of the hundred and forty-five
bourgmestres, how many of them were members of the MRND?
A.    I cannot answer that question because I was not an official and I was
not responsible for monitoring what happened in all the préfectures;
therefore, I'm not in a position to give you the number of bourgmestres
that were there -- were members of the MRND -- which of the
bourgmestres were members of the MRND and which were not.  But I could
give you a figure so far as the préfecture of Kigali-ville was
concerned.
Q.    That would be helpful.  How many bourgmestres in Kigali, please?
Figure.
A.    Kigali-ville had only three communes, that is, the three
bourgmestres, and two of them were MRND members.  The third was a
member of the PSD party.
Q.    In Kigali-ville, how many conseillers, please?
A.    Kigali-ville had 19 conseillers.  And all those conseillers had
signed the document and the statutes of the MRND; all of them.  It was
only later that certain conseillers began leaving the MRND, but
initially they were all members of the MRND.
Q.    Do I understand correctly that, of the 23 people in 1994 who were
responsible for either the préfecture, the three communes, or the 19
secteurs, only one was not a member of the MRND?
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Mr. President.  I'm going to object to the leading nature of
that question because it's also incorrect.
MR. MORLEY:
Your Honour, I'm simply taking from the witness what I understood the
witness was saying.
We've got one préfet, three bourgmestres --
MR. PRESIDENT:
(Microphones overlapping)...I -- I also did the math, but you could
rephrase the question just to see if he can --
MR. MORLEY:
I'll put it the other way around --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Of the 23 people running the préfecture, the 3 communes and the 19
secteurs, in 1994 in Kigali-ville, how many were not in the MRND?
A.    I've already told you that, among the signatories, or the -- those
who signed the MRND statutes, there were 19 conseillers.  The
bourgmestres were not supposed to sign those documents, but in 1994
some conseillers had expressed the -- the desire no longer to be
members of the MRND party.  There was a bourgmestre, I remember, that
left the MRND at that time.
Q.    Now, to help Mr. Robinson, how many conseillers of the 19 had
expressed unhappiness with the MRND?  Can you give us a figure, please?
A.    Those that said so in writing were two, two.
Q.    Doing the math again, of 23 -- I hope I can lead on this now -- are
you suggesting that 20 were members of the MRND?
MR. ROBINSON:
Well, Mr. President, I don't think that he can lead on that.  He --
first of all, he's already said the préfet was not a member of the MRND
in 1994 because the soldiers couldn't be members of the political
parties.  So he's -- not only is he leading, but he's leading him
incorrectly.
MR. MORLEY:
Well, perhaps the point is available to the Court to work out as a
mathematical exercise.  I don't want to get bogged down in this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The evidence is there already.
MR. MORLEY:
Thank you.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Now, turning to the government, can you help us, prior to the death
of President Habyarimana on the 6th of April 1994, approximately how
many ministerial positions were occupied during that period of
multipartyism by members of the MRND?
A.    It is difficult for me to answer that question.  All that I know is
that in 1994 the government was composed in the -- in the majority by
ministers from the MRND party.  That I can say.
Q.    During the period of the Abatabazi government, which arose after the
death of President Habyarimana, can you give us some idea of how many
ministerial positions were occupied by members of the MRND?
A.    As I have already said, the government of the Abatabazi was in the
majority, composed of people from the MRND party.
Q.    I want to turn now, please, to the Interahamwe.  Can you help us,
please, with when approximately you think the Interahamwe was created?
A.    The Interahamwe were -- was officially created in 1992, 1992.  That
was the time that the setting up of that body was official throughout,
but the document, or the statutes, were written in 1991.  It was,
therefore, the MRND party that created the Interahamwe.  It was -- the
Interahamwe was linked by that party.
Q.    And who is it you understand was instrumental in creating the
Interahamwe?
A.    It was Mathieu Ngirumpatse that was secretary-general of the MRND
that conceived the idea in collaboration with President Habyarimana.
Q.    When the Interahamwe was first created, what was the point of it,
please?
A.    The Interahamwe was created by the secretary-general.  He was the one
that ensured that the Interahamwe functioned properly because they were
based at the national office of the MRND.  Mr. Robert Kajuga was
appointed as president or chairman of the Interahamwe at national
level.
Q.    Thank you.  That's helpful.  But can you help the Judges with, when
the Interahamwe was created, why was it created?
A.    At the creation of the Interahamwe, we were told that they would be
responsible for ensuring the protection of members of the party because
the other parties had already set up youth groups to protect their
members.  So that we were told that the Interahamwe were there to
ensure the protection of the members of the party, as well as
sensitising the population about MRND ideals at national level.
Q.    Why was it that members of the MRND might need protecting because of
there being other parties?
A.    At that time, I said that the youth wings of the other parties in --
joined in activities, such as seeking the members of the other parties
that were in government to kick them out.  So when the Interahamwe was
created, we were told that that youth wing, that group, was there to
protect our members so that our leaders would not be endangered or
worried.
Q.    Who controlled the Interahamwe?
A.    As I have already said to you, the Interahamwe was created by our
leaders at national level, where they were controlled by the executive
committee.  It is in the office of the executive committee that the
Interahamwe were given instructions.  There was somebody there, posted
there at the national party office, to ensure that the Interahamwe
activities were coordinated.
Q.    Who was posted at the -- at that office to ensure coordination of
Interahamwe activities?
A.    It was Jean-Pierre Turatsinze.
Q.    And what was his job, please?
A.    He was responsible for running the office because he was paid by the
national bureau of the party.  He was to receive -- receive all issues -
- questions put forth by the Interahamwe and transmit those questions
or issues to the -- the secretary-general and get instructions from the
MRND secretary-general, so that he was based at the national office of
the party.
Q.    Prior to 1993, the national congress then, is it right that
Ngirumpatse was the secretary-general?
A.    Since '92, that is, until the elections, Mathieu Ngirumpatse was
national secretary of the party.
Q.    So who was Turatsinze's boss?
A.    He was to report to the general secretariat of the MRND party.  In
other words, he was under the orders of Mathieu Ngirumpatse.  And when
Mathieu Ngirumpatse left that post, it was Joseph Nzirorera who was his
boss.  It was the latter that kicked him out, in other words, released
him of his functions -- or, relieved him of his functions at the time.
Q.    I'm sorry.  I don't quite understand the last part of your answer.
Who was kicked out by whom and why?  What are you referring to?
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Mr. President.  I'm going to object for lack of foundation.
This is -- this man is -- was not a member of any of these Interahamwe
committee, executive bureau.  He's simply reporting hearsay that's
probably twice or third removed or may be something he read in the
newspapers.  I think there's a lack of foundation here.
MR. MORLEY:
There is probably an argument that there is a lack of foundation on
Mr. Robinson's part for almost everything that's being offered by the
Prosecution.  It's a matter for Your Honour.  Your Honour already knows
that this witness had a relation in the Interahamwe, and he was quite
involved in the MRND, and he was knowledgeable about its mechanisms.
On the face of it, he's perfectly positioned to talk about how one of
the organs of the MRND was being run.
MR. ROBINSON:
Mr. President, if I could just respond briefly.
Whenever evidence is offered, you have to make a determination under
Rule 89(C) whether that meets a -- some threshold of reliability.  In
order to do that, you have to know the source of information.  Now,
okay.  He's been talking in general terms about the structure of the
MRND, which we can assume he knows from his own experience, and the
préfectural committee and other organs in which he served lower than
the national organ.  But now we're talking about specific information
about Mr. Nzirorera's acts and which this witness was clearly not privy
to.  So I think the Prosecutor is obligated to lay a foundation to know
what is the source of his information so you can determine whether or
not it's reliable enough to be admitted and, if it is, what weight to
give to it.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robinson, I think your objection came at the wrong time because, as
far as I recollect, this particular question was for clarification of
information which the witness himself had volunteered.
MR. ROBINSON:
That being the case, I'd move to strike his previous answer, then, and -
- and to --
MR. PRESIDENT:
No, but -- but he volunteered it.
MR. ROBINSON:
But, nonetheless, it may not be admissible.  Just because it's
volunteered doesn't mean it's admissible.  I can move to strike
something that's volunteered into the record.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.  Well, we don't -- we don't -- I don't accept that at this stage
because we don't think that his answers up to now have violated --
violated Rule 89.
MR. ROBINSON:
I -- I understand that, Mr. President.  I'm not saying they violated
Rule 89.  I'm saying under Rule 89 you have to make a threshold
determination of what's admissible.  And you can't do that unless you
have a foundation for how he knows this information, whether it's --
someone told him, he read it in the newspaper, he heard it on the
radio.  When you have that information, then you can decide whether
it's admissible and how much weight to give to it, if it is.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, you will have an opportunity to cross-examine on those issues --
on those issues.  We don't think that at this stage the information he
has given raises that question in our mind.  It seems that he is giving
information that he has that he knows about.  He gave a particular
answer, and he was asked to clarify it.  We -- we are not of the same
opinion about his testimony at this stage as you are advocating.
MR. ROBINSON:
Okay.  I accept that, Mr. President, but I just want to make it clear
that I object to the admissibility of the evidence.  I think my cross-
examination later could indeed clarify, but I think you have to make a
determination of admissibility when the evidence is received.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.  Well, we have made the determination of admissibility at this
stage.
You may continue, Mr. -- Mr. Morley.
(Pages 25 to 31 by Ann Burum)
H
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Witness, I was interested in the last part of your last answer.  You
mentioned that someone had been fired.  Who were you talking about?  By
whom were they fired, and why, please?
A.    Mr. President, with your authorisation, before I answer the question
put to me, I should like to react to what Mr. Robinson said because I
see that he is trying to prove that I was not an MRND member.  If I
may, therefore, I should like to tell him about my office in the MRND.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, you are not permitted to enter into dialogue with counsel,
but I will allow you to tell the Chamber what you wish to say.
MR. MORLEY:
Before the witness does that --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, you have been given permission to make the statement you
wish to make, but it should be addressed to the Bench.  Do you
understand me?
THE WITNESS:
I am most grateful, Mr. President.  I should like to explain that I was
a member of the MRND party.
MR. MORLEY:
My only worry is that if the witness helpfully tells Your Honour this
person's role and involvement in the MRND, we're in open session, he's
going to identify himself.  That's my only concern at this stage.  I
invite the witness to be able to say what he wants to say, but should
it be in closed session?
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Morley, we will allow you to manage your examination.  If you are
going to go into closed session, it should be just before the end of
the day's session.  We intend to adjourn at approximately 5:30, and you
can assess how much time you need to address this issue.  So if you can
defer your examination on this issue until then.
MR. MORLEY:
Your Honour, yes.  With Your Honour's leave, then, perhaps if the
witness might be told that he will get an opportunity to explain to the
Bench what it was -- what it is that he presently wants to say, but in
order to protect his identity --
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    You will be speaking in closed session.  Do you understand what I've
said?
A.    Yes, I have understood that, sir.
Q.    So, mindful of the fact that in about 40 minutes you'll get an
opportunity to say what you wish to say, can I take you back to the
question which I was trying to ask you a moment ago?  You gave an
answer, where you referred to someone being fired.  Can you help us
with who was fired, by whom, and why, please?
A.    Turatsinze, Jean Pierre, an employee in the party office, after
Mathieu Ngirumpatse was appointed president of the party.  So the new
secretary was Nzirorera, and that's when he sacked Turatsinze.  As to
why he was sacked, Nzirorera knows it.  I know that after that sacking,
Turatsinze had to flee because he was in conflict with the party
leaders at that time, in particular, the secretary of the MRND party.
Q.    Do you have any idea what has happened to Turatsinze?
A.    After having left his position at the MRND party office, we heard
that he had fled.  He was no longer in the country.
Q.    Why would he have to flee?  Why not just go home and have a cup of
tea?
MR. ROBINSON:
Objection, Your Honour.  Speculation.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Despite the nature of the question, we will allow it.
MR. MORLEY:
Thank you.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Mr. Witness, you talk about Turatsinze fleeing, fleeing the country.
What is your understanding of why he would have to flee, rather than
simply go home and not be involved in politics any more?
A.    In my opinion, he would not have peace of mind.  The MRND party had
just shown him they no longer needed his services.  He was someone who
was highly familiar with all levels of the party, and when he saw that
his safety was threatened, he fled.  So, in respect of that question, I
know well that he had the right to flee because his safety was under
threat.  I knew that man very well.  He was from Kigali-rural
préfecture.  It's someone who we knew very well.
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Mr. President, now that we have that answer, I would move to
strike it because the witness himself had stated that it's based on his
opinion.  This is not an expert witness who should be giving an opinion
about things he doesn't have knowledge of, and I would object to him
giving opinion evidence and to the lack of foundation for any factual
basis for the answer.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robinson, although the words "in my opinion" were used, we don't
think this is opinion evidence.  We allow the answer.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Mr. Witness, it may be that I'm asking the obvious, but we need you
to state it.  When you say he was in fear of his safety, what do you
mean by that?  What was he in fear -- from all that you understand was
taking place in Rwanda at that time, what was he in fear would happen
to him?
A.    As I explained, he fled because***********************************.
So, according to circumstance, the circumstances under which he fled,
he said that he did not feel safe.  So when I have the occasion to
speak to you of this, to explain this, I'll be able to explain in
detail in the closed session.  But it is not something that I say out
of speculation.  I full well know that he fled because of the lack of
safety that he was threatened with.
Q.    When you say he feared for his safety, he felt a lack of safety, and
you also talk about his family, from all that you know was taking place
in Rwanda and within the MRND, can you please spell it out:  What is it
he feared?  What do you mean by "feared for his safety"?
A.    He feared for his life.  He feared to be killed because at that time,
if you weren't a member of the party, that you might divulge secrets.
You could be killed.  So he felt that, as he wasn't in the employment
of the MRND any more, he was running a serious risk of being killed.
Q.    Now, turning back to what Turatsinze's job was before he was fired by
Nzirorera, how did it work?  His boss was Ngirumpatse, you've told us.
What was his function?  What was his job in relation to the
Interahamwe?
A.    He was Ngirumpatse's messenger.  He was the messenger of the
secretary-general between he and the Interahamwe.  So information that
had to be communicated to the Interahamwe, it would be Turatsinze that
would do it.  If you wanted to send a message to Mr. Ngirumpatse, you --
you went through Turatsinze, and he was the intermediary between the
secretary-general and the Interahamwe.  And he was also a member of the
Interahamwe committee at préfectoral level and he was the secretary-
general's envoy at national level.
Q.    You've told us that the Interahamwe was originally formed as a
counter-measure to the existence of youth movements in other parties.
Did the Interahamwe remain that type of organisation, or did it change
into something else, and if so, what?
A.    At the outset -- at the inception of the Interahamwe, they were
introduced to us as you have just described, but with the passage of
time, the Interahamwe transformed themselves into a -- sort of an army,
a sort of party militia, and the practice extended down to préfectoral
level, and that is why I say it was like an armed branch of the MRND
party.
Q.    Having transformed into an armed branch of the MRND party, did the
Interahamwe always -- I'll start that question again.
Having transformed into an armed branch of the MRND, were the opponents
of the Interahamwe always simply other youth movements in other
parties, or did the Interahamwe find a new body of opponents, and if
so, who were they?
A.    In fact, the Interahamwe had as opponents the opponents -- political
opponents of the MRND party.
Q.    In 1994 who were the opponents of the Interahamwe?
A.    I can even speak of before 1994.  There were political parties
opposed to MRND.  Add to that the RPF, who were at war with the MRND
government.  So those parties that wanted to overthrow the MRND, but
more particularly the Interahamwe, attacked the Tutsi who were members
of the existing political parties in the country, or the Tutsi who were
members of the parties outside the country.
Q.    Thank you.  Now, by 1994, why would the Interahamwe attack the Tutsi?
A.    Because the MRND noted that the Tutsi wanted to overthrow MRND
government -- the Hutu government because those who were at war with
the country, the RPF-Inkotanyi, were led by Tutsi.  That is what was
said.  And as the MRND did not want to lose power, it was decided to
fight whoever opposed the MRND, and along the same lines, any party
that collaborated with RPF was fought.  So slogans were uttered such
as, "We will fight you and we will win."
Q.    After the death of President Habyarimana on the 6th April 1994, what
happened to the Tutsi in Rwanda?
A.    After the death of Habyarimana in 1994, the Tutsi were killed, their
houses were destroyed, and their goods were looted, and their girls
were raped.
Q.    And when you describe the events befalling the Tutsi, are you
describing simply the men or the entire group, including children,
elderly, civilians and otherwise?
A.    Tutsi, in general terms, whether they be men, women, aged, children,
all were killed.  And their houses, the houses of all the Tutsi -- of
the Tutsi as a whole, were destroyed.
Q.    Was there a genocide of the Tutsi after the death of the president,
please?
MR. ROBINSON:
Objection, Mr. President.  This calls for a legal conclusion.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Morley.
MR. MORLEY:
I know.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Were you just trying to see if we were awake?
MR. MORLEY:
I was trying to see if Mr. Robinson is awake.  I thought I'd get that
reaction, but from time to time I do try.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Who was it that was responsible for the bulk of the killing of the
Tutsi, please?
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Your Honour.  Again -- I think now we're once again getting
into using this witness as an expert.  He can certainly give his own
opinion on what he saw, but to turn him into -- ask such a general
question, I believe, is not correct.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, we agree.
Mr. Morley, you can approach it in a different way.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    What was the role of the Interahamwe in the killing of the Tutsi
after the death of the president?
A.    No, I didn't say it was only after the death of the president.  The
Interahamwe killed Tutsi to the full knowledge -- in the presence of
the officials, but they did not intervene, and then after the death of
the president, in concert with the military, the Interahamwe started
killing -- started, in concert with the military, to kill the Tutsi.
Q.    Dealing with events after the death of the president -- I'm going to
go through events previous to that later.  I'm concentrating now on
after the death of the president.  What was the role of the Interahamwe
in what happened to the Tutsi?
A.    The Interahamwe led the attack, and in cooperation with other
parties, they started to kill the Tutsi, and that was in public.  It
wasn't anything done in private.
Q.    When the Interahamwe were killing the Tutsi in public, who was in
charge of them?
MR. ROBINSON:
Objection, Mr. President.  Again, this calls for either speculation or
opinion without any foundation as to how this witness knew that.
MR. PRESIDENT:
This question could be addressed in terms of time frames.
MR. MORLEY:
I'm aware of that.  I can turn it the other way around, but it won't
help Mr. Robinson.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    After the 6th of April of 1994, who was in charge of the Interahamwe?
MR. ROBINSON:
Yes, he's right, it doesn't help me.  I still think that there has to
be some foundation.  He's simply giving an opinion or speculating.
This person is not in a position to have observed orders or chain of
command after the 6th of April, so he's just giving speculation without
foundation.  If Mr. Morley can find out how he would know such a thing,
maybe that would be useful to the Trial Chamber; otherwise, it's not
admissible.
MR. MORLEY:
May I make an observation?  My learned friend has frequently made
enquiries about foundation.  One of the interesting features to those
enquiries is that he frequently observes that evidence should not come
out until foundation is laid for the evidence.  Until we know what the
evidence is, it's rather difficult to establish foundation for why the
witness knows it.  So, really, the way around this sort of exercise --
if it's one that meets with Your Honour's approval, the way around this
sort of exercise -- should be conducted, is we find out what the
witness knows and then we ask him why he knows it.  But I can't ask him
why he knows something I haven't asked him about.
JUDGE SHORT:
But Mr. Morley, when we started during the closed session, did you get
the witness to tell us what his position in the MRND was?
I said, during the closed session at the beginning of the witness's
testimony, was evidence led as to his position within the MRND, to
enable him to give the information he is giving at the moment?
MR. MORLEY:
As I've not doubt Your Honour recalls, yes, it was.  He described what
meetings he attended and at what level.
JUDGE SHORT:
Why are you not responding accordingly?
MR. MORLEY:
I don't understand what Your Honour means by why I'm not responding
accordingly.
JUDGE SHORT:
Don't you think that is a sufficient basis for responding to the
objection being raised by Mr. Robinson?
MR. MORLEY:
Your Honour, yes.  But I'm also interested in the way that the
arguments about foundation tend to put the cart before the horse, just
as a general observation.
MR. ROBINSON:
Excuse me, Judge Short, if I could also respond to your question.  From
the information that we have, this witness was a member of a committee
at the préfectoral level.  So it would be like asking some member of
the house of representatives in the United States what was being
discussed between George Bush and Donald Rumsfeld about why they should
invade Iraq.  That's the level at which he was responsible, and that is
the enquiry as to the level at which those decisions or that
information was being made.  And my position is that based on what's
being elicited, there's no foundation for him to give that information
as to who was giving orders to who at the national level.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Robinson, I think we've already made an order deferring the
discussion of foundation until we go into closed session.  So the real
question really is -- we are not a jury, and I would think that these
questions could be asked now.  I see the time.  It's almost quarter
past five, and we'll be addressing these issues in closed session in
just a few minutes.  So I'll be disposed to allow the Prosecutor to
continue and then we'll address it more fully in a few minutes' time.
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    Mr. Witness, coming back to what I was asking you about, after the
th of April, death of the president -- well, I'll turn it the other
way around.  Before the death of the president, who was in charge of
the Interahamwe?
A.    The Interahamwe were affiliated to the MRND, so that means that even
if Kabuga was the president, it was the president of the MRND who was
responsible, of course, in accordance with the bureau, the executive
bureau.  The Interahamwe's instructions came from the general
secretariat bureau.
Q.    Now, when you talk about the general secretariat bureau, is that the
same as the executive bureau, just so that we get our terms right?
A.    Yes, the national bureau, the executive bureau.  That was with
Mathieu Ngirumpatse at its head and Nzirorera being the general
secretary.  Until 1994, those were their positions at the national
level.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, Mr. Morley, we think it's time to go into closed session.
MR. MORLEY:
Can I ask one last question before we do?
BY MR. MORLEY:
Q.    So that was the position before the death of the president.  Who was
in charge of the Interahamwe after the death of the president?
A.    The instructions given to the Interahamwe came from the secretariat
of the MRND.  As I said, it was the general secretariat that was
responsible for the MRND.
Q.    And just to be clear about this -- you keep changing terms – “general
secretariat” is the same as the “executive bureau”; is that right?
A.    Yes, that is the same entity.
MR. MORLEY:
Thank you, Your Honour.  If that's a convenient moment, we can deal
with closed session matters.
MR. PRESIDENT:
For the benefit of the waiting public, many of the witnesses in this
trial have the benefit of protection orders, and the main import of
these orders is for the imposition of arrangements to prevent their
identity from becoming public knowledge.  Now, we have been informed by
the Prosecutor that the line of questioning which will -- which he's
about to embark upon is likely to reveal the identity of this witness,
and we have to go into closed session.  It should not take more than 15
minutes, but that will bring us up to the end of play for the day.  But
we have to ask you to leave now.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 44] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the session
was heard in camera)
(Pages 32 to 38 by Karen Holm)
MR. PRESIDENT:
It had to do with the appeal judgement, or whatever it really is.  The
witness had given information that it's with his family.  We wondered
whether the Prosecution would be in a position to obtain that document.
MR. MORLEY:
I don't know, Your Honour.  I don't know how quickly it can be
obtained.  We'll put in motion an enquiry.  We can't speak to the
witness at the moment to find out where his family lives because he's
giving his evidence, but --
MR. PRESIDENT:
Would I enquire of the witness whether he could direct WVSS how to make
a request for the document?
MR. MORLEY:
Very well.  Once we get the address, we can send somebody round to the
house.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Is that the question I should put to him?
MR. MORLEY:
I suspect so.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, the Court is interested in facilitating the production of
the appeal decision, and we are wondering what information you could
provide that would facilitate obtaining that document.
Yes, I've just remembered, maybe we should go back into closed session
because -- I think we should go back into closed session before he
answers the plain question.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 47] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the session
was heard in camera)
(Page 45 by Karen Holm)
MR. WEBSTER:
Yes.  Your Honours, I believe there's still a pending motion from
Nzirorera concerning inspection or disclosure of a statement made by
Juvénal Uwilingiyimana.  I don't think that the Chamber has decided
that motion yet, and in our response we offered to provide the Court,
and directly to the Trial Chamber, a copy of that statement for its
inspection if it wanted to review it to make a decision as to whether
it contained Rule 68 material, which is what Nzirorera is alleging.
So I have with me in the courtroom today the French original of that
statement and the English translation, and I can hand it up directly to
the Trial Chamber if the Court is interested in seeing it or receiving
it.  So I just wanted to put that on the record and make it available
to you if you cared to take possession of it.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Webster -- Mr. Webster, that's a matter which is currently
receiving our attention.  We have not as yet concluded that we wish to
see the document, but I think that by tomorrow we will be ready, either
to take a decision or to react to the kind offer you have just made.
MR. WEBSTER:
All right.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.
MS. DIAGNE-MBAYE:
On that point, Mr. President, I should like to know if the Prosecutor
could inform us as to whether he has no video or audio recordings of
the same, and if he would similarly be prepared to put those at the
disposal of the Defence.
MR. WEBSTER:
The offer was not made to the Defence, simply to correct the record;
the offer was made to hand the material up to the Court.  As far as I
know, there is only a written statement.  I'm not aware that there is
any audiotape or videotape.  So I hope that satisfies Ms. Diagne's
enquiry, but the offer was made to the Court in camera, not to the
parties.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much for today.  We take the adjournment now until 9:15
tomorrow.
(Court adjourned at 1747H)
(Page 48 by Karen Holm)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Wendy Molnar, Jennifer Spring, Ann Burum and Karen Holm, Official
Court Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, do
hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-entitled
cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was taken in
shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer; that the
foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of said
proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________ Wendy Molnar
___________________________ Jennifer Spring
___________________________ Ann Burum
___________________________ Karen Holm
