P R O C E E D I N G S
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is in session.  Good morning ladies and gentlemen.
We have witness CBI this morning.
Good morning, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Prosecutor will continue to lead you in evidence.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Just a moment, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Maître Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Yes, Madam President.  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
I wish to respectfully pray your Tribunal to give the witness leave to
say a word because he wishes to do so.  Thank you, Madam President.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Or rather, Madam President, it is the Accused who wishes to make a
statement.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel Monthé, can you tell us what is the reason for the statement
by the Accused?
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.  I believe that the Accused has a prepared
short letter that he would like to read to your august Trial Chamber,
and besides, he has just advised me that I can read out the letter in
his place if the Trial Chamber so allows it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, we are going to listen to you, but this is not the usual
practice, as you are aware.  Last time around we allowed Maître Pognon
to read a letter by the Accused.  Today, once again, we do not usually
receive such applications here.
I can see the Prosecutor, who is standing.  Is there a problem, Madam
Prosecutor?
MS. ALEXIS:
I merely wish to make the point that this is an exceptionally odd
procedure at which in various points in the trial procedure the
Accused wishes to make statements to the Court.  We had no real
objections at the beginning of the trial when the Accused had a
prepared statement.  At this juncture, please, Madam President, we do
not know what is the nature, nor the contents of the statement, and we
find it exceptionally unorthodox.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.  It is a letter that has been written by
Father Athanase Seromba at Arusha, 4th October 2004.
"Madam President of Trial Chamber III of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, Arusha.
"Madam President, after the submissions of the three initial witnesses
of the Prosecutor, I realise the need for the Defence to be availed of
all the material in order for the cross-examination of the Prosecution
witnesses to be carried out effectively, but so far we have only
received a few of those documents, and most of these documents are
written in Kinyarwanda and they have never been translated.  It's been
over seven years that the Prosecutor has been dealing with the file of
the Nyange massacres, and they were informed of the case files in
Rwanda for this same case.  My colleagues were acquitted in Rwanda.
Almost all the Prosecution witnesses were involved in the appeal case,
some as Accused and others as witnesses.  The Prosecutor has only
brought material concerning the condemnation of the two priests that
were -- which was done by the Kibuye court, and we would like to have
the Ruhengeri case file which acquitted them.  There are other
individuals whose case files in Gacaca having been disclosed to us,
and this is concerning CBU and CBL first in Kinyarwanda and the French
translations thereof.
"On the 1st of September, in the afternoon, the Prosecutor gave us
another document in Kinyarwanda which cannot be used as it was.
"For the reasons above, the Prosecutor should avail us of all the
extra materials that they have with them and that can prove my
innocence, and this by virtue of Rule 20.  Under these circumstances
it would be difficult for my Defence counsel to prepare my defence.  I
am concerned that the Trial Chamber is really concerned with hearing
the Prosecution witnesses as much as possible, whereas the Prosecution
has not given me all documents that will be necessary for the Defence
to do the cross-examination, and this situation is insurmountable,
especially during the hearing days."
I'm sorry.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Do you have a copy of the letter for the interpretation, because that
will make things easier?
MR. MONTHÉ:
No, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So take note of this and go a little slowly.
MR. MONTHÉ:
"This situation causes material prejudice to me in the hearings
because these Prosecution witnesses are the same who, in 1998 and
, before the police as before Rwandan judges, were heard in the
same case in which I was charged with the same crimes in the Nyange
massacres.
"My steadfast conviction is that if I hadn't been exiled, I would have
been acquitted like my other colleagues, but I have come and handed
myself over to the ICTR Tribunal because my name has been soiled and I
wanted to clear it, and that is why I am appealing to you to stay my
proceedings so that the Prosecution can avail myself and my Defence
counsel of all the documents in French and English as well as the case
files of the detained persons.
"While hoping for your understanding, I would like to convey to you or
to extend to you my sincere esteem.
"Thank you, Madam President, Athanase Seromba."
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you, too.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, can the registry have this?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Can the letter be handed to the Bench?  Can the Court assistant take
the document from Maître Monthé.  Thank you.
Very good, so we have received that letter from Father Seromba, which
kind of has the same complaints as the initial application and after
which we provided an answer and we asked Mr. Gogo to meet with the
parties in answer to settle this problem with disclosure, because it's
very important that the Defence should have all documents that are
necessary for the preparation of the
cross-examination of witnesses.  We are not trying to go fast without
having regard to the needs of the Defence.  Quite on the contrary, we
have asked the Prosecution to spare no effort at providing to the
Defence the documents.  We would like to reiterate that order, and it
is absolutely necessary for the prosecution to disclose all those
documents to the Defence because the Defence needs them, and the
Prosecution should do all to ensure that those documents are at the
disposal of the Defence in the earliest time possible because we are
compelled to listen to the witnesses who have been here for several
weeks and that is why we held a meeting with all the parties to see if
we could commence the trial, and we were given all the assurances from
both sides, and today the witnesses are here and we are trying to do
our possible best, and it is necessary absolutely for the parties to
be convinced that the Chamber is seeing to the interests of both
parties, and that it is out of the question here to undermine the
interests of the Defence; quite on the contrary.  And on account of
the above, we will direct the parties to meet today with Mr. Gogo
because apparently the Defence counsel were not available on Friday,
which is why that meeting didn't take place, and that the Prosecutor
should do all possible to provide them with those documents, because
if these documents are brought up later, whereas the witnesses are not
here to respond to the counsel for the Defence, it will go without
saying that this will raise a problem insofar as the probative value
of the statements that would have been received here are concerned.
I thank you therefore, and I hope that all will be done to solve these
problems definitively and in the earliest time possible.
Right now we are going to proceed with the examination-in-chief of the
witness.
Yes, Counsel Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
Yes, Madam President, I am presenting to the Tribunal the batch of
documents, the documents that have been received and that are all in
Kinyarwanda.  They obviously have things on which we could always
question the witness, and since the translation has not been done, it
is certain that the
cross-examination that we will be leading cannot continue if we don't
have those documents, and I think this is a problem which is the
application that the Accused has just made.  The problem is should we,
simply because of the presence of the Prosecution witness, continue to
work under these conditions whilst the Defence is not in a good
position insofar as the documents are concerned?  And as has been
said, these are documents which are supposed to have been disclosed to
us and which have the material necessary to secure the Defence line of
questioning.  Probably we are going to continue with the examination-
in-chief of Witness CBI because he's here, but I do not think that if
we do not receive the translations of all these documents, we could
really accept to continue with the proceedings.  I think the
Prosecutor should be given enough time for them to give us the
documents, because we need to work and want to work seriously, and
that is where the problem is,
Madam President, so we are saying that with your leave and very
respectfully, probably CBI is here, we may proceed with him, we may do
what we will be able to do, but it will be difficult for us to
continue so long as we don't have the translation of all the documents
and the rest of the documents that we are still waiting.
Thank you, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are going to insist once again with the language services that
those documents be translated as a matter of priority so that we can
continue with the hearing of the forthcoming witnesses.  The witnesses
that have been scheduled are four in number, and these are the ones
who, for the Defence, did not pose any problem and which is why we
have accepted to -- we all accepted to hear them.  We will try to
ensure that these documents are translated very fast, but I think it
is mostly the other witnesses who will be coming here that we may have
a problem, so we will try to take stock and now we will continue with
Witness CBI, and I think this is following the arguments of both
parties.
Madam Prosecutor, right now you are going to proceed with the
examination of Witness CBI.
MS. ALEXIS:
I'm obliged, Madam President.
WITNESS CBI
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF (continued)
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness CBI, good morning.
A.   Good morning, Counsel for the Prosecution.
Q.   Last week, Friday, Witness, you gave us an account in which you told
us that someone named Miriam spoke to Father Seromba and that Father
Seromba sent her away.  I want to get back to that issue, Witness.
When you said Father Seromba sent her away, can you tell us, Witness,
exactly what, if anything, did Father Seromba say or do?
A.   What he did was that he had come to obtain the chalice and other
things.  When she came, Father Seromba told her, "Go away," turned her
back, so he came to get a chalice.
Q.   Very well, Witness.  On that day when you said that Miriam spoke to
Father Seromba, did you speak to Father Seromba on that day?
A.   No, I did not speak to him.  On that day there was Miriam.  As for
myself, it was on the same day, but at another time, as far as I am
concerned.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, where did this conversation between you and
Father Seromba take place?
A.   We were in the courtyard.  I mean the church courtyard.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, what did you say to Father Seromba?
A.   When I spoke to him, as a matter of fact, he asked me whether there
were other people who had remained in the secteur.  I gave him their
names.
Q.   Can you recall any of these names that you gave Father Seromba?
A.   Yes.  I spoke of Antoine Kerake's family, that of Aloys Rwemera;
Désirie Marc Ryanyundo, Vaneste.  Those are the names I remember for
now.  There were others.
Q.   When you gave Father Seromba this information, can you tell us
whether you saw him do anything with it?
A.   He took note of those names.
Q.   And having note of those names, what, if anything, did Father Seromba
do with that note?
A.   He wrote those names on a list and handed the list to the former
bourgmestre of the commune, Grégoire Ndahimana.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, the names that you gave to Father Seromba,
what was the ethnicity of those persons?
A.   Those persons were of the Tutsi ethnic group.
Q.   And, Witness, why did you give -- what were your reasons for giving
this information to Father Seromba?
A.   First of all, when we got to the church, we knew that, customarily,
people who found refuge in the church were saved, so when I gave him
the names of those persons, I was thinking of that.
Q.   When this conversation between you and Father Seromba took place, can
you, Witness, if you can, using the dimensions of this Court, if
possible, can you point to the approximate distance between you and
Father Seromba?
A.   I was standing here and he was in front of me here.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The witness pointed to the position in front of him.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel for the Prosecution.
MS. ALEXIS:
Yes, Madam President.  I have been given a list of the courtroom
measurements of this Court, and it appears to me, if counsel on the
other side agree, that it is 2.30 metres, since the witness pointed to
the table where the registry sits, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, counsel for the Prosecution, please proceed.
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, you spoke of giving Father Seromba one of the names as
Kerake, Antoine.  My question now is this: after you gave Father
Seromba that name, did you thereafter see Kerake, Antoine?
A.   Yes, I saw him.  He found me in the church, and he had come on board
a vehicle accompanied by members of his family.
Q.   After April 1994, did you ever see Antoine Kerake alive again?
A.   No.  Up till date, I never saw him again.
Q.   On the day that you arrived at the church, Witness, can you tell us
approximately how many refugees were already gathered there?
A.   When I got to the church, I would estimate the number of refugees I
found at 2,000, but the number kept rising until they got to about
,000, but these are only estimates I'm giving.
Q.   Witness, you told us that the incident with Miriam and Father Seromba
took place -- well, perhaps I should ask the question again.  Can you
tell us, what date did the incident between Father Seromba and Miriam
take place, if you can recall?
A.   That incident occurred on a Wednesday.
Q.   On that day, Witness, the Wednesday, did anything happen to the
refugees on that day?
A.   No, nothing happened.  There were a few attacks.  We succeeded in
repelling them.  Otherwise nothing happened to the refugees who were
there.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, these attacks, who were the attackers?
A.   They were people of the Hutu ethnic group.
Q.   And on this day, these attacks, can you tell us what was the
approximate number of attackers?
A.   The attackers were few in number, about 200, but the subsequent days,
more and more attackers came in larger numbers.
Q.   You said, Witness, that the refugees were able to successfully resist
the attack.  Can you tell us by what means?  How?  What did the
refugees use to resist this attack?
A.   The refugees used stones.  They were throwing stones at the
attackers.  Others were armed with spears and machetes.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, what weapons, if any, did the attackers
use?
A.   They used mostly spears and machetes, and that is all they had at the
time.
Q.   When the attackers were attacking the refugees, were they saying
anything?
A.   They were saying, “They are Inyenzi, they should be killed and
massacred.”  They were shouting at the top of their voices.
Q.   On the next day, Witness, that is the Thursday, were you still at
that church?
A.   I was there.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, whether any one of the refugees, any of the
refugees, received any food?
A.   I did not see any receiving food.
Q.   Did any of the refugees make any efforts or attempts to obtain food?
A.   They tried, but they received nothing.
Q.   Who amongst the refugees tried?
A.   Two women asked Father Seromba for food, and he told them that he had
no feed to give an Inyenzi and Inkotanyi.  Those were Christian women,
members of the Marial movement, or the Legion of Mary.
Q.   Witness, did you understand the word Inyenzi, and, if so, can you
give us the meaning?
A.   At that time, if we go by what people were saying, they used those
terms to refer to the Tutsis.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, similarly, did you know the word
Inkotanyi, and can you tell us if you knew the meaning of this word?
A.   I do not know the meaning of that word, apart from the fact that I
heard it used over the radio and people used that term.  Those are the
circumstances under which I heard that term used.
Q.   When this conversation took place between the two women and Father
Seromba, can you tell us how far away from Father Seromba were you?
A.   Regarding the distance between myself and him, I, of course, did not
measure the distance.  All I can say is that the distance is from here
where I'm sitting up to the end of that bench.
Q.   Witness, I'm ever so sorry, but I did not see which bench you were
pointing to.  Can you, for the benefit of the Court, stand up and
point again to the bench?
A.   It is from where I am sitting, or standing, up to the angle I can see
there, the angle of that desk in front of me.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, it appears to me that the witness is pointing to the
end of the desk where the registry sits.  If counsel on the other side
have no objections --
THE WITNESS:
Yes, it is indeed the end of that desk.
MS. ALEXIS:
If counsel on the other side have no objection, I would perhaps
estimate that that would be a distance between three and three and a
half metres.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
The Defence has no objection with regard to that distance.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
MS.  ALEXIS:
Madam President, I'm so sorry.  I was having problems with my
instrument at the time and I did not hear the response of my friend.
Was it an objection?  I missed it.
Madam President, I've been told that there was no objection.
MR. MONTHÉ:
We entirely agree with you, Madam Prosecutor.  We have no problem with
that distance.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  You may proceed, Counsel for the Prosecution.
MS. ALEXIS:
Thank you very much.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   On that day, Witness, the Thursday, can you tell us whether anything
happened to the refugees?
A.   No, except for those attacks.  The assailants continued coming and we
kept repelling them.
Q.   On that day, when there was some attacks, can you tell us whether the
attackers were more or less than the day before?
A.   On that day, there were more attackers than the day before.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, what, if any, weapons were used by the
attackers in the course of the attack on that day?
A.   They were using the same weapons, traditional weapons, spears,
machetes and others.  Those were the weapons they were carrying.
Q.   And you told us that the refugees were able to repel the attack.  Can
you tell us, Witness, with what did the refugees repel the attack?
A.   They used stones.  The refugees had no other weapons apart from
stones.
Q.   Witness, can you tell us, on the next day, the Friday, did anything
happen to the refugees?
A.   On the Friday, the situation was very serious.  There were about
,000 attackers who came to attack us.  The communal vehicle had been
sent to various secteurs to gather assailants.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, approximately what time --
approximately what time was this attack launched?
A.   It was between 11 a.m. and midday.  It was during that period that
the attack was launched.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, what was the approximate number of
persons attacking?  Were they more or less than the day before?
A.   Yes, the number was by far higher.  It was a large scale attack.
There were many assailants, a lot more than the previous day.
Q.   Were the attackers more or less than the refugees in number?
A.   No, of course, by far higher.  There was not even any resemblance
between the two groups.
Q.   Witness, were the attackers armed and, if so, what were they armed
with?
A.   I haven't quite understood your question, Madam Prosecutor.
Q.   Very well, Witness.  I will ask it in a different fashion.  Did the
attackers have any weapons, and, if they did, can you tell us what
those weapons were?
A.   They were carrying traditional weapons, but the leaders were armed
with guns.
Q.   Who did you see with guns on that day?
A.   Father Seromba was carrying a gun.  The bourgmestre of the commune at
the time, Ndahimana, was also carrying a gun, as well as Fulgence
Kayishema and communal police officers.  And the gendarmes who were
supposed to be providing for our safety were, of course, carrying
firearms as well.
Q.   When you saw Father Seromba with this gun, can you tell us what was
he doing with it?
A.   When people were being killed, whenever the refugees tried to go to
the back of the presbytery, he, from the first floor of his building,
opened fire on the people who were in the courtyard of the presbytery.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, whether you recognised any of the
persons who were being shot at by Father Seromba?
A.   Yes, I know them.  There was Antoine Kerake and Epimaque Ruratsire,
Aloys Ruimera Ryanyundo, so I saw Father Seromba shoot at all these
persons.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Could you please spell the names.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Yes, Madam President.  Kerake is K-E-R-A-K-E.  Ryanyundo is R-Y-A-N-Y-
U-N-D-O.  Ruratsire is
R-U-R-A-T-S-I-R-E.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  Prosecutor, you may proceed.
MS. ALEXIS:
Obliged, Madam President.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, you told us that this attack was launched between 10:00 and
:00 that day.  Can you tell us, Witness, how this battle proceeded --
this attack proceeded?
A.   The attack proceeded.  They continued killing people.  Some tried to
take refuge in the presbytery and the priest shot at them.  Outside,
the policemen were shooting at people while other assailants were
hitting them with machetes.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, what was the ethnicity of the attackers?
A.   They were of the Hutu ethnic group.
Q.   And do you know whether anyone gave the attackers their weapons?
A.   They were carrying traditional weapons, spears and machetes.  Those
were the weapons that I was able to see.
Q.   On that day, Witness, during this battle, were any of the refugees
killed?
A.   Refugees -- many refugees were killed.
Q.   And when they were killed, Witness, did you see their dead bodies?
Where were they?
A.   Their bodies were in the courtyard, and I saw others in the
courtyard, that is the presbytery courtyard, and it is the victims
that Father Seromba had killed.
Q.   During that attack on the Friday, Witness, you said that some of the
refugees went to other places in that church compound.  Can you tell
us, Witness, where did you go?
A.   When grenades were thrown at us, I climbed over the presbytery wall
and went to hide at the place --, or in the place where beans and wood
were stored.
Q.   And whilst you were there, where wood was stored, were you there
alone or were there other persons with you?
A.   I met someone, but afterwards many other people came.  It was raining
at the time, so people were seeking shelter.
Q.   And, Witness, can you tell us, if you recall, exactly where is this
place where they stored wood?  Where in the compound was this place?
A.   This place was inside the presbytery, but right now these kitchens
have been destroyed and others have been rebuilt in a different place
further down.
Q.   Whilst you were still hiding, did anyone find out that you were
there?  Did anyone discover you there?
A.   Two gendarmes found me there and they asked each one what their
occupation was.  We said that we didn't have any occupation.  The
gendarmes went away, and afterwards I left this place and went behind,
and at that point, I heard the explosion of grenades at the place that
he had just left.
Q.   And, Witness, can you tell us where, if anywhere, did you go
afterwards?
A.   I went to Gitarama, in Kabgaye, precisely, after walking all through
the night.
Q.   Witness, did you have any children at that time?
A.   I had only one child.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, what did you do with this child?
A.   I left this child at a place and I went to the church.  When I
returned I realised that the child had been killed.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, approximately when did you return to your
commune, and can you tell us without mentioning the name of your
commune?
A.   We left Kabgaye after the liberation of this place by the Inkotanyi.
We went to different places afterwards, and I returned to my commune
in the month of July.
Q.   And that, of course, Witness, would be July 1994?
A.   Quite so.  1994.
Q.   Whilst you were at Kabgaye, were you there alone or were there other
persons there with you?
A.   There were many people who had come from various parts of Rwanda.
Q.   And these persons who had come from various parts of Rwanda who had
been gathered at Kabgaye, what was their ethnicity?
A.   They were of the Tutsi ethnic group.
Q.   Whilst at Kabgaye, did anything happen to those refugees?
A.   There were many incidents.  People, beginning with young people, were
being killed, whilst some people were killed elsewhere, or everywhere
in Kabgaye, people were killed.
Q.   When you told us, Witness, that some of the refugees were killed, can
you tell us, what was the ethnicity, if you know, of the killers?
A.   They were Hutus.
Q.   Witness, did you know, and can you now recall, the names of any of
the attackers of the church?
A.   I remember there was the bourgmestre of the commune at the time,
Fulgence Kayishema, who was the judicial police inspector, and
Athanase Seromba.
(Pages 1 to 12 by Trevor Gerbes)
H
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, do you think or, perhaps I should say, could Father Seromba
have prevented the attack on the refugees at the church?
A.   He was able to prevent these attacks.
Q.   Did Father Seromba do anything whilst you were at that church to
protect the refugees from harm?
A.   I saw no such thing.
Q.   Whilst you were at that church, Witness, did you ever see any figures
of authority come to the church?
A.   Yes, authorities came to the church at the time.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, who were these authorities who came to
the church?
A.   These figures of authority included the bourgmestre of the commune,
that is Grégoire Ndahimana, Fulgence Kayishema, who was the judicial
police inspector, communal policemen, a certain Védaste Rurangabugabo
and a certain Rushema.
Q.   And when they came, can you tell us which -- which part of the
compound did they go to?
A.   When they came, they would go to Seromba's, that is, the upper storey
of his house.
Q.   And when they went to the upper storey of the house of Father
Seromba, where was Father Seromba?
A.   He was at home.
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, if you recall, approximately when did these
figures of authority come to the church compound and go to the house
of Father Seromba?
A.   They came on a Friday.
Q.   Witness, can you describe for the Court the physical attributes of
Father Seromba?
A.   He was a short man with a wide face, that is, the last time I saw
him.
Q.   Witness, would you be able to recognise Father Seromba if you were to
see him today?
A.   Yes, I can recognise him.
Q.   If you can do so, can you stand, Witness, and if Father Seromba is
indeed in this room, can you point to him?
A.   Yes, I can do it.
Q.   Can you do so, Witness?
A.   It is that man there who is in the middle of the two other men.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I believe that the identification has been done, and
might the record so reflect.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Let the record show that the witness has indicated the Accused in the
courtroom.
MS. ALEXIS:
I'm obliged, Madam President.  Madam President, I would now like the
witness to be shown certain photographs, and for that to be done,
Madam President, I would ask that the witness be permitted by the
Court to stand and walk to the overhead projector.  Can the registry
make the appropriate adjustments?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Registry, will you please draw the curtains so that the witness can go
to the overhead projector.
Witness, you may now rise and approach the overhead projector.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, can the witness be shown what was admitted into
evidence as Prosecution Exhibit 3-21?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, registry, please show the photograph to the witness.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Could the witness be directed to speak into the microphone.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, can you clearly see that photograph?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And, Witness, can you tell us what is depicted there?
A.   I see what the photograph represents.  I see the tower and the
church.
Q.   And what church might that be?
A.   That is Nyange church.
MS. ALEXIS:
Might the witness now be shown what was admitted into evidence as
Prosecution Exhibit 2-09.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, are you able, clearly, to see that photograph?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, what is depicted there?
A.   This photograph depicts a storey building, and this is Seromba's
house.
Q.   You spoke, Witness, in your evidence of seeing Father Seromba
shooting at refugees, and you told us that at the time he was in his
house.  If you can see the area in that photograph, can you point it
out to us where you said you saw Father Seromba standing when he was
shooting at refugees?
A.   He was here, and he was shooting at people who were below.
Q.   As well, Witness, you spoke of figures of authority going to the
house of Father Seromba.  Can you tell us, Witness, if you recall,
which part of that house did the figures of authority go into?
A.   He was standing at this place that I have already indicated, and that
is where he was.
Q.   I have asked you, Witness, about the figures of authority, and I mean
the persons you spoke of such as Kayishema and Rushema.  When they
came to the church compound, you said they were at the house of Father
Seromba.  Can you tell us, can you indicate to us where in the house
of Father Seromba did these figures of authority go?
A.   This top storey.  They were at -- on the -- at the top storey
watching what was going on in the rear courtyard of the presbytery.
MS. ALEXIS:
And can the witness now be shown Prosecution Exhibit 3-04?
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, can you clearly see that photograph?
A.   Yes.
Q.   And can you tell us, if you can, Witness, what is depicted on that
photograph?
A.   This photograph depicts the rear courtyard of the presbytery.  There
is a chimney on this building.  In the – the building next to it is
the storey building.
Q.   You spoke in your evidence, Witness, of hiding in a room where there
were certain things stored.  Are you able, using this photograph, if
possible, to indicate to us where that room was?
A.   This building was destroyed.  Here there was an oven.  The kitchens
were a little off to the side.  They were visible, but they do not
appear on this photograph.  The building here on this photograph -- or
the buildings here on this photograph are still intact, whereas the
kitchens were destroyed.  There were also cow byres as well.
MS. ALEXIS:
Can the witness now be shown what was admitted as Prosecution Exhibit
-25?
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Can you tell us, Witness, can you see clearly that photograph?
A.   The place depicted on this photograph is higher than the place where
the church was destroyed.
MS. ALEXIS:
Can the witness finally be shown what was admitted as Prosecution
Exhibit 2-30?
THE WITNESS:
This photograph shows the inside of the church.  There are benches
where people sat.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   And which church would that be, Witness?
A.   This is Nyange church whose parish priest was Father Seromba at the
time.
Q.   Yes.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President.  Madam President, these are all my questions for this
witness on the photographs.  Might the witness be permitted to return
to his seat.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Good.  The witness has gone back to his seat, so the curtains can be
drawn.
Do you still have questions you want to put to the witness?
MS. ALEXIS:
(Microphone not activated)...Madam President.  This marks the end of
my examination-in-chief.  I thank the Court.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  Thank you, Madam Prosecutor.  The floor goes to the
Defence for the cross-examination of the witness.
Counsel Monthé, the floor is yours.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
CROSS-EXAMINATION
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Good morning, Witness CBI.
A.   Good morning, Counsel.
Q.   As you must have noticed, I am also going to be asking you questions
for the Defence in order to have to ascertain the truth.  If you do
not understand my questions, please kindly tell me so that I can ask
them again.
A.   Agreed, Counsel.
Q.   Mr. Witness, can you tell us if you have had the opportunity of being
heard by the investigators of the Prosecution; if so, how many times?
A.   I do not quite understand your question, Counsel.
Q.   I would like you to tell the Chamber here, that is before coming here
to Arusha, if you had been interviewed by investigators of the Office
of the Prosecutor.
A.   I met them once, only once.
Q.   Can you recall the date on which you met with them?
A.   No, I cannot remember that date.  I did not write it down.
Q.   But approximately when did you see them?  Is it three months ago, six
months ago, two years ago?  Roughly.
A.   About a month ago.  I think I saw them the very last time -- the last
-- about a month ago.
Q.   Now, did you make any statements that you signed when you met them?
A.   Yes, there are statements that I signed.
Q.   Can you remember the number of statements that you have had to sign?
A.   I met many investigators.  I've met many people who came to visit the
site, the location at the church.  All I can remember is that I also
met investigators of the Prosecutor and that I signed documents
representing my statement.
Q.   Very good.  Tell me, Witness, when did you meet Father Seromba for
the first time?
A.   It was on a Wednesday.
Q.   And which year, if you can kindly tell me that?
A.   Madam President, I don't think I quite understood the previous
question.  Can you kindly repeat that question, because I don't think
I understood it well.
Q.   Well, I will repeat the question, Mr. Witness.  In which year did you
get to know Father Seromba?
A.   I knew him in 1994 -- no, I think it was in the '90s, and I was able
to identify him, or I saw him in the Nyange church where he was
working as a priest.
Q.   Are you sure that you met him for the first time in 1990?
A.   Yes, I saw him.  I met him because I used to go to church.  I used to
attend mass, and when I went there, I saw him.
Q.   So in 1990 he was already a priest in Nyange?
A.   He wasn't a father.  He came there to see other priests -- or he
wasn't a priest.  He came there to see other priests, and that is when
I saw him come to Nyange.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, with your leave, I would like to call the court
assistant to come to the Defence bench so that I can give him a letter
of 1993.
Mr. Court Assistant, please.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I just wish to say that the interpretation I heard
was that Father Seromba came to the church in the 1990s.  I don't know
if that was the right interpretation and if that came over in the
French, but I did not hear 1990.  I heard in the 1990s.
MR. POGNON:
Objection, Madam President, objection.  Madam President, objection.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel Pognon.
MR. POGNON:
The witness has made statements.  We did not interrupt the Prosecutor,
and the Prosecutor cannot start testifying for a statement that the
witness has just made.  I think what the Prosecutor has just said
should be expunged from the record because she did not have the right.
She stood up to testify.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Apparently there is a problem, because we -- in French we heard in
, but in English apparently it was said in the 1990s, so we will
call on the interpreter, the Kinyarwanda interpreter to enlighten us
on this.  Was it in 1990 or in the '90s?
THE KINYARWANDA INTERPRETER:
Madam President, if I do recall, the first time around he talked about
the '90s, and later, when he was asked questions, follow-up questions,
he talked about 1990, so he used both, the '90s and 1990.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
You may carry on, Counsel Monthé.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.  Madam President, I have just disclosed to
you the copy of a letter that I think the Prosecutor should also have
before her, which is dated 93, and this letter comes from the
bishop of Nyundo at the time who was Bishop Wenceslas Kalibushi, and
this letter is addressed to Father Athanase Seromba of the major
seminary of Nyakibanda, BP 85 Butare.  So with your leave, Madam
President, I would like to read this letter.  Actually, at the time he
was Brother Seromba.
"Dear Deacon, your letter of 20 March 1993 by which you asked me to be
admitted into the presbytery reached me, and since you have prayed and
thought about this sufficiently and that you are guided by your
conscience director, supervisor, I congratulate you on that.  Besides,
since I have a favourable opinion of you from the leader of the major
seminary, I would like that -- I would like to tell you that you will
be sent –”
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Can the counsel be asked to slow down a little bit so that we can
interpret the entirety of his message?  Madam President, can counsel
be requested to read it, you know, following a normal pace of speaking
so that we can interpret it correctly?  Thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So, Counsel Monthé, can you read that letter a little more slowly for
the interpretation purposes.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, can the court assistants come and take a copy of this
and take it to the interpreters' booth?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Court Assistant, please comply.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Yes, we have the letter ready, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
So, Counsel Monthé, they have the letter now, so you can carry on.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
"On my part, be aware that I am praying for you so that you can be a
priest that will always be guided by strong faith and sustained by a
fervent and a faithful prayer and to your commitment of chastity and
obedience besides the recitation of the breviary, which is not
optional but obligatory.  While waiting for you to be a priest, remain
assured of my paternal affections."
Madam President, on the strength of this letter of the Catholic
hierarchy of the young deacon that was Father Seromba at the time, he
couldn't have been at Nyange in 1990.  He was sent to Nyange only in
after having been ordained priest.  So this, indeed, is the
situation.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Mr. Witness --
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, I think that this should be D. 10.  I would like that
this document should be entered as Defence exhibit under number D. 10,
if you will so allow it.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Court Registry Official --
Madam Prosecutor, do you have any objection to that?
MS. ALEXIS:
No, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
That letter of 93 from Bishop Wenceslas Kalibushi is admitted
as a Defence exhibit under the number D. 10.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
(Exhibit No. D. 10 admitted)
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Mr. Witness, can you tell the Chamber how often you went to the
Nyange parish per week?
A.   I didn't go there many times, but I can say four or five times.  I
didn't have the habit of going to the Nyange parish.  I went there
approximately four or five times.
Q.   Four or five times a week?
A.   No.  I am talking about a month, that is four or five times a month.
Q.   Did you know the priests who at that period were there, that is,
before the events that took place in the Nyange parish?
A.   Before the events, I knew the priests who were there.
Q.   Can you name them, please?
A.   I knew Father Seromba, Father Straton.  Those are the two that I knew
at the time.
Q.   Who was Father Straton?
A.   What do you mean?  What is your question, Counsel?  I don't quite
understand the meaning of your question.
Madam President, I did not understand the question that was asked me.
If it can be rephrased, I'll be glad.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Okay.  I asked the witness to talk to us about Father Straton.  I
think it will be easier that way.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I knew him, but before the war began, he left the place.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Please don't be in a hurry.  We'll get there.
When did you know Father Straton?  When did you get to know him?
A.   I saw him when he was a parish priest, but as for the year, I don't
know.  I'm not the one who ordained him as a priest to be able to know
the year.  I don't know the year, but I saw him there and I knew him.
Q.   According to you, did he come to Nyange before Father Seromba?
A.   Yes, he is the one who came before Father Seromba.
Q.   In your opinion, who was the line superior of the other in the
parish?
A.   At that time it was Father Straton.
Q.   What was the relationship between Father Straton and Father Seromba,
in your opinion?
A.   They were priests.  I was only a citizen.  I don't know anything
concerning the relationship between the two priests.
Q.   But you told us a while ago that Father Straton left.  Do you know
when he left and the circumstances under which he left?
A.   Yes, I heard about that, but I wasn't a witness to it.  I heard that
there was a misunderstanding, and before the outbreak of the war,
Father Straton went away.  That is what I heard, but I wasn't witness
to anything whatsoever.
Q.   But the misunderstanding that you heard about, it had to do with
which problem, in your opinion?
A.   Concerning the disagreements between the priests, please don't ask me
many questions on that.  They were priests in the church.  I have told
you that I heard about it.  It was being said that there were
disagreements between them and that the disagreement was due to their
ethnic differences.  That is what I heard people say.
Q.   According -- from what you hear, are these the disagreements which
led to the departure of Father Straton?
A.   Yes, that is how I learned of it and that is why he fled.
Q.   But what was he running away from?  Weren't you told?
A.   No.  Well, I've told you what I heard being said, but I was told that
there were disagreements between the two persons, and at a certain
point Father Straton fled.
Q.   To further enlighten the Tribunal, how can you explain the flight of
the parish priest merely because he disagreed with one of the priests?
A.   You see, there were disagreements, and he went away from the place.
Since this concerns the two priests who were living together and since
they didn't agree with each other, I think he chose to leave, but I
cannot explain, you know, what the case was.  I wasn't a priest, so I
didn't know much about it.
Q.   Is it Father Seromba who might have chased him away from the parish,
in your opinion?
A.   There I don't think I know anything about it.  I don't know if he's
the one who chased him away.  I heard about the conflicts between the
two persons, but I wasn't a witness to their disagreements.  I don't
know much about them.
Q.   In your opinion, of which ethnic group was Father Straton?
A.   He was a Tutsi.
Q.   How about Seromba, he was of which ethnic group?
A.   Father Seromba was of the Hutu ethnic group.
Q.   Very good.  Tell me, Witness, have you ever heard of Silas Gasake?
A.   No, I heard nothing of him.
Q.   Didn't you learn that after the departure of Father Straton, Father
Gasake replaced him?
A.   You see, these internal arrangements of the priests, I don't know how
things happened.  I don't know how priests replaced each other in that
church.  That is internal to the priests.
Q.   No, I'm talking to a parishioner like you who used to go to the
parish about four times a month, so obviously you used to see the
priests there?
A.   I used to see priests in the church.  I gave you the names of the
priests that I saw there.  They didn't used to celebrate mass on the
same day.
Q.   Mr. Witness, we don't seem to be understanding each other.  I'm not
talking -- I haven't mentioned mass so far.  I've asked you how many
priests were in the parish.  You said two, Father Straton and Father
Seromba.  Father Straton left, and I asked you, "Did you hear that he
was replaced by Father Gasake" and you told me no.
A.   Well, I didn't hear anything of the sort.  I heard that he was
replaced by Father Seromba.
Q.   So when Father Straton left, besides Father Seromba, you didn't see
any other priest in the parish?
A.   No, no, I didn't see any.  And after Father Straton's departure, I
didn't go to the church any more to attend mass.
Q.   But according to you, when exactly did Father Straton go away?
A.   I learned that he had gone away, but I don't know the day or the date
on which he left, because I'm not one who sent him anywhere.
Q.   But you tell us that when he left, you didn't go to church anymore,
so at least you know when you stopped going to the church.
A.   Yes, since I never went to the church anymore after his departure.
Q.   You personally stopped going to church?
A.   There are reasons which made me to stop going to church, and there
are several of them.  When there was a wedding which was not
celebrated officially, we were not allowed to go to the church.  We
couldn't even -- you couldn't even have your children baptised, so you
needed to make good of that shortcoming before going to church, so I
was waiting to normalise the situation before going to church again.
Q.   Mr. Witness, if we want to have fruitful discussions, please answer
my questions.  I asked you since when you stopped going to the church.
You didn't answer my question.  So, please, I will appeal to you to
answer the question as I ask it again.  When did you stop going to the
Nyange church?
A.   I told you that I stopped going to the church, but I did not put down
the date anywhere.  I didn't write it down.  I merely stopped going to
church since I -- my civil status had to be normalised, and it was in
that I stopped going to church.  I think it was in 1992.
Q.   In 1992?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Tell me, you wanted to normalise, to regularise your situation.  Why?
A.   I said so a while ago.  I don't know if you understood me well.  When
you were not faithful and you entered into a wedding without passing
through the church, you were treated like somebody who wasn't a
Christian, and you were treated as a pagan and you were asked to pay a
fine, and if you did not pay such fines, you stopped going to church.
I don't know if you understand me.
Q.   I understand and thank you.  Tell me, what happened on the 6th of
April 1994 in Rwanda?
A.   Habyarimana died.
Q.   What did you do when you learned of his death?
A.   When I learned of his death, people started looking at us, you know,
wickedly and in my locality, and I fled.
Q.   Now, when you say "people", who are the people you are alluding to?
A.   I'm talking about the Hutus who were not looking at the Tutsi kindly.
Q.   Thank you.  Did you feel threatened?
A.   Yes, I felt threatened, because it was being said that Habyarimana
had been killed by Tutsi.  After his death, I didn't sleep in my home
again up until I took refuge in the church.
Q.   Now, when you left your home after the death of Habyarimana, where
did you go?
A.   I went to the Nyange church.
Q.   Can you -- you'll recall that one day you went to the Nyange church?
A.   Yes, I remember.
Q.   Can you tell the Chamber the day on which you arrived at the Nyange
parish?
A.   I arrived at the church on a certain Wednesday.
Q.   How many days after the president's death did you get to Nyange?
A.   I got there after about two days.
Q.   We agree that the president died on the 6th of April.  You arrived at
Nyange parish on the 8th of April; is that correct?
A.   No, I have not quite understood your question.  Could you please
repeat it?
Q.   Willingly.  Both of us are relying on this point of reference, that
is, the death of the president on the 6th of April 1994.  You state
that after he died, you got the church two days later.  That means the
th of April; is that correct?
A.   Please, don't put questions to me regarding dates.  I arrived on the
th in the evening.
Q.   Well, if you chose to come here, it's to answer questions.  You have
to answer questions, and my duty is to put questions to you.  This is
the objective of this trial, so please be kind enough to answer my
questions.  If you do not know the answers, say so.  That would also
be an answer.
So I ask you once more that on the basis of your statement, you
arrived in Nyange church.  Was that two days later or on another day?
A.   I arrived there on the 12th.  It was a Tuesday in the evening.
Q.   Thank you.  In the final analysis, you don't like dates?  Witness, in
the final analysis, you don't like dates?
A.   No, at that time, I wasn't used to counting and noting dates.  All I
can do is to make estimates.  You cannot be somewhere under -- being
pursued and remember dates.
Q.   You can be pursued and remember what you saw.
A.   I remember the date on which I arrived to the church.
Q.   Now, let me refresh your memory.  With all serenity, when you were
answering investigators from OTP's questions, you said on the 30th you
arrived Nyange church, two days after the death of President
Habyarimana; and still in April 2004 you declared that you arrived the
church on the 12th of April.  Finally, on what date did you arrive in
the church?
A.   I arrived on a Tuesday in the evening, and the following day was a
Wednesday.
Q.   How did you get to Nyange church?
A.   I was on foot, and I went across bushes.
Q.   Were you alone?
A.   I was alone.  My family members had already left.  I was alone.  I
left alone.  We were not walking together at that time.
Q.   Could you tell the Chamber whether you went to the parish on your own
volition or someone else invited you to go there?
A.   I myself took the decision to go there because I knew I could be safe
in the church.
Q.   Before you got there, were you not visited by the bourgmestre?
A.   He came, but we did not see one another.  He saw other people.  I
heard that he had stopped by and left again.
Q.   However, Witness, you stated on the 30th of August, 2000, officially,
that Bourgmestre Grégoire Ndahimana invited you to go to seek refuge
in the church.  Do you confirm that?
A.   No, I do not confirm that.  He had already left.  I simply heard that
he had stopped by.  I therefore do not confirm that.
Q.   However, when you state something to the Office of the Prosecutor for
whom you are testifying, do you say it freely and knowingly, or you
give your answers under duress?
A.   No, I state what I think.
Q.   After you state what you stated, were your answers read out to you
before you confirmed?
A.   Yes, they were read out to me, but since many investigators come to
Nyange, at times your statements are not read out to you.
Q.   You signed a statement -- by the way, you signed many.  I suppose
that you were conscious of what you -- that what you were signing were
indeed your statements.  Do we agree on this point at least?
A.   Yes, I know the statements that I -- the contents of those
statements.
Q.   You state, however, that on the 30th of August 2000, the bourgmestre
came and invited you to seek refuge at the parish, and on the 26th of
April, you said you went there on your own because the church was a
place of refuge.  So which of the statements is true if I compare it
with what you're giving today as your evidence?
A.   I decided on my own to go there.  That is what I confirm today.
Q.   Very well.  So you were never invited by the bourgmestre?
A.   Well, I told you that the bourgmestre went -- came to our area but
left.  He invited people, but I was not one of those who was invited
by him.
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  Let us round up this line of questioning
regarding the bourgmestre.  Why would you -- why would the
bourgmestre, in your opinion, go to your area to invite people to go
to the parish?
A.   You cannot put that question to me.  The bourgmestre himself knows
why he came.  He told them that he was taking them to the parish so
that they could seek refuge there.  I therefore do not know the reason
why he invited them.
Q.   Witness, your role, your duty is to answer the questions I'm putting
to you.  That is your role here today, so please spare me your
remarks.
Can you tell the Chamber whether Father Seromba may have invited
refugees to go to the parish?
A.   Yes, he invited people.  For instance, he asked me who were the
people who had remained up in the hills in the secteur, and I gave
those persons' names.
Q.   Did you see people brought on board vehicles to the parish?  If yes,
who was the person who brought them there?
A.   Those persons were brought by a driver who had been appointed.  This
driver was working in the communal office at the time.  He went to
fetch refugees on board that vehicle.
Q.   What was his name?
A.   Yohana, Jean, nickname Jigo.
Q.   Could you please spell out the name you have mentioned to the
Chamber?
A.   It is a family name.  It was Jigoma, Jean.  Jigoma is spelt as
follows: G-I-G-O-M-A (sic).
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  What vehicle did he go and use to fetch those
people?
A.   It was a Toyota vehicle.  I know -- I don't know its name because I
didn't have a vehicle.  It was a white vehicle.
Q.   You knew that it was a Toyota vehicle, but you don't know the kind of
vehicle.  Was it a saloon, a double cabin?  What type of vehicle was
it?
A.   It was a white Toyota.  I don't know what particular type of vehicle,
but -- and I don't know the registration number, but I know it was a
Toyota vehicle.
Q.   I did not ask for the registration number.  I asked whether it was a
pick-up, a saloon, or another type of vehicle.  Can you make a
distinction between a pick-up and a private car, another particular
car?
A.   Yes, I can make that distinction, but I do not have a vehicle.  I
knew saloon cars and pick-ups, but I cannot tell you what make it was.
Q.   As a matter of fact, you knew the driver -- you knew it was -- you
knew its make, but you didn't know the particular type of car?
A.   It was a white Toyota with a rear part.
Q.   Thank you, Witness.  When you got to the parish that day, were there
many people there?
A.   Yes, there were many people, but as the days went by, the number
increased.
Q.   Let us talk about the day you arrived.  We'll talk about the other
days later.  When you got there, what number of people did you find
there, approximately?
A.   There were about a thousand, but on the fourth day, which was a
Thursday, the number kept rising up to Friday.
Q.   We'll talk about those other days later.  On the first day, how many
were there?  You said there were about a thousand?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Those people you found there, were they inside or outside the church
when you got there?
A.   When I got there, there were people both inside the church and
outside the church.
Q.   When you got there, did you go inside the church or you stayed
outside the church?
A.   I went inside.  At one time I went in and then I came out again
because there were many people inside.
Q.   And when you went inside the church, how many people did you see
there, approximately?
A.   The church was full.  There were about a thousand people there.
Q.   There were already a thousand inside; is that what you're saying?
A.   Yes, there were about a thousand inside, but this is only an
estimate.
Q.   And how many -- how many were outside?
A.   I gave an estimate.  Under those circumstances, I could not count
people.  It was not my duty to do so.  We were in a war situation.
Q.   As a matter of fact, you did not know the number of people you saw?
A.   I saw about a thousand people, and the number kept rising.
Q.   When you got to the parish that day, did you meet Father Seromba?
A.   Yes, we saw one another.  That was the following day.
Q.   If I am not making myself understood, please let me know.  Let me put
my question to you again.  When you got to the church on that day, did
you meet Father Seromba?  I don't -- I'm not asking about the
following day.  I'm asking about the day you arrived.  Did you meet
him?
A.   I arrived at night.  We did not meet one another.
Q.   You, therefore, did not meet him.  It was at night.
A.   Yes, I did not see him.  It was at night.
Q.   Did you see him then -- where did you see him then?  When did you see
him then?
A.   I saw him the following day.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Madam President, we couldn't get the question from the Defence because
he spoke into the microphone -- he spoke into the previous
interpretation.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Excuse me.  I will repeat my question for the interpreters.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   You have so stated to the Chamber that you did not meet Father
Seromba the day you arrived the church because you got there at night,
so it was only the following day that you were able to see him; is
that correct?
A.   That is correct.  I saw him the following day, and it was a
Wednesday.
Q.   So if you saw him only the following day, how, then, could he have
asked you the day you arrived if there were refugees on the hills and
you gave them -- you gave him names which he jotted down on a list and
handed to the bourgmestre?  Could you enlighten the Chamber on this,
please?
A.   Yes, I can explain things to you.
Q.   I'm listening to you.
A.   So I arrived on a Wednesday.  He asked me whether there were people
who had remained in the secteur, and I gave him the names of those
persons.
Q.   Let us be more precise, please.  The persons whose names you gave,
were they living in the same secteur as yours?
A.   Yes, they were living in my secteur.
Q.   How did you know, since you were fleeing, that those persons had
remained in your secteur?
A.   It was because when I arrived the church, I did not see them.
Q.   But, Witness, you have just told me, at least you told the Chamber
through me, that you assessed the number of people inside the church
and estimated the number at a thousand, and you said there were many
people outside and you could not see if they had been there.
A.   There's a difference between counting people and recognising them.  I
gave you an estimate of the people who were there.
Q.   I'm no longer talking about the number.  I am stating to you that
there were about a thousand people.  How could you have made out those
from your secteur who were absent?  That is the thrust of my question.
A.   Since I already knew those people, I therefore noticed that they were
not at the church.
Q.   You have just told us that you arrived at night, so I suppose that at
night on the church premises it wasn't sufficiently lit.
A.   It was during the day that I did not see them.  You will understand
that at night it is dark, and when I noticed that they were absent
during the day, I answered the questions put to me.
Q.   Place yourself in our situation.  You arrive under panic at the
church because you are fleeing threats, and the first thing you do is
to try to identify the people you didn't see or to the list the people
you couldn't see?
A.   When I arrived, he asked me the question -- that was the following
day, on the Wednesday, he asked me whether some people hadn't remained
in the secteur, and I answered his question saying that indeed some
people had remained behind in the secteur.
Q.   Tell me, Witness, is Father Seromba from your commune?  Of course, I
don't expect you to name the commune, just tell us, is he from your
commune?
A.   No, we are not from the same commune.
Q.   So how could you have given him the names of refugees who had
remained in your secteur and he could go and look for them, whereas
you were not from the same commune?
A.   I knew them.  I gave him those names, which he noted on the list and
handed the list to the former bourgmestre.
Q.   I have taken time to study the administrative organisation of your
country in 1994.  There is a préfecture, then there is a commune below
that, then the cellule -- the secteur, I beg your pardon, and then the
cellule at the bottom.  Is that correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   So the administrative system of organisation is very, very well
worked out?
A.   Yes, it is.
Q.   How, then, can you imagine that the bourgmestre who knows the names
of his subjects would need Father Seromba to draw up a list of
refugees absent from the parish?
A.   I have not quite understood your question.  I would request that
Madam President allow the question to be asked again.
Q.   Willingly, Witness.  We have just looked at the administrative
organisation of Rwanda in 1994.  I therefore tell you that the
bourgmestre did not need Father Seromba in order for him to give him
the lists of refugees who were absent from the parish at the time when
you arrived.
A.   I gave him those names because he was cooperating with the
bourgmestre, and that is, by the way, why he gave the list to him.
Q.   Now, if it is a bourgmestre who's effectively in charge of the
commune, he doesn't need
Father Seromba to have a list of his subjects or those in his area of
jurisdiction.  At the commune office, there is a secretariat -- a
secretariat.  There is -- there are census reports regarding subjects.
Why would he need Father Seromba to draw up such a list?  That is my
question.
A.   After he put the question to me, I gave him the names, and he noted
them on a piece of paper which he handed to the bourgmestre.  They
were cooperating.  The administration was the same.
Q.   Customarily in your country, is it priests who establish lists of
members of the population?
A.   No, it is not customary.  I gave the names because Seromba put the
question to me.
Q.   Why did he ask only of you?  Since you were not the first to arrive
at the parish, why did he ask you for those names?
A.   I do not know, but all I assert is that he put the question to me.
Q.   In the commune are you an important personality?  You know everybody
to the extent that you can be asked to tell who was not there, to say
who was not there?
A.   I do not know everybody, but I knew the people who had the same
problems as myself.
Q.   Tell me, you stated that you were fleeing to the parish because you
and members of your ethnic group were threatened.  Can you explain to
me why people threatened remained in the secteur so that they should
come and fetch them, whereas you were fleeing, and the others knew
they should have fled as well?
A.   Yes, those people could flee, but they did not flee.
Q.   You mean they were not threatened, then, since they stayed, they
remained behind?
A.   Roadblocks certainly started being set up.  No one could go to the
church apart from those who were transported on board the vehicle I
made mention of.
MR. MONTHÉ:
I see the time is 12:30, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel.  We shall adjourn and resume at 2:30 p.m.
MR. MONTHÉ:
If you will allow, thank you.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Thank you.  The proceedings are adjourned.
(Court recessed at 1230H)
(Pages 13 to 28 by Sherri Knox)
(Court resumed at 1440H)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court is now in session.  Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
We can give the floor to Mr. Monthé to continue with his cross-
examination that he began this morning.  Please proceed, Counsel.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President Your Honours.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Good afternoon, Witness.
A.   Good afternoon, Counsel.
Q.   Before we broke for lunch, we were talking about the conditions under
which refugees arrived Nyange parish, whether they came by vehicle,
brought there by someone, or whether they came on their own volition.
If I remember correctly, you answered that a vehicle of Toyota brand
went and got some of these people but that you, for your part, came on
foot; is that correct?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   Thank you.  Could you tell the Court what your relations were with
the person known as Karake.
A.   We came from the same ethnic group; that's all.
Q.   Apart from the fact that you came from the same ethnic group, did you
see each other?
A.   We used to see each other, but it was not as often as all that.
Q.   Was he one of your neighbours?
A.   He lived in another cellule.  We did not live in the same place.
Q.   Was the cellule in which he lived far from yours?
A.   Yes, but the two cellules shared a common boundary.
Q.   Can one evaluate the distance in kilometres that separated your
cellule from his?
A.   I cannot evaluate the distance in kilometres.  All I know is that the
two cellules shared a boundary.
Q.   Could you see his cellule from yours?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Could you see what was happening?  For example, if were you in your
home, could you see what was going on in his home?
A.   No.  There were hills.  I could not see what was happening in his
home.  There were very high mountains.
Q.   Thank you.  How does it come, then, that you feel yourself to be
under threat?  You leave your cellule for some days, you take refuge
in the parish, and when you arrive there you realise that Karake is
not there.  How does this happen?
A.   That means that I did not see him there, although I knew him.
Q.   Was he the only person you knew in his cellule?
A.   There were others that I knew.
Q.   But why did you not give the names of these other persons that you
knew?
A.   I think I gave the names of other people.
Q.   All the persons whose names you gave, did they come from the same
cellule as Karake?
A.   The cellules were different.  It was not the same cellule as that of
Karake.
Q.   But when you were fleeing, you knew almost systematically that the
refugees had stayed in the cellules.
A.   I know the people who stayed in their respective cellules.
Q.   How did you know this, since you were fleeing and you could not see
these people consequently?
A.   When I arrived at the parish, and I did not find them there, that is
when I realised it.
Q.   Let us, if you will, return to Karake.  You said that you used to see
him.
A.   We used to visit each other but not as often as all that.
Q.   What was his occupation?
A.   He was a farmer, an animal breeder.
Q.   Was he married?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Do you remember how many children he had?
A.   He had many children.  I can't remember the number.  Some were
younger and some were older.
Q.   When you finally met him in the parish, was he with his entire
family?
A.   He was with some members of his family; others were not with him.
Q.   Witness, I'd like to stop here for a little while and ask a question
based on your own statements.  You stated on the 30th of August 2000
to OTP investigators that Karake returned to the parish because Father
Seromba was drawing up a list of people based on indications that you
had given him -- that you gave him.  This is what you said on the 30th
of August 2000.  But on the 26th of August 2001, you said that you
arrived Nyange parish because you heard that it was safer to seek
refuge in the church and that you do not mention any lists, nor do you
mention Karake.  So why is there this difference in your statements?
Can you explain to the Court?
A.   I mentioned Karake's name in all the statements that I made.
Q.   I regret to inform you that this is not correct.  In the statement of
th April 2001, you made no reference to Karake.
A.   I referred to him in all my statements.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, Your Honours, if you have the statement before you,
perhaps it should be confirmed to the witness that there is no mention
of Karake in the statement of 26th April 2001, which I have before me.
I shall not read out this portion of the statement unless the Court
so requires.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The witness should be given the statement in Kinyarwanda.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, I have the witness statement in French and English,
but I do not have it in Kinyarwanda.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, if I may.  The Prosecution does not have the
statements in Kinyarwanda either.  The statements are in the languages
of the Tribunal, French and English.  None of them are in Kinyarwanda.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, we have the French and English but not Kinyarwanda.
Do you wish to read the entire witness statement?
MR. MONTHÉ:
No, Madam President.  It is not useful.  If you have it before you,
and if the Prosecution has it, I just wish to highlight the part that
is of interest to us.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Please proceed.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q. Mr. Witness, I am going to read your statement of 26 April 2001 to the
investigators of the Prosecution, and I think it will be translated to
you in Kinyarwanda.  This is what you said.
"I have given testimony before to the ICTR.  I know Father Athanase
Seromba.  He was the parish priest at the time of the genocide in 1994.
I also know Gaspard Kanyarukiga.  He had a pharmacy in Kivumu and then
he started a business in Kigali.  A little after the death of the
president, the Interahamwe began to kill Tutsis in my area.  I heard
that it was safer to seek refuge in the church in Nyange.  Because of
this recommendation, I went with my brother and sister to the church.
When I arrived -- when we arrived, we found many refugees.  I think
there were about 1,500 to 2,000 people.  I arrived on the evening of 12
April 1994."
MR. MONTHÉ:
I shall stop here with the reading for now, Madam President.
Madam President, Your Honours, I asked the witness -- I asked the
witness how come Father Seromba drew up a list at his initiative
whereas he himself, six months after his first statement, he does not
refer to the list that Father Seromba is supposed to have asked him
for.  Can he explain this contradiction to us.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Mr. Witness, did you hear the question that was put to you?
THE WITNESS:
I did not quite understand the question, Madam President.  Can Defence
counsel repeat the question for me?
MR. MONTHÉ:
Willingly.  Hoping, of course, that you do not only understand the
questions that you wish to understand.
Madam President, I can repeat the question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Perhaps you may simplify, so that he can understand.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   My question is about your arrival at the parish and the supposed
drafting or preparation of a list of refugees.  You made a first
statement to the Office of the Prosecutor on the 30th of August 2000
and another on the 26th of April 2001.  In these two statements -- in
the first one you say, "I arrived.  Father Seromba asked me for the
names of absent refugees and I gave it to him."
In the second declaration you don't allude to any list and you don't
refer to any request by
Father Seromba.  So my question is this:  Can you explain this
contradiction?
A.   There are several reasons.  In the church, there were many incidents.
People asked many different questions, many investigators came, and
the question was not put to me that way.  In the church, investigators
came to find out what had happened, and they put various questions
regarding what had happened.
Q.   Mr. Witness, I am not asking you what questions the investigators put
to you.  That is the work of the Prosecutor; it's not my job.  What I
am asking you is to explain to the Court how in the space of six
months you can give two different answers regarding your arrival at
the parish and your conversation with Father Seromba.  That is my
question.
On the 30th of August, you say, "I gave a list of names."  On the 26th
of April, you no longer refer to this list.  Why?  That is the
question.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, the witness has answered the question and -- sorry,
Madam President.
Madam President, in our estimation, the witness has answered the
question.  He may not have given the answer my friend may have wished,
but he did indeed answer the question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, the witness has answered the question.  Would you move on to
something else, please.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Apart from Father Seromba, how many other priests did you know in
Nyange?
A.   There were many of them.  There was Father Straton.  There was Father
Nturiye (phonetic), Edward.  There was Kayiranga and Father
Rwansamanzi.  They took over from one another at the parish, at this
church.  These are the priests that I knew to have been in the parish.
Q.   During the events of April 1994, did Fathers Nturiye and Kayiranga,
were they in with Father Seromba at the parish?
A.   They were present.
Q.   Did you see them?
A.   Yes, I saw them on a Friday.
Q.   Did you see them when you arrived at the parish?
A.   When I arrived at the parish, I went towards other refugees, many
refugees, and I did not see them on that day.  I saw them on a Friday.
Q.   How do you think they arrived at the parish?
A.   I do not know the way in which they arrived.  I don't know whether
they were there well before.  All I know is that I saw them at the
parish.
Q.   When you say you saw them at the parish, was it at the presbytery?
A.   I am referring to the parish in general, that is, the presbytery and
the churchyard.
Q.   Mr. Witness, let's try and be precise.  We are talking about the
parish.  But did you see -- where did you see Father Kayiranga or
Father Nturiye?  Was it in the church or outside the church?
A.   I saw them in the presbytery courtyard, and I saw them in the company
of Athanase in the upper story of his house.  They were together.
Q.   So you saw them in the presbytery.  So you saw them in the presbytery
in his house?
A.   Exactly.
Q.   But, Mr. Witness, why is it that all through your statements you make
no reference to the presence of Father Kayiranga and Nturiye at the
presbytery during the events?
A.   Questions were not put to me about that.  Investigators came,
conducted their investigations, and before, they told me that I would
answer the questions that were put to me.  During these interviews, no
questions were put to me to that end.
Q.   I think you are here to tell the Court what you saw and you are not
here to recount the questions that were put to you.  If you saw Father
Nturiye and Kayiranga during that time at the church, you should tell
the Court that Father Seromba was in their company when you saw them.
A.   I saw them on a Friday.
Q.   But you never said this until I put the question to you now.
A.   I didn't talk about it because there were many investigations that
were conducted and we answered questions that were asked.  I wasn't
asked such a question -- a question on that subject.
Q.   Thank you.  You stated that there were attacks when you arrived at
the church.  Can you recall to us when the first attack took place?
A.   The first attack was launched there on a certain Wednesday.
Q.   When you say on a Wednesday, was it on the day of your arrival or the
next day?
A.   It was on the day following my arrival.
Q.   According to you, who gave orders for the attack to begin?
A.   I wouldn't be able to tell you who exactly it was.  What I noticed is
that we were able to fend off the attacks that were launched against
us, with the exception of the attack that was launched on Friday.
Q.   This morning, however, you were saying that the assailants had
traditional weapons and that the leaders had firearms.  So if the
attacks were launched, definitely orders for the attacks to begin were
given by somebody.  Is that a minor issue?
A.   What I would like to maintain is that, as I said, a large school
attack was launched on Friday and I saw those who were instigating the
assailants to take part in that attack.
Q.   At the time of the attack, you mentioned that Father Seromba was on
the upper floor of the presbytery building; is that correct?
A.   Yes, that was my testimony.
Q.   What was he doing when the attack began that the time?
A.   I told you that he brought the chalice and there was the host, and on
a Wednesday, that is, on the day following my arrival, that's when he
did that.
Q.   Apparently we are talking at cross purposes, Mr. Witness.  I haven't
talked about a chalice so far.  Well, you talked about a large-scale
attack, if I go by the translation -- a large-scale attack that was
launched on that day, and you said that Father Seromba was standing on
the upper floor of the presbytery.  And my question was as follows:
What was he doing on the upper floor of the presbytery on that day of
the attack?
A.   I explained under what circumstances the attacks were coming, and you
asked me when the attack began.
Q.   Now, can you tell me where Father Seromba was on the day of the
attack?
MS. ALEXIS:
I would just ask my friend if he can be a bit more particular.
Perhaps that might save us some confusion.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Maybe you should be specific as to the day, since you talked about
several attacks -- Wednesday, Thursday and Friday attacks.  Now, are
you referring to the attack on Friday that he had talked about?
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, he no longer knows the days; he doesn't know the
dates.  I must say that I am rather embarrassed.  Now, the question is
very simple.  He said that a large-scale attack was carried out on
Friday.  Now, I was talking about the attack of Friday, because when
you listen to him, you start wondering when he got there.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   But let's talk about the attack of Friday, and I would like to know
where Father Seromba was when the large-scale attack was being carried
out.
A.   He was at his home on the upper story.
Q.   Now that's an answer.  Was he alone on that upper floor or was he
with other priests?
A.   He was in the company of the priests we talked about, as well as with
the bourgmestre and the judicial police inspector.
Q.   Thank you.  What were all those people doing on the upper floor at
that time of the attack?
A.   Those persons were present in the company of Seromba, and a certain
Kayishema had a gun.  Seromba also had a gun, and they were shooting
at people who were trying to take refuge in the courtyard of the
presbytery.
Q.   Was Father Seromba the only priest who was armed at that time?
A.   Well, I saw only him with a weapon.  The others who were armed were
communal policemen.
Q.   Can you tell the Tribunal what type of weapon Father Seromba was
carrying on that day?
A.   He had a gun that had a butt.  That is the weapon that he was
carrying.
Q.   He had a weapon with a butt?  Well, it's difficult to have a gun that
doesn't have a butt.  Do you have some knowledge of firearms?
A.   No.
Q.   Why was it a gun that he had?
A.   I knew guns.  I was a neighbour of a communal policeman who had one,
and I used to see him carrying that gun.  I knew therefore that it's a
gun that he had.
Q.   Can you make a difference between a gun and a revolver -- between a
gun and a pistol?
A.   Well, I've never had those weapons so I can't tell the difference in
between.
Q.   Even though were you a neighbour to a policeman?
MADAM PRESIDENT:
That is not at question.  I think that's comment that you made,
Counsel.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Tell me, Witness, when you saw those priests on the upper floor, had
the attacks begun?
A.   The attack had already been launched.  People were already being
killed outside, whereas others were seeking refuge in the rear
courtyard of the presbytery.
Q.   Thank you.  During those attacks, the commune policemen, the
gendarmes, and the assailants, were they shooting with firearms?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   So there were lots of gunshots being heard at that time?
A.   That is correct.  There were lots of explosions and lots of noise.
Q.   Lots of explosions and lots of noise.  Now, can you explain to the
Tribunal under what conditions --
A.   Thank you.  Thank you, sir.
Q.   Now, under these conditions, as I was saying, can you explain to the
Tribunal how you were able to hear Father Seromba's gun, who shot only
once, amongst all those explosions and all that noise?
A.   There were explosions you could hear outside, coming from outside,
and other explosions that you could hear coming from the presbytery.
Q.   In your opinion, is there a difference in sounds in explosions, since
you don't know anything about weapons?
A.   Well, I couldn't tell.  I was hearing explosions, gunshots here and
there, and I couldn't tell the difference between those various
gunshots.
Q.   Thank you.  Sir, could you tell us if indeed while the shots were
being fired, you were -- I don't think you were sitting somewhere, you
know, observing what was happening.  You must have been fleeing; is
that correct?
A.   That is how it is.  But I could be witness to what was happening in
the courtyard of the presbytery.
Q.   No, please, address my question.  I will come to that later.  While
the attacks were ongoing, there was much noise, there were many
explosions and gunshots, and you were trying to flee, so you didn't
stand somewhere, you know, watching what was happening.  Is that
correct?  You were moving about, or you were moving, as it were?
A.   Yes, that is true.  I went and took refuge in the courtyard, and it
is then that I witnessed all that.  It is true that I was moving.
Q.   Well, I said -- I didn't ask you where you went to seek refuge.
Answer my question.  You were moving when gunshots were being fired
from the upper floor.
A.   I was standing in the courtyard.  I was specifically in the kitchen
when he shot from the upper floor.
Q.   But to get to the kitchen, you must have left from somewhere else.
Between the time you left the church to go to the kitchen, which way
did you take?
A.   I climbed the fence because there were many gunshots.  The people who
were attacking us -- people were attacking us with traditional
weapons, and I got to the fence and climbed to accede to the
courtyard, to the presbytery.
Q.   Now, in climbing the walls, you succeeded in sighting the people who
were on the upper floor and those were who armed.
A.   When I got to the inner yard of the premises, that's when I saw them.
Q.   But you got to the kitchen though?
A.   Yes, the kitchen is in the inner courtyard of the presbytery; it's
part of the presbytery.  The kitchen wasn't closed.
Q.   So you took refuge in a room that had an opened door.  You didn't
close the door behind you?
A.   There was no door.  If there had been a door, it would have been
broken open and the assailants would have found me inside.
Q.   But the two assailants who found you, what did they do?
A.   They came, they saw people who had come to take refuge there, and it
is then that they saw us on the spot.  There was no door.  It is a
place where firewood was stored, where bins were stored.
Q.   Is it not, rather, the police inspector or Kayishema's gun that you
saw on the day you said
Father Seromba was armed?
A.   Seromba and Kayishema, those are two people I know very well.  Each
of them had his own gun.
Q.   Well and good.  Before climbing the wall to get to the kitchen, did
you have to go by a barrier of Interahamwe?
A.   They did not surround me.  They were coming from the other side, and
when I saw them, I was able to climb the fence, but if they had
already surrounded me, I wouldn't have been able to climb the wall in
question.
Q.   In your opinion, was your hiding place in the church, was it in the
kitchen or in a small shelter elsewhere?
A.   It was a small room shaped like I'm showing you (indicating), but it
wasn't closed, and inside you could find firewood and bins.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  While you were in the church, were there people
working for Father Seromba who provided you with drinking water?
A.   No, there was none except for a man who at a certain point gave us
water, but that was done just once because he stopped us from having
water.
Q.   Now, was that person working in Father Seromba's house?
A.   Yes.
Q.   Thank you.  Tell me, in the parish, did you know the number of people
working for the priests or do you know the number of domestic staff of
the priests?
A.   I knew some, but some are no longer alive.
Q.   Did you know a certain Rwansamanzi?
A.   I knew him.  *********************
Q.   ***********************.  Where was he working?
A.   He used to work at the priest residential quarters and for Father
Athanase Seromba.
Q.   Was he was working for the parish or for Father Seromba.
A.   He was working for Father Athanase Seromba because he is the one who
used to cook food for him.
Q.   Is it Father Seromba who had employed him?  *****************.
A.   I don't know the person who had recruited him, but I know that he was
cooking for him and that during the war he left the place.
Q.   In your opinion, for how long -- for how long did he work there?
******************
A.   Yes, he was Tutsi.
Q.   For how long did he cook for Father Seromba?
A.   If I think clearly, I don't know really for how long he worked there,
unless it is within a month that I knew he was working at the parish,
especially as we are not neighbours.
Q.   But he told you that he was cooking for Father Seromba and for the
other priests?
A.   Since Seromba was the person in charge who was on the spot, he is the
one whose name he gave me.  He talked to me about Father Seromba.
Q.   But Seromba was never the person in charge.
MR. MONTHÉ:
So, Madam President, if you would allow me, I have a document that I
would like to tender to you for your consideration.
Madam President, Your Honours of the Bench, I have just tendered to
you a letter of 25 February 1994, a copy of which I have asked to be
made and given to the Prosecutor and to the interpreters, as well as
for the witness.  So if you grant me leave, Madam President, I would
like, in the interest of justice, to give a reading of this document
which defines the exact role that Father Seromba was called upon to
play in Nyange.  The letter is from Bishop Wencelas Kayibushi.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The interpreters don't have a copy yet, so could counsel wait for the
copies to be brought to the interpreters.  Thank you.
Madam President, the witness has just stated that he has poor sight
and that he cannot read to him, that the letter, therefore, should be
read to him.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  That is even good since the letter is -- especially so
because the letter is in French, by the way.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.  I was saying therefore that the Bishop of
Nyundo of the time, Wencelas Kayibushi, wrote to Father Athanase
Seromba, who was the vicar of Nyange, and that was on the 25th of
February 1994.  And this letter goes as follows.  "Reverend Father, in
accordance with carnal law number 970 of the carnal law of the
Catholic church, I am granting you leave to listen to confessions of
the faithful because you have been recognised to be the most
appropriate person for this so far.  I will also allow that you have
this possibility to hear confessions of the faithful of the parish
where you are assigned, in the Nyundo diocese, just as with the other
diocese of Rwanda."
So, Madam President, Mr. Father Seromba was vicar and was never parish
priest in Nyundo.  And I would like to tender this document as an
exhibit of the Defence team.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Any objection from the Prosecutor?
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I have several comments.  First of all, I would wish
that my friend would confine himself to questions and not comments,
and not in fact give evidence from the bar table.
And additionally, please, Madam President, this letter, whilst it
states what would be some of the duties of Father Seromba, it can in
nowise be viewed as a fully comprehensive document containing all of
the duties of Father Seromba.  And whilst I have no difficulty with
the admissibility of this document, I would await to go see what
manner of questions, the specificity of the questions that my friend
wishes to ask the witness on this document.  And I would ask that
those questions be fair to the witness.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Counsel for the Prosecution, please content yourself with doing your
work and I'll do mine.  Since the beginning of this afternoon, I have
been listening to your suggestions and remarks.  If you have an
objection to make, do so.
As for the rest, I intend to continue my cross-examination, Madam
President, with your leave.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Counsel for the Prosecution.
MS. ALEXIS:
Thank you very much, Madam President.  Perhaps, in retrospect, I did
not make myself abundantly clear.  What in fact was my objection,
Madam President, was that I do not have any difficulties with the
admissibility of this document insofar as it is the right of the
Accused to put questions to the witness.  When I said I was awaiting
to see what will occur, Madam President, I meant that we would be
objecting to the admissibility of this document as a Defence exhibit,
not that questions cannot be asked, but as a Defence exhibit.
Since the witness is not the maker of this document and my friends
would have to, by dint of their questions, show this Court the
relevance of this document insofar as -- insofar as the Defence have
not yet asked all the questions.  That is why I couched my objection
in the way that I did.  I would by no means seek to be obstructionist,
and counsel may ask any questions.  But I would reserve the right,
Madam President, to object to the admissibility of this document as a
Defence exhibit at the appropriate moment.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam Prosecutor, we cannot ask questions and answer them at the same
time.
If you have an objection, raise it, and if need be we will take the
objection and accept the decision.
The object of this letter is to say that Father Seromba was never the
parish priest of Nyundo, as the witness states.  The head of the
(inaudible) church wrote and stated clearly that he wasn't appointed
vicar of that church, and I think we understand that clearly.
Madam President, if there are no objections, then I maintain my
request.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel for the Prosecution, I hope we'll able to progress.
MS. ALEXIS:
Certainly, Madam President, I merely wished to see that, as my friend
has said, if the purpose is to show that Father Seromba was not
appointed the priest at Nyange, I do not agree that the contents of
that letter so depict and, therefore, if that is the purpose, then I
must object.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, what I said has not been understood.  I did not say
that he was not appointed priest.  What I said was that this document
proves that he was not the parish priest of that parish and it is the
parish priest who has authority in this parish.  That is the purpose
of this document.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  The Chamber admits this document as Defence Exhibit D. 11.
(Exhibit No. D. 11 admitted)
MR. MONTHÉ:
I thank the Chamber, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel, you may proceed.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q. Witness, let us go slightly behind, and you'll excuse me for the
interruptions.  You stated on the
th of April 2001 to the OTP investigators --
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, if you, as I am doing, could turn to page 3 of the
statement of the
th of April 2001, K0232059, page 3.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
You may proceed, Counsel.  We are there.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, with your leave, I would like to point out that the
witness changes his position continually with regard to what he did.
If you read the last paragraph on that page, it states that, "I
managed to cross the barrier of the Interahamwe, and I hid in a small
shelter in the church complex.  That shelter no longer exists.  I
could not see what was happening there.  The attack was seemingly
dragging on."
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Mr. Witness, what did you see in the final analysis?
A.   While I was in the presbytery courtyard, while the refugees were
seeking refuge in the presbytery, Seromba was shooting at the
refugees.
Q.   I thank you.  Let us go back to Rwasange (sic) -- rather,
Rwansamanzi.  I beg your pardon.  Let us go back to Rwansamanzi.  You
stated that he was working at the parish as a cook for Father Seromba
and the others.  What became of this person called Rwansamanzi?
A.   Rwansamanzi died on the premises.
Q.   Do you know the circumstances under which he died?
A.   People were killed in various circumstances in the parish.
Rwansamanzi was in the presbytery courtyard.  He was an employee of
the church.  And amongst those who died in the courtyard was
Rwansamanzi.
Q.   You did not get to know how he died, did you?
A.   He was shot as well.
Q.   Did his death have anything to do with the priests who were there?
A.   As far as I am concerned, I saw Seromba shoot at him.  That is what I
could see and that is what I am testifying to.
Q.   On what day did you see Seromba shoot at him?
A.   It was on the Friday in question.
Q.   So Rwansamanzi was in the courtyard while were you in your shelter
when Seromba shot at him?
A.   He was coming.  He had sought refuge in the courtyard of the
presbytery while the other refugees were outside.  They were outside
in the courtyard that was there as well.
Q.   Did you not, under the circumstances, say that it was Father
Kayiranga who killed Rwansamanzi?
A.   No, it was Father Seromba.
Q.   Do you maintain your assertion?
A.   What I am saying is that when he was shot at, he was in the courtyard
of the parish, with other persons of course.
Q.   But was it Father Kayiranga that killed Rwansamanzi, or Father
Seromba?
A.   Since he was the one carrying a firearm, as well as Kayishema, and
since it was Seromba shooting at refugees who were coming into the
courtyard of the presbytery.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, Your Honours, I would now like to apply that we
should go into closed session because I have before me a document that
will support the questions I am currently asking.  It is the report of
the hearing of this person before the Court.  I would therefore apply
that we go into a closed session for the next line of questioning on
this particular matter, Your Honour.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Counsel for the Prosecution.
MS. ALEXIS:
I have no objections, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well then.  We will go into closed session.
We will crave the indulgence of the public, but it won't be for long.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
For purposes of protecting the witness and in the interest of justice,
we now go into closed session.
(At this point in the proceedings, a portion of the transcript [pages
to 55] was extracted and sealed under separate cover, as the
session was heard in camera)
(Pages 29 to 42 by S. Eboe-Osuji)
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, this is not a question that has to do with this
witness, but a matter of housekeeping.  The Prosecution has had on
standby the entire day the next witness in prospect.  I was merely
wondering whether this would be a good moment to inquire whether I
should request the WVSS personnel to return with this witness, or
whether we would still need this witness today.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very good.  I think it would be better for the witness to be here
tomorrow, which means that he can leave now.
MS. ALEXIS:
I am obliged, Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We are in open court.  Counsel Monthé you have the floor.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Madam President.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Can you tell the Court if you know of an association called Ibuka in
Rwanda?
A.   There is an association that is better known by the officials there,
but I know there is such an association.
Q.   Are you a member of that association?
A.   No, I am not a member thereof.  I know merely that it exists.  There
are representatives of that association who know more about that
association.
Q.   Do you know the objective of that association?
A.   It is an association called Ibuka which is responsible for coming up
with a solution to the problems of survivors.  That is what I know
about it.
Q.   Now, let's go back to the Nyange church during the events of 1994.
Did you see Father Seromba go into the Nyange church while you were
there?
A.   I saw him.
Q.   Can you recall what day that was?
A.   I saw him on a Wednesday.
Q.   Was it during the day or in the evening?
A.   I believe I have already said that it was during the day.
Q.   What did he come to do in that church on that day?
A.   On that day, he came, he took chalices full of communion and took
them to his house in the storey-building.
Q.   You stated that, indeed, it was rather in the afternoon or in the
evening that you came -- you saw him come to take the chalices.  That
is, on the 13th of April in the evening, you saw him come to take the
chalices.
A.   It was on a Wednesday.
Q.   Yes, the 13th of April.
A.   The 13th of April, it was a Wednesday.
Q.   So he did not come in the morning; he came in the afternoon or
evening?
A.   Since there were many refugees, I saw him in broad daylight, during
the day.
Q.   I will ask the question again, if you did not understand me.  When
did you see him go and look for the chalices in the church?
A.   It was on a Wednesday.  There were many refugees.  I think it was
during the day.
Q.   And yet you had stated on the 26th of April 2001, and it is the same
statement, and it's on page 3 of the same document, that on that
evening, and I'll read it:  "That evening Kanyarukiga came with
Grégoire Ndahimana.  They arrived at about six or seven o'clock in the
evening.  They went to Father Seromba's house and stayed there for two
hours.  The only thing that I saw was Father Seromba who came to
church that day and took the chalice and the plates used for
communion.  That is what he took along with him."  You are the one who
made that statement, isn't it?
A.   I said that he came in broad daylight.  As for the hour and the time
he came, when you are waiting for your death, you cannot say exactly
at what hour.  All I can tell you is that it was in daylight and one
could see.
Q.   I'm not the one who is giving the hour.  I am reading your statement.
On the 26th of April 2001 you said it was after 6:00 or 7 p.m. that
he came.  And in your statement of 27th February 2003 -- of 11 March
as well, you said it was on the 13th of April 1994 and that he
came at about 7 p.m.  Now, when you saw him get into the church, when
exactly did you see him get into the church?
A.   I saw him on a Wednesday.  As for the hour you have just mentioned,
I've told you that I have met many people who ask you different
questions.
Q.   But I am here and I'm alone with you and before this Tribunal and I'm
here to ask you questions so that the Tribunal can understand exactly
what happened.  But you made your statement freely to those
investigators and you made a number of contradictions.  So, now, tell
the Court: was it in the morning, during the day or in the evening?
A.   It was during the day, and if there are contradictions, it is because
I was investigated by different people.  There were some who used to
come and who would ask me what had happened and there were others who
would tell me, "You are going to answer only the questions that I'm
going to ask you."
Q.   Thank you.  Did you see in Father Seromba's house in the parish,
certain officials or influential figures, and if you saw them, did you
know them?
A.   Yes, I can tell you names.  There were Grégoire Ndahimana, the
bourgmestre at the time.  There was Fulgence Kayishema.  There was
Kayishema.  There was Vérdaste Rurangabugabo.  I saw all those people
in the company of the priest.
Q.   Can you remember the day on which you saw them?
A.   I saw them on a Friday, but they came there every day.  At least I
saw them on Friday.  They were in the storey-building and that was the
day on which people were killed.
Q.   Was he armed when you saw them -- or were they armed when you saw
them?
A.   I saw policemen who were armed, as well as Kayishema and Seromba.
The gendarmes who were present were also armed.
Q.   According to you, who appeared to be the leader of that group?
A.   The person who looked like the leader was Seromba, as well as the
bourgmestre of the time.  Then you also had the police judicial -- the
judicial police inspector.
Q.   So Seromba was the person who appeared to be in command?
A.   This is because, while people were being killed, those people had
taken refuge at Seromba's house and the meetings where they prepared
for the killings took place in Seromba's house in the presence of
those authorities.
Q.   So far you haven't talked to us about meetings.  Why only now?
A.   I didn't talk about them, but those people were present.  Even though
they were all together, it's obvious that they held a meeting.
Q.   So, you saw meetings being held.  Did you attend those meetings?
A.   No, I saw them together in the storey-building in his house.  I saw
them from a distance and I don't know the discussion that they had
together.
Q.   Were these meetings held in the open for you to know that there was a
meeting?
A.   I did not talk about meetings.  I said they were together in the
storey-building.  I mean, those persons that I mentioned, all of them
were with him.
Q.   Well, "meetings", I think we should agree with the term.
A.   If I talked about a meeting, what I meant is that they were together.
When you see people sitting together or standing together and who are
observing people who are being massacred, you cannot say that they
were not together, whereas you were on the spot.
Q.   Now, Mr. Witness, let us understand each other.  I am talking about a
meeting, not that they were together.  You said that they held a
meeting or they held meetings.  Do you maintain that term?
A.   I said that they were together in this storey-building in his house.
And you can conclude that it was a meeting when people are together.
Q.   Thank you.  I simply take note of the fact that at no moment since
the 28th August 2000 up to 2003 you didn't talk about any meeting at
which Father Seromba took part.
A.   I didn't talk about it.  I said that they were together in his house
in the storey-building and they were watching people that were being
killed, whereas they were authorities.
Q.   Those who were watching the group that was on the upper floor, were
they also at the meeting?
A.   You are insisting on the “meeting”.  I said that they were together
looking at the people being killed.
Q.   Now, I have asked that those who were like you, who were watching
people, other people, who were on the upper floor together, were you
also holding a meeting?
A.   I was in the inner courtyard of the presbytery.  I did not know the
other people you are referring to.
Q.   Did you hear of a certain Kanyarukiga?
A.   I talked about him.  I said that he himself was present.
Q.   What did he come to do there?
A.   He came to the parish.  He entered the storey-building in the company
of other authorities in question.  He even had the habit of coming
often, and I saw him after I arrived at the church.
Q.   When they got to the priests' house, he was a member of the officials
or the authorities of the commune?
A.   No, but he was an important businessman.
Q.   How, in what capacity, therefore, was it (sic) in Father Seromba's
house during that event?
A.   He came there as an influential businessman who used to come to the
parish and who was collaborating with the bourgmestre at the time, as
well as with Kayishema.  They were all together during that period.
Q.   Were there -- was their business to be carried out at the presbytery
during that period?
A.   No, I wasn't aware of any, but when the killings took place he was
present, as well as in the days that came -- that followed.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
What you said was inaudible.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Thank you, Interpreters.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Witness, let's remain with Mr. Kanyarukiga.  You saw him go to Father
Seromba's house in the course of these events.  Was he armed?
A.   I saw that he was carrying a grenade around his belt.  This is the
weapon that I saw him carrying.
Q.   Did he have anything else, apart from the grenade?
A.   I saw nothing else.  I did not wish to look at him for very long.  I
was not supposed to be watching him.  I saw him on that Friday and on
the following days.  I also saw him on a Thursday and another Friday.
Those are the days on which I saw him.
Q.   Amongst the people who were accompanying Kanyarukiga, were there
people who were carrying spears, for example?
A.   It is he who was carrying out these attacks or who was leading these
attacks often.
Q.   Mr. Witness, I am asking you whether the people who were accompanying
him could have been carrying spears.
A.   The people who were with him and with whom he was going to the
priests' house were two policemen carrying firearms, whereas the other
ones who were carrying spears came after them.
Q.   Did you -- are you sure that you did see Kanyarukiga that day?
A.   Are you saying Friday, Counsel?  Yes, I saw him when many people were
killed.
Q.   Mr. Witness, in this very interesting statement of yours, dated 26th
of April, you state that you saw him with a grenade and a spear, but
now you remember the grenade but not the spear.
A.   I saw him carrying a grenade, but the killers used several weapons.
Each one was carrying the weapon that he could find.
Q.   I am referring particularly to this gentleman.
A.   On that day I saw him armed with a grenade.
Q.   What was he doing with a grenade?
A.   He was going to use it to kill people.  It's obvious.
Q.   But you did not see him use it, did you?
A.   I did not see him using it, but when I was at the priests' house I
could hear explosions.
Q.   Was there only one person carrying a grenade at that place?
A.   It is the only person that I was able to see.  But the grenades that
exploded were many.
Q.   So you cannot know whether it was he who threw them?
A.   I cannot confirm this.  I do not know the persons who threw grenades,
but he did have one there at the church.
Q.   So you spent about three days at the parish, did you not?
A.   That is correct.
Q.   During these three days, it is on third day that you went and sought
refuge in the shelter that is no longer standing?
A.   I went on the third day, and that was a Friday.
Q.   Thank you, sir.  During your stay in the church, did you see a sister
called Mama Jean?
A.   Yes, I saw her.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The interpreter did not hear what counsel for the Defence was saying.
He was speaking while the channel was engaged.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Did she not bring food for -- coming from CARITAS?
A.   I heard that money was collected, and when she brought this food she
was stopped on her way and the food was taken from her, because it was
destined for the Tutsi refugees.
Q.   Yes.  But when did you hear about the collection of food, on what
day?
A.   The money was collected.  I no longer remember the day on which we
collected money, but it was either a Wednesday or a Thursday.  So we
collected money.  We gave it to her and we asked her to go and find
bread for the children.  Afterwards, we learned that she had been
stopped on her way back, so she did not return.
Q.   Thank you.  Before this contribution, did they not bring you food?
A.   I know nothing about it, since there were many people around and
below, further on down.  I just know that money was collected.
Q.   Did you, yourself, contribute?
A.   Yes, I gave money.
Q.   Do you remember how much you gave?
A.   I think at that time everybody gave what they had.  Personally, I
think I gave her a hundred francs.  There were many of us and each
gave according to his means, and we asked her to go and find food for
the children.
Q.   When I began my cross-examination you said that there were several
priests in the presbytery during the events, and you gave the names of
Jean-François Kayiranga and Edward Nturiye; is that correct?
A.   I said that.
Q.   After at the events of Nyange, did you learn what happened to Father
Kayiranga and Father Nturiye?
A.   Subsequently, I learned that they had been detained.  I do not know
what happened afterwards.
Q.   From the information that you received, was their detention linked to
the events of Nyange?
A.   I learned that they were detained, but many things happened in
Nyange, and you cannot understand everything.  It was not a marriage
ceremony.
Q.   We are talking about the death of victims.  Please spare us the
humour or the wit.  I am asking you whether, in relation -- or in
connection with these tragic events, Father Kayiranga and Father
Nturiye were placed in detention.  Please answer yes or no.
A.   Yes, their imprisonment has something to do with what happened.
Q.   So some victims did accuse them of participating in these events?
A.   Many things happened in Nyange.  I cannot confirm what you are
saying, Counsel, and I cannot deny it either.  Many things happened in
Nyange.  There were many people who were killed in that place in the
presence of these people.
Q.   But, personally, did you testify against one of these priests?
A.   Yes, I gave testimony; but I was not prepared for it, so I didn't
bring a copy here.
Q.   Witness, let's stay together.  Don't go too fast.  Let's take it
easy.  Let me put the questions to you.  So you, personally, gave
testimony against one of these priests, one of the two of them?
A.   I will tell you -- I would tell you if I did have a copy of this
thing, because it's a long time ago since I gave testimony before a
court in respect of this case.
Q.   I do not have a copy either.  I just want to know that you, who
witnessed the events, and I, who have come here several years
afterwards, I would just like you to tell me whether you accused or
you charged any of these priests.  You don't need a copy for that.
Just answer the question.
A.   I was summoned.  I explained my knowledge of events at the court.  I
said that these persons were present.
Q.   So you said that Jean Kayiranga killed Alexis Rwansamanzi?
A.   I did not see this.  I did not say this.  Unless I have a copy before
me, I cannot say.
Q.   Do you know what became of them after their detention?
A.   I'm not sure about it.  I know that they were detained.
Q.   You never had any further news of them?
A.   No.  Since that day I have never heard anything of them.
Q.   Did you hear about Father Balthazar Habimana?
A.   Who are you referring to?  Are you referring to the priest?  Please
repeat your question; I did not understand it.
MR. MONTHÉ:
I believe I was asking the witness whether he heard about Father
Balthazar Habimana while he was in Nyange.
THE WITNESS:
I did not hear about him.
BY MR. MONTHÉ:
Q.   Are you involved in politics?
A.   No.
Q.   So you have never been a militant of a political party?
A.   Not at all.
Q.   At the time, Mr. Witness, I believe, looking at your statement of 26
April 2001, and I can see that you indicate that you were a member of
the MRND, which was the party in power at the time.  I am referring
here to the statement of the 26th April 2001.
A.   At the time I was a militant in the MRND party.  I stopped in 1990
when this party began to sow the seeds of hatred and hate people.
Q.   Thank you.  When you left the MRND, what party did you join?
A.   I became a member of the current party; that is, the RPF.
Q.   So today you are a member of the RPF?
A.   Yes, I am a member.
Q.   Inside the RPF, what do they think of the events of April 1994?
A.   Don't ask me questions regarding the administration, the hired
administration of the nation.  I am just a member of a political
party.  I cannot say anything.  That is for the hierarchy.  It is
quite beyond me.
Q.   When you came to give testimony before this Court, did you have some
idea of what your party would expect of you?
A.   When I come here the party is aware of that I have come here.
Q.   Does the party give you any instructions regarding your trip?
A.   Yes, the party knows about my departure from my own commune, which
even organises security in my area in my absence; for example, in my
absence, I am given security.
Q.   What does your party expect of a witness such as you, when you come
here?
A.   I am expected to tell the truth about the events that I witnessed.
Q.   When you return do you tell the party of your testimony?
A.   It is the first time I am coming here and I do not think and I am not
aware that one has to produce a report afterwards.
Q.   But it is not first time that you have gone to make statements
against the priests to the authorities, is it?
A.   It is not the first time I have been in the party of the republic of
Rwanda.
Q.   Thank you.  In your view --
A.   I have been in court in Rwanda.
Q.   Thank you.  What would anybody say about the events of Nyange?
A.   I didn't understand your question.
Q.   I shall put it again willingly, Mr. Witness.  I asked you: in your
view what would a reasonable man think -- or would have done -- what
would a reasonable man have done to prevent the events at Nyange from
taking place?
A.   Talking particularly of Seromba and Grégoire Ndahimana, Fulgence
Kayishema, as well as the policeman and the gendarmes who were present
and, in particular the priests who saw children die of hunger, whereas
there was food in the parish, whereas the bourgmestre himself had the
power to stop massacres, that is what I'm saying.  That is what I can
say.
Q.   But you are not accusing the bourgmestre; you are accusing Seromba.
Did Seromba have the powers of the bourgmestre?
A.   Why did he not come to ask the bourgmestre to help him?  We would
have noticed then that he had tried to do something, at least; but we
waited in vain.
Q.   How do you know that he asked for nothing?
A.   I say it because nothing happened.  If something had happened, we
would have seen him and we would have seen the attacks stop.  We would
have seen that they had stopped killing people who had taken refuge in
his home.
Q.   Why do you -- you who are accusing him now, although you knew that he
was going to kill you, you took refuge in his home, why did you do so?
A.   I did not know this.  I did not know that a priest could kill.  I
thought that a person who sought refuge in the church would be saved.
Q.   Since 1994 have you always made the same statements to the courts
before which you appeared?
A.   Many people come to visit the church to inquire about the events that
have taken place, and since I do not live far from there, I am
contacted so that I should say what happened.  So I do not limit
myself to appearing to the courts.
Q.   So you have become the witness of reference, have you?
A.   I act as a reference point for people who come to Nyange to see what
happened there.  I am taken to the church.  I show them the situation,
how the people died, I show them the premises; I do all of that.
Q.   So, in fact, you do what the Ibuka people do?
A.   They have their procedures, their own procedures, these Ibuka people.
I do as I am told.
Q.   Thank you, Mr. Witness.
MR. MONTHÉ:
Madam President, Your Honours, I have no further questions for this
witness.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Court thanks you, Mr. Monthé.
Madam Prosecutor, do you wish to conduct a re-examination of the
witness?
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I have only one question.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Please proceed; ask your question.
RE-EXAMINATION
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, can you tell us, if you recall, approximately when did you
first see Father Seromba at Nyange church as a priest?
A.   I saw him on the 13th.  It was a Wednesday.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I would rephrase the question in a more
understandable fashion.
BY MS. ALEXIS:
Q.   Witness, can you tell us when was the first time ever in your life,
approximately, did you see Father Seromba as priest of Nyange church?
A.   The first time I saw him was during the year that I mentioned earlier
when he was a priest in Nyange.
Q.   And can you tell us, Witness, around which year it is, if you recall?
A.   This is an estimate.  I think I saw him in the nineties, the
nineties.  It is at that time that I saw him because I used to go to
mass sometimes, as I said.
MS. ALEXIS:
Those will be all my questions for the witness, Madam President.
Thank you very much, Witness.
THE WITNESS:
I thank you, too.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
We thank you, Madam Prosecutor.
I was telling the parties -- perhaps the witness might withdraw since
we no longer require him to be on the stand.
Mr. Witness, we thank you for coming to give testimony.  At this time
we have no further questions to put to you.  Thus we wish you a safe
journey back to your home.
THE WITNESS:
I thank you, too.
(Witness excused)
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I will give some information.  It would appear that the Trial Chamber
will be occupied tomorrow afternoon, and the entire day of Wednesday
they shall probably continue to sit.  So, in our case, if we wish to
use this Trial Chamber, we can only use it tomorrow morning and we may
sit in the afternoon in courtroom III.  So it will only be in the
afternoon in Trial Chamber III.
Madam Prosecutor, could you tell us who the next witness will be?
MS. ALEXIS:
That will be, Madam President, Witness CBS.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Now, Defence, is this witness one of the witnesses which does not
raise too many problems for you in respect of the continuation of
trial?
MR. POGNON:
Madam President, unfortunately, this is one of the witnesses with whom
we have a problem.  We have statements here that are in Kinyarwanda.
When you take the Kinyarwanda documents and look at them, you realise
that you cannot even read the names.  So we have documents here that
have not been translated.  We need these documents to be translated to
cross-examine this witness.  So we really, really, cannot cross-
examine this witness, given that the documents for which we seek
translation are not yet available.
I put it to the Court that Prosecution -- I am informed that there is
an accelerated procedure for translation.  I suggest that these
documents be submitted for accelerated translation so that we will be
able to have them at our disposal and thoroughly cross-examine the
witness.
The witness that we have just cross-examined, I should say that in
respect of him we were lucky to have a few documents, and these
documents were very useful.  You saw that at some points the witness
denied his signature, and so on and so forth.  So the ones that we
have here have so far not been used to -- put to any use at all by us.
So that is the situation that we are facing.
If it were in English, we might have managed.  And this is Kinyarwanda
and everything is terribly abstruse here.  We cannot decipher anything
at all.
I shall conclude rapidly.  So that is the problem we have, which is
why we are asking this Court for a little time at least so that we can
allow the translation service to devote some time to these documents
so that we can have documents that will not be denied by the witness
as coming -- if they come from the Prosecution.
That is what we request of you, and after the Accused's letter we
asked for a break so that we would receive the translation so that we
could put them to use and work efficiently with the Court.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Madam Prosecutor, you have the floor.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I understand from the case manager that the very
excellent suggestion of my learned friend that we submit these
documents for accelerated translation, that in fact that has already
been done and we await with baited breath, Madam President, obtaining
these documents.  As soon -- so soon as these documents are in our
possession we would continue to oblige the Defence with these
documents as per our obligations of disclosure.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Very well.  Prosecutor, what are the witnesses that we have available,
without any -- without too much difficulty?
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, the witnesses that we have proposed, the list, it
would have been CBS.  Then we were proposing that that witness be
followed by CBT, and then CDK.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Now, I shall ask the Defence.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Defence, please use your microphone.
MR. POGNON:
There are two problems in respect of these witnesses, the first
concerning the detained witnesses.  And the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence say that we must have their files disclosed.  We have already
received disclosures in respect of some witnesses.  The second problem
-- that is, the judicial files, the criminal records, of the detained
witness, that is the -- that is the first.  The second is the
procedure in Rwandan court cases which are the same -- or which is the
same case where Father Seromba was accused but whose trial was
separated because he was abroad.  In such procedures most of the
witnesses who are scheduled have already given testimony and appeared
in this case, some as accused and others as witnesses.  It so happens
that most of the witnesses proposed by the Prosecutor are witnesses
who participated in that trial.  So it is very important that we have
the documents relating to that court case.
We are not saying that the Prosecutor is not in some difficulty, but
these are documents that we absolutely require in order to provide
with the Defence -- or the Accused with an adequate defence.  The
Prosecutor has been following this case since 1997, and the Prosecutor
has the best possible relations with the Rwandan authorities to be
able to obtain the documents that are required.  So, the witnesses --
*****************************************, are witnesses who were
involved in court cases -- in the court case in Rwanda, and most of
them are currently being detained.  There are witnesses who are not
being detained, but I do not believe that these witnesses are here at
present, but many of these witnesses, as I said, appeared in the
Rwandan court case, and in -- many of them were in the form of -- or
appeared as accused persons.  So that is our quandary, Madam
President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber regrets that parties did not raise all these issues
before the commencement of trial because at this time we have begun;
the witnesses are there.  And all of this causes many problems because
these persons must be interviewed or must be heard.  This means
additional cost every day for the Tribunal that they cannot be heard.
As we are well aware, the Tribunal is facing some financial
difficulties.  It is true that it is difficult to decide to adjourn,
whereas all the parties had agreed that we should commence trial and
hear the Prosecution witnesses.
MR. POGNON:
Most respectfully, Madam President, with all due respect, it is from
Cotonou -- and I am saying this here -- that I started asking for
documentation from the moment when the Prosecutor was in a position to
disclose documents to me.  I had unredacted – redacted statements that
were sent to me.  The Prosecutor has to give redacted statements
within 21 days of the trial.  This is what the Prosecution understood
by not providing the defence -- I don't know what the Prosecution
understood by not providing the Defence with the requested documents.
I think that this is the absolute truth.  We tried to obtain these
documents.  When we organised a meeting chaired by yourself, we were
persuaded that the documents would be provided to us.  We have
continued to request them.  We have never had them.  And you will
realise that it is only on Friday -- or Thursday, 23rd, and Friday,
th, that we received documents that are in Kinyarwanda and which we
cannot use.
So that is the points in issue here.  It is not a lack of
understanding on the part of the parties.  This is under Rule 66.  The
Prosecutor is obliged, under this Rule, to communicate these
documents.  Most of the cases here have been pending before the
Rwandan courts.  The Prosecutor was reminded of that.  She may not
have been ready, but it cannot be said to be our fault.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
The Trial Chamber has already rendered a decision in respect of this
problem.  However, to assist the parties in making some progress, we
are going to suggest the following.  Tomorrow morning, the Defence
will indicate to the language services section what documents are the
most urgent requiring translation, which -- those documents that will
require priority, but you must not lose sight of the fact  that that
section is overwhelmed.  We also suggest something else: it would be
that we should have an interpretation session for the Kinyarwanda
documents; that is, with the interpreters.  Those are the documents
that are even more urgent than those that have been suggested to the
language services section.
So tomorrow morning, instead of sitting here in court, the parties
might meet with the interpreters from nine o'clock for an
interpretation of these documents.  There will be transcripts, and
this will help us for the afternoon and, perhaps, we might sit in the
afternoon at 2 p.m.
This is what we can do to avoid interrupting the court case because of
translation problems.  But I think that with this approach we would
settle a great many problems.
MR. POGNON:
Madam President.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes.
MR. POGNON:
I am grateful to the Trial Chamber for its interest in seeking a
solution to the problem.  But this is the problem: each time that we
have a document, we have a working session.  This is a criminal trial.
This is a fact-based trial.  We have working sessions with our
client.  And after that working session, that is how we build our
cross-examination.  Obviously, we also do this taking account of the
examination-in-chief.  Therefore, this accelerated procedure that you
suggest would perhaps allow us to translate one or two documents.
Although the Trial Chamber seems to be placing the Defence under
obligation, whereas we are facing a failure on the part of the
Prosecution to disclose documents, which is why we raised a motion,
and we would like for there to be case law developed in this respect.
We have the feeling that the ball is always thrown into Defence's
court, that is, in the sense that we are always accused of not coming
to an understanding with Prosecution, or that we are being placed in
circumstances such as to cause the Defence to not feel that its rights
are guaranteed.
I think the Defence must be afforded all rights -- the means of
providing the Accused or guaranteeing the Accused with all his rights.
If we program -- or we plan a session for nine o'clock and then we
are here at two o'clock, I do not think that is practically feasible.
Whatever the means -- or the problems faced by the Tribunal, I think
Father Seromba has been here for two years, and I think we should find
a solution that is satisfactory to all of us and that will help us to
work efficiently in this case.  We have been waiting for very long,
and it is only today that we are being provided with documents that we
find to be unsatisfactory.
Under these conditions, Madam President, if this is what of the Court
suggests, then we would like a decision to be taken in this respect so
that it should be applied as necessary because we are going to do very
bad work otherwise.  We are not doing any justice to the Accused and
we are not giving any service to the Tribunal if we accept this.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
Yes, Madam Prosecutor.
MS. ALEXIS:
Madam President, I merely wish to say that, pursuant to the Rules, the
Prosecutor did indeed disclose everything that was necessary and that
was relevant within the 21 days prescribed by the Rules, except for
the judicial documents which were requested from the Rwandese
authorities.  These were, in fact, disclosed in Kinyarwanda on the
th of September 2004, and they are with regard to all of the
detainees, that is, seven of them.
Additionally, there was a pre-trial conference and at that pre-trial
conference, if I so recall, the -- our senior trial attorney, Madam
Silvana Arbia, made it clear to the Court openly that we had gone over
and above our duties of disclosure as prescribed by the Rules, and
that was because we wished to do all that was fair.
Since then, Madam President, the Court has ordered that we get the
documents, the documents which I shall refer to as the Ruhengeri
documents.  We have since made an application for these documents and
we still await them.  Might the record show, Madam President, one,
that we have disclosed everything that was in our possession; two,
that we have fulfilled the obligations under the Rules; and, three,
that pursuant to the order of this Court, that we did apply to the
Rwandese government for the documents, as requested by my learned
friends, and we await them.
MADAM PRESIDENT:
I would like to point out to you that we are supposed to stop at 5:30
p.m.  So we maintain, we stick to what we had said.  Probably the
parties can come together with the Judges in our office when we leave
from here in a short while, because right now we are compelled to
adjourn.  We cannot keep the interpreters here beyond a certain hour.
I will now turn to the interpreters.  Insofar as what we said is
concerned, it’s possible tomorrow for us to have a session in order to
help the Defence with the translation of the documents that are in
Kinyarwanda.
Very good.  Thank you for your availability.  So we are going to
adjourn and invite parties to join us in the office of the President.
Thank you.
So the Court stands adjourned.
(Court adjourned at 1750H)
(Pages 56 to 70 by Verna Butler)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Trevor Gerbes, Sherri Knox, Shannon Eboe-Osuji and Verna Butler,
Official Court Reporters for the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, do hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings in the above-
entitled cause were taken at the time and place as stated; that it was
taken in shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter transcribed by computer;
that the foregoing pages contain a true and correct transcription of
said proceedings to the best of our ability and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________ Trevor Gerbes
___________________________ Sherri Knox
___________________________ Shannon Eboe-Osuji
___________________________ Verna Butler
