P R O C E E D I N G S
MR. PRESIDENT:
Good morning, everybody.
Mr. Registrar, could you open the proceedings, please.
MR. HOMETOWU:
Thank you, Mr. President.
Trial Chamber III of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
composed of Judge Dennis Byron, presiding; Judge Karin Hökborg; and
Judge Gberdao Gustave Kam, is now sitting in open session today,
Friday, 2nd September 2005, for the continuation of the trial in the
matter of the Prosecutor versus André Rwamakuba, case number ICTR-98-
C-T.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much, Mr. Registrar.
Ms. Fall, I think you know the best way of managing our time today, and
we thought that it would be better to take the testimony in chief of
the witness and then hear your legal argument.  It would probably give
us a better chance to get an early adjournment.  But we also understood
that there was a notice of withdrawal you wanted to give us.
MS. FALL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  That's right.  We would like to withdraw a
motion that we made.  For your assistance, regarding the two witnesses,
Witnesses ALX and AWZ.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I'm sorry.  I missed part of that.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I was saying that we did decide to withdraw the motion
that we made regarding Witnesses ALX and AWZ.
MR. PRESIDENT:
So this is a formal motion for withdrawal, which we can just accept.
And so the matter is now -- is now ended.  Well, I'll make a formal
order of granting leave for the Prosecutor for the withdrawal of these
motions.  Yes. Thank you, Ms. Fall.
MS. FALL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  Regarding these two witnesses, we're going
to make every necessary effort for them to appear before the
Trial Chamber.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.  What is -- what we thought in terms of our
management of time today, it would be more effective and efficient to
call RJ, take RJ's evidence in chief, and then he can be excused and we
could hear the legal argument, of which you gave us notice yesterday.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I have no objection to that procedure since the legal
argument will be heard in due course.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
Could you bring the witness, please.
MR. KALUMO:
Mr. President, I would like to beg for a few more minutes.  As you are
aware, we even had problems to bring the witness to the Court this
morning from the safe house because she has got a small baby, two
months old, and right now she's attending to the baby.  And she will be
in in the next two minutes, with your permission, sir.  Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.
Good morning, Ms. Madam Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Good morning, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We thank you for coming to the Court.  We are about to take your
testimony in this case, and the registrar will, first of all, ask you
to take an oath to tell the truth.  Do you understand?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, Mr. President.
(Declaration made by Witness RJ in Kinyarwanda)
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, Madam Witness, you will be giving your testimony by responding to
questions that are put to you, and the first person who will be asking
you questions will be the Prosecutor, and you'll have to answer her
questions.  You understand that?
Thank you very much.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, Mr. President.
MS. FALL:
Thank you, Mr. President.
WITNESS RJ,
first having been duly sworn,
testified as follows:
EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Good morning, Madam Witness.
A.    Good morning, madam.
Q.    Madam Witness, before you start, I would like to apologise personally
because you've been coming here for two days now, and you have been
taken back home without your being able to testify.  I'm sure that this
has caused you some discomfort, and I would like to apologise
personally for this.  Unfortunately, we were not able to determine that
you would not be able to testify in the previous two days.
I am going to begin your testimony, as Mr. President said.  Before we
start, I should like to remind you that you are a protected witness, so
please refrain from giving any information that is likely to reveal
your identity.  That is why I am going to give you a piece of paper.
It is a personal identification sheet, which contains your personal
particulars, and you are going to verify whether the information
contained therein is correct.
MS. FALL:
With the assistance of the registry.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, does this document mention your name?
A.    Yes, I saw my name.  Yes, yes, I see my first name.
Q.    The year of your birth, is the year of your birth mentioned in the
document?
A.    Yes, I can see the year of my birth on the piece of paper.
Q.    Does it mention your nationality?
A.    Yes, it does.
Q.    Does it indicate your ethnic origin?
A.    Yes, I see the ethnic origin as well.
Q.    Does it mention your current occupation?
A.    Yes, I can see it.
Q.    Does it mention the occupation -- your occupation in 1994?
A.    Yes.
Q.    Witness, can you tell us whether the information as to your place of
birth, your current address, and your address in 1994 are correct?
Please check and tell us if the information is correct.
A.    I have observed that the information is correct, but regarding my
current address, it has already changed.  This changed because I left
this place for reasons of personal safety.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The witness has indicated where she currently lives.
THE WITNESS:
Apart from this element, all other information contained in this sheet
is correct.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President --
MR. HOOPER:
Sorry.  I'm not concerned with her present address whatsoever.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, I think that it would be better if she wrote it, if we could.
We thank the interpreter for not mentioning it on the record, but she
could write it on the document, which will form part of the sealed
records of the Court.
MS. FALL:
Exactly, Mr. President.  That is what I wanted to propose.  With the
assistance of the registry, the witness could be given a piece of paper
so that she could write down her current address.
THE WITNESS:
I am going to put down the information on the piece of paper.
There is not enough space here.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Says the witness.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, thank you.  Now, would you please write down the date
on the document and sign it.  Today is the 2nd of September 2005.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I would like -- for reasons of the record, I would like
to be indicate -- to be indicated that the witness has shown -- written
down where she lives right now.  I would like this -- to tender this
document as Prosecution Exhibit P. 69, and I would like it to be placed
under seal.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Admitted, P. 69 under seal.
MS. FALL:
I have been told that there is a mistake, Mr. President.  I'm told that
it is supposed to be P. 70, actually.
MR. PRESIDENT:
P. 70.
(Exhibit No. P. 70 admitted, under seal)
(Pages 1 to 5 by Ann Burum)
H
MS. FALL:
Most obliged, Mr. President.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Witness, have you ever given testimony before this Tribunal?
A.    Yes, I have.
Q.    Do you remember the date?
A.    No, I don't.
Q.    Do you remember the year?
MR. HOOPER:
You can lead the witness.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, can you give us any details as to when you came to
give testimony before this
Trial Chamber?
A.    It was last year, but I can't remember the month.  I think it could
have been October, November or December, but I'm not able to remember
the exact month when I came to give testimony before the Trial Chamber.
Q.    Madam Witness, can you tell us what trial that was?
A.    It was in the André Rwamakuba trial.
Q.    Have you given testimony be -- before a Rwandan court?
A.    Yes, I have.
Q.    Can you tell us when you did that?
A.    I don't remember.
Q.    Can you tell us in what trial you gave testimony?
A.    I beg your pardon?  I didn't quite understand you.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Says the witness.
THE WITNESS:
I didn't hear the question.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    In what trial did you give testimony before the Rwandan courts?
A.    It was in the trial of Dr. Gatera, also the trial of Dr. Twagirayezu
and Sub-lieutenant Bizimana.  I must say that in the trial of sub-
lieutenant Bizimana, there was someone else who was involved, that is,
Dr. Kageruka and another soldier, whose name I don't remember.
Q.    Apart from these two courts that you have mentioned, have you ever
made any statements regarding other persons before anybody whatsoever?
A.    I also provided information before Gacaca court sessions, which are
held regularly in our country.
Q.    Have you met investigators of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, Madam Witness?
A.    I didn't meet any investigators of the Tribunal.
Q.    Madam Witness, did you make any statements in Rwanda?
A.    I don't understand the question.
Q.    Did you make statements -- any statements in Rwanda to some people?
A.    Yes, I gave statements to people.
Q.    And when those people approached you, can you tell us how they
approached you?
A.    Those people informed me that they were working for the international
Tribunal.
Q.    Can you tell us how many times, if you remember, that you met such
people?
A.    No, I cannot remember.  Several times.  I cannot remember how many
times.
Q.    And when they took your statements, as you said, did they ask you to
sign those statements?
A.    Yes, some statements I signed, other statements I did not sign.
Q.    Madam Witness, before signing those statements, were they read back
to you?
A.    Yes.
Q.    Have you, at one time or another, made any corrections or changes to
such statements?
A.    Yes, some things had to be changed.  Errors were made and
subsequently corrected.
Q.    Madam Witness, when you were conversing with those people from the
international Tribunal, were you alone?
A.    The investigator was accompanied by an interpreter.
Q.    Apart from the interpreter, was there anyone else?
A.    No one.
Q.    Witness, do you remember where those interviews took place?  Can you
tell us exactly where such interviews took place, if you remember?
A.    I remember one place we met once with those investigators.
Q.    Witness, I am going to talk of certain events.  I would like you to
answer us slowly at not too great a length, slowly so that people can
take notes and not to wander off the topic too much.
Madam Witness, in April 1994, where did you live?  And I remind you
that you must not give any information that might reveal your identity.
A.    I was at home.
Q.    Could you tell us, please, perhaps in which commune?
A.    I cannot give you the name of the commune.  I told you, I have
problems concerning my safety.  I cannot give you the name of the
commune in open session.
Q.    I don't think that is a big problem, but if you feel you cannot,
because of problems of personal safety, I will not insist.
Madam, do you know what happened in Rwanda on the 6th of April 1994?
A.    Yes, I know.
Q.    Can you tell us?
A.    On the 6th of April, President Habyarimana's plane was shot down.
President Habyarimana was the head of state.
Q.    How did you hear about that?
A.    It was spoken of over the radio and other people spoke of it, and
that's how the news came to my attention -- attention.
Q.    At that point -- at that moment, where were you?
A.    I was at home.
Q.    With whom were you?
A.    I was with the members of my family, that is to say, my husband and
children.
MR. HOOPER:
I will just indicate that my friend can lead this witness until we
arrive at the hospital and perhaps the date of that, but up to that
point, there's no contention.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Can you tell us what happened in your cellule after the president's
demise?
A.    The day after, we saw people running away.  We also fled at one
point, left our house, our home.  On the 9th, our house had been set on
fire.
Q.    You tell us you saw people fleeing.  Who were those people fleeing,
did you know them?
A.    They were Tutsi.  They were fleeing, and when they arrived in our
neighborhood we asked them why they were fleeing, and they told us that
they were being threatened by Hutu, who had already set their houses
ablaze.
Q.    In your answer you mentioned a date.  I think it was the 9th of
April.  What does the 9th of April represent?
A.    That is the day when my family and I fled.
Q.    Can you tell the Trial Chamber why you fled?
A.    People set fire to our house and looted our cattle, and as we felt
under threat, we decided to leave our home, and then our houses were
set on fire.
Q.    You say "people" who set your house on fire.  Can you tell us who
these people were, if you know them?
A.    They were Interahamwe -- people who joined the Interahamwe.  They
came, set our houses on fire and looted our property.  They were Hutus
who'd banded together in some sort of an association.  They were the
people committing those misdeeds.
Q.    You tell us you fled.  Were you alone when you fled?
A.    I fled with my family.
Q.    Can you tell us where you went with your family?
A.    We went to Kibeho .
Q.    Can you tell us how long it took you to get to Kibeho as of the
moment when you left your home and arrived there?
A.    We covered that distance in a very short time.
Q.    Can you give us the approximate duration?  How long approximately?
A.    It -- one hour or two, about an hour or two to cover that distance.
Q.    Can you tell us what happened when you arrived in Kibeho?
A.    We were attacked.  Those Interahamwe attacked us.  They were in the
company of soldiers and local authorities.  It was on the 14th, that's
when the Interahamwe and the soldiers attacked us.  They killed people
with bullets and bladed weapons.
My whole family died there.  The church was destroyed; they set it
afire with petrol.  We had found refuge, but at one point we had to
leave it, and I subsequently left that place with one of my children
and we went to Karama.
(Pages 6 to 9 by Jean Baigent)
H
BY MS. FALL:
Q.   Madam Witness, let me come back to this event.  So you mentioned the
dates the 14th of April.  Why are you so specific with regards to that
date?
A.   It is on that date that I lost all the members of my family, so it
remains engraved in my memory.  And what is more, every year we
commemorate the death of our children at that place, so that, so much
so that I cannot forget that date.
Q.   Madam Witness, when you arrive there, did you find any other people?
A.   We found other people there who came from various commune.
Q.   Can you tell us from which commune they had come from?
A.   Some had come from Nshili some from Rwamiko and Mubuga.  Some had
even come from Kivu.
Q.   Are you in a position to estimate how many people were there?
A.   It would be difficult to make an estimate.  There were a lot of
people.  It is a big place.  There is a church, a primary school and
there's classrooms, halls, and a lot of people in those buildings and
courtyards there.
Q.   Do you know the ethnicity of those people?
A.   The refugees were exclusively Tutsis.
Q.   Madam Witness, how can you be so adamant and specific that they were
all Tutsis?
A.   I say that because at the time the people targeted, being sought out,
saying that they were being hunted down by Hutus or that it was Hutus
who set their houses on fire.  That's why I say that.
Q.   You speak of attacks.  Do you know who was attacking?
A.   They were the Interahamwes, local authorities and the Biniga Damien.
The
sub-prefect, he organised several attacks and meetings were they
sensitised the Hutus to killings.
Q.   You say that the sub-prefect organised attacks.  And apart from that
attack of the 14th of April where, so unfortunately, you saw the
members of your family perished.  Are there any other attacks you can
mention?
A.   The attacks continued, and it is only later that the military
intervened at Biniga, Damien’s request, and that's when they finished
off the refugees.
Q.   You say that it's when the soldiers arrived that they finished the
refugees.  Can you tell us in respect of that date, the 14th of April,
when that time came?
A.   The soldiers also intervened on the 14th.  It was in the end of the
morning when they started shooting the refugees, and they were
assisted by the Interahamwes who had there spears and clubs.  The
soldiers would shoot from outside and the Interahamwe would come
inside with their bladed weapons.
Q.   Madam, you told us that the soldiers finished off the refugees.  What
do you mean by that?  Can you tell us what you meant by that?
A.   I told you that the soldiers came in the course of the attack of the
th.  That is the day they encircled the place.  Before that attack,
the Interahamwe came, but did not dare enter the buildings, because
there were many refugees.
Q.   Madam, subsequent to those attacks, were there many victims?
A.   Everybody died.  There were many people.  I'm sure you've heard of
events spoken of.  The few survivors of that massacre fled to Karama.
As far as I am concerned, I arrived in Karama bleeding, because I was
wounded by a spear thrust.
Q.   Madam, you said there were very few survivors, you are one of them,
you went to Karama.  Were you alone when you went to Karama?
A.   I was with the only child I had.  I was carrying on my back.
Everybody else had died, perished at Kibeho.
Q.   You say you were wounded.  Where exactly were you wounded?
A.   I had been given a lance, spear thrust in the upper part of my leg.
Q.   Was that a deep wound?
A.   Yes, it was quite deep and I was suffering from that wound at that
time, and today there is a visible scar.
Q.   Madam, can you tell us how long it took you to get to that place
where you sought refuge?
A.   It took all night.  I only arrived the following morning.
Q.   Can you tell us how wounded were the leg wounds?  And you told us
that it pains you -- you are suffering.  How did you manage to get to
that place after an all-night trip?
A.   I was with other people, but the wound was still fresh.  I told you I
had a thigh wound.  One can still move with that.
Q.   Can you tell us what happened when you arrived there?
A.   When I arrived, we found other refugees who had preceded us and who
were also wounded.  There were others, and we found a priest who tried
to help the seriously wounded, and he took them to the university
teaching hospital to help them.
Q.   Madam, you told us that there were wounded people.  Could you tell us
how many, approximately?
A.   No, I cannot give you even an approximate figure.  There were many
wounded.
Q.   You said there were many wounded.  Can you tell us the ethnicity of
those people?
A.   They were Tutsis.
Q.   How can you be so adamant and specific and tell us that they were
Tutsis?
A.   I say that, because at the time of those events it was the Tutsis who
were being sought out, and moreover, some of the victims had been in
the company of some of those victims in Kibeho and we had travelled
together, so I sort of knew them.
Q.   Madam, in your statement, in your testimony, you told us that there
was a priest who was attending to the injured and took them to
hospital for treatment.  Are you able to tell us what happened to that
person?
A.   The priest's name was Ngomirakiza, but he is no longer alive.  He was
killed.
Q.   Madam Witness, how long did you stay at that place?
A.   I did not stay there long.  I stayed there for a relatively short
time.
Q.   Can you tell us approximately how long you stayed at Karama?
A.   I did not stay there long, because I think it was on the 21st that I
arrived at the teaching hospital.  I do believe it was the 21st I
arrived at the hospital.
Q.   Can you tell us under what circumstances you went to the university
teaching hospital?
A.   I was one of the wounded persons transferred to the hospital.  As far
as I am concerned, I arrived there on the 21st in a vehicle.
Q.   Madam, you have given us a date, namely, the 21st.  Once again, how
can you be specific as to the date?
A.   When we arrived there, the people were saying that it was the 21st.
As far as I am concerned, I was not in a position to know the date,
the day’s date, but I heard people saying that was the date.
Q.   Could you perhaps be more specific and tell us who were those people
who were talking of the 21st?
A.   I no longer remember who said it was the 21st but when we arrived, we
were among the last to arrive, and I remember they said it was the
st, but without remembering who exactly said so.
Q.   You said that you were driven to the hospital, transported to the
hospital.  Can you tell us how?
A.   When I arrived at the hospital, I went to the paediatric ward where
children were taken care of, in front where I found a plastic tent,
where the other people that the priest had brought to the hospital
were.  So I was put in that tent with the other people that the priest
had taken to the hospital.
Q.   According to your statement, your testimony, therefore you were put
in a tent.  And since you mentioned the paediatric ward, can you tell
us where in relation to that the tent was situated?
A.   That plastic was pitched in front of the paediatric ward reception
area.
Q.   Can you tell us, even if only approximately, what was the distance
between the tent and the paediatric reception?
A.   Not far at all.  Standing in the tent, you could speak to someone
standing at the paediatric reception.
Q.   Madam, you told us that when you were in the tent, you met other
people.  Can you tell us, approximately again, how many people were
there?
A.   There were many people, but I cannot tell you.  I cannot estimate how
many people were there.
Q.   Could you give us -- tell us the ethnicity of those people if you
know what it was?
A.   Those people were the people that the priest had brought, and they
were Tutsis.
Q.   Madam Witness, can you tell us what you saw, what you observed when
you were in that tent?
A.   I saw doctors who came to that tent, but before the doctors arrived,
I saw other people working for the NCO, Médecins sans frontière,
Doctors without Borders.  They are the ones who gave us preliminary
treatment, and then other doctors came and asked the patients to give
their ID cards, which was when I saw Dr. Gatera, André Rwamakuba, and
one soldier called Justin Muvunyi and other soldiers and a lady who
was said to be Gatera's sister.  And I also saw other people, doctors,
who I didn't know, but subsequently, I came to know who they were.
And when they came, they started to ask the patients to show their
identity cards.
Q.   We will come back on this, madam, in such a manner as to allow the
parties to take notes.
MS. FALL:
I thought it was an objection, but counsel has risen to thank me.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.   Madam Witness, you have spoken of doctors who came to the hospital.
Can you tell us the names of those doctors that you have quoted to us?
A.   There was Dr. Gatera in the company of André Rwamakuba, and his
sister named Juliet.  And there was one Twagirayezu.  There were male
nurses and other doctors; I don't know their names.  Also, a soldier
by the name of Tharcisse Muvunyi.
Q.   Madam Witness, before coming back to those events themselves, I
should like to ask you, since you gave names, what knowledge do you
have of those people?  Did you know Gatera prior to that?
A.   No.  I did not know those people.  I saw them passing without knowing
them, but since I stayed quite some time at the hospital, I came to
know them.
Q.   Regarding Dr. Gatera, how did you know that he was indeed Dr. Gatera?
A.   When I went to the maternity ward, a lady who had registered me as
her carer gave me that information when that doctor came to the
maternity ward.
MR. HOOPER:
It would be very helpful if there was just a slight pause at the end
of the answer, which is then translated to us, so that I can keep a
note of what the witness is saying.  Thank you very much.
MS. FALL:
How long do you need after each answer to take notes so as to avoid
my being interrupted?
MR. HOOPER:
Just a reasonable amount of time.
MS. FALL:
Thank you, interpreter, for that very clear explanation.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.   Madam Witness, on the subject of André Rwamakuba, how did you come to
know his name that he was indeed André Rwamakuba?
A.   When I went to the maternity ward, that lady whose carer I was gave
me that information.  That lady told me that the person in question
was André Rwamakuba, because she knew him.
Q.   So when you were at the maternity, did other people confirm to you
what that lady had told you?
MR. HOOPER:
I am sorry, that is a leading question on a very important matter.
I'm sure this subject can be approached in another way.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.   Madam Witness, I should put the question afresh.  How did you know
that that person was
André Rwamakuba?
A.   It was a lady in the maternity at the same time as I who told me, and
she had registered me as her carer.  I was the one who went to get the
gruel for her from the place where they dish out the gruel or
porridge.  I went to fetch from the porridge place.
Q.   Madam Witness, regarding doctor -- the one you named as Dr.
Twagirayezu, did you know him prior to that?
A.   No, I did not know him before that.  It was the people who knew them
who spoke of them to me.
Q.   You told us that the doctor, the one you called Dr. Gatera and Dr.
Rwamakuba, came to that tent, that they were checking identity cards
had been verified.  Can you tell us who was veryfying identity cards?
A.   It was Dr. Twagirayezu who was asking patients to show their identity
cards.  Drs. Rwamakuba and Gatera were doing the same thing.
Q.   You have told us that these people were accompanied by soldiers.  Can
you tell us whether these soldiers were armed or not?
A.   Some of the soldiers were armed.
MR. HOOPER:
Had the witness previously said "soldiers", or had she spoken of "a
soldier"?  My understanding is that she spoke of a soldier.  If that's
the case, then again, the leading question latter to this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We will take note of Mr. Hooper's request.
MR. HOOPER:
So, I don't need an answer.  It's really to raise -- the damage is
done, if there was damage done.  It's just to raise a concern.  I
invite my learned friend to -- given the contentious nature of this
evidence, to proceed with the care I know she is trying to.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I am very careful.  I don't want any argument between
what Mr. Hooper hears, however, and what is said and what can be in
the records.  I think that I am not putting leading questions.  She
said that there were soldiers amongst whom she recognised Muvunyi.
So, I think Defence counsel would be well advised to listen carefully
to what the witness is saying carefully before he stands up to make
any comment, which he interprets on matters that he interprets as he
wishes. Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
We don't think there is any ruling required at this stage, but we
notice it is about 10:35 and this might be a convenient time to take a
short break.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I do not know whether it is important for Mr. Hooper's
statement to be verified, because I'll be embarassed if Mr. Hooper
stands up to say  that I am putting leading questions, whereas, I feel
that the questions are not leading and an answer can be given.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, Mr. Hooper specifically said he was not asking for a ruling and
he was just asking you to be careful, so I don't think it is necessary
for us to make any comment on it.  There is no specific complaint,
just a -- I don't think that we need to rule at this stage.  If I
thought that there was a need for ruling that you were asking leading
questions, we will make such a ruling, but' I don't think this needs a
ruling at this stage.  So we take an adjournment now.
(Court recessed at 1038H)
(Pages 10 to15 by Sheriffo Jammeh)
(Court resumed at 1102H)
MR. PRESIDENT:
We can resume now.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Witness, I am going to put a question to you that I put to you before
because we want a lot more clarification on the matter.  You said that
when you were in the tent, you saw a group of people arrive.  Can you
tell us precisely, and without going too quickly, who was in the group
of people?
A.    Do you wish me to give you the names as well?
Q.    Yes.  You've already done it, but it's all right, you can do so
again.
A.    When I was in the tent I saw the doctors who came and asked for the
identification papers from the refugees who were in the tent, but
before, these patients had received care from workers of
Médecins sans frontière.  So the doctors came afterwards, the group
of doctors came afterwards.  The doctors were Dr. Gatera, André
Rwamakuba, a soldier called Tharcisse Muvunyi, and others soldiers of
lesser rank who were carrying guns, along with Dr. Twagirayezu and
others doctors whose names I don't remember.  This group also contained
nurses including the sister of Dr. Gatera who was called Juliette.
This group of people asked refugees lying in the tent to show their
identification papers.
Q.    Thank you, Madam Witness.  That is very clear.  In order to avoid any
confusion, I am going to ask you not to go too quickly and to answer
the questions I put to you as precisely as possible.  It would be very
useful to us.  Please do not go too fast because people are taking
notes, the parties are taking notes, and this will avoid us wasting a
lot of time.
Witness, you say that identity cards were being checked.  Can you tell
us who was checking the identity cards.
A.    André Rwamakuba, André (sic) Gatera are the people who most often
examined identity cards.
Q.    Witness, can you indicate to us, either precisely or approximately,
where you were in relation to the group in question when all this was
happening?
A.    I was close to this group of people.
Q.    Madam Witness, using this courtroom as a reference for the place
where you were, that is, using this courtroom, can you indicate the
distance from you at which the group was located?
A.    I was under the tent.  This group of people were inside the tent, and
they got to the place where I was.
Q.    Madam Witness, I did -- I'm going to repeat my question.  I don't
think you understood it.  Perhaps I would like us to try to assess the
distance, even approximately, at which you were from the group and use
as a reference point the place where you are now, which is the witness
box, and another point in this courtroom.  You might use me or other
people in the courtroom as a reference, and please indicate what was
the distance that separated you from this group.
A.    In a few words, it is as if where I am sitting now and this group of
people were in front of me here in the corridor asking patients to show
their identity cards.  I saw them.  I could see them.  They went past
me.
Q.    Madam Witness, can you tell us whether you were asked -- asked for
your identity card?
A.    Yes, I was asked to show my identity card.
Q.    Did you show your identity card?
A.    No, didn't have an identity card.  I had lost it because it wasn't
useful to me any more.
Q.    Do you remember when you lost this identity card?
A.    I lost it during the time when I was in hospital because it was no
longer useful to me.
Q.    When you say that it was of no further use to you, what do you mean
by that?
A.    I'd like to tell you that at that time when a person was bearer of an
identity card indicating that he or she was Tutsi, the person was
killed.  So I realised that the identity card was of no further use to
me, so I threw it away.
Q.    Witness, you told us in response to a question a while back that you
had lost it.  Now you say that you had thrown it away.  It's not quite
the same thing.  Perhaps you might tell us exactly what happened.
A.    I threw it away because it was of no further use to me.
Q.    Witness, can you tell us what happened after the identity cards were
taken?
A.    After checking identity cards, identity cards that mention Tutsi
ethnic origin were taken.  These -- this group of people would withdraw
to some distance.  I saw hospital workers come with stretchers, and
they asked patients to get onto the stretchers, and they took them away
with them.
Q.    Madam Witness, were -- did they check the identification papers of
all the wounded persons who were in the tent?
A.    Some people had identity cards on them.  And others, like me, had
thrown them away.
Q.    You're telling us that afterwards, hospital workers came with
stretchers and took some -- put some of the wounded patients on these
stretchers.  Can you tell us what patients these were?
A.    These are the patients who were under the tents, who were taken away.
I thought they were taken to -- being taken to another ward in the
hospital.  The next day I tried to find them and I failed.  So I asked
someone who was working at the hospital, and this person told me that
these -- these people were Tutsis and that they had been killed.  So I
returned to where I had been, and as the white people who were treating
us were upset that they had killed their -- they had -- because they
had realised that their patients had been killed, they went away and I
left the tent.
Q.    (No interpretation)
A.    I no longer remember how much time I spent in the tent before I left.
There were so many massacres I couldn't focus on time frames, on the
time that I had spent in the tent.
Q.    Madam Witness, if it is possible, could you give us even an
approximate figure of people who were taken away on stretchers?
A.    Many people were taken away.  There were many people who had left
Karama, and all of these people were killed.  Only a few people
survived.  The rest of them were killed.
Q.    Among these people who were taken away and killed, was there anyone
you knew?
A.    I know people who came from the same place as I did, but I do not
remember the names of some of these people any longer.
Q.    If you were given a piece of paper, would you be able to write down
the names of the victims whom you knew who were taken away on
stretchers and killed?
A.    No, I can't do it.  Some people had come from Kibeho.  Like me, they
were wounded people.  I stayed with them in Karama for a very short
time.  We were taken to the hospital afterwards, and I no longer
remember their names.  In any case, I remember that there were many
people.
Q.    Thank you, Witness.  So after these incidents that occurred in the
tent, you left this place after a while, you say.  Can you remind us of
the exact reasons why you left that place?
A.    I left the tent because I had just realised that the people who were
there had just been killed.  That is why I decided -- decided to leave
the tent, because I did not wish to be killed.  So I went and hid at
the maternity.
Q.    Can you tell us where in the maternity you were?
A.    I was in the room or in the ward that was at the lower level.  This
is the ward where women with difficult pregnancies were hospitalised.
Q.    If it is possible, could you give us a more precise description of
the location of this ward in the maternity unit?
A.    It is the first ward.  This is the ward in which women with difficult
pregnancies are hospitalised.  It is the first ward you get to when you
approach the maternity.
Q.    Can you tell us whether you were alone at that place?
A.    I was with my child.  I was always with my child.  We were together
in this ward, and there were many patients in the ward.
Q.    Can you tell us for how long you stayed at that place?
A.    I stayed there for a fairly long time.  Actually, I left the
university hospital in the beginning of May, I believe; although, I do
not remember the exact year -- the exact date, sorry.
Q.    Did you stay in the ward all the time?
A.    Yes, I stayed in the ward, but since a lady had registered me as her
carer, I was able to get out to find -- get her food and porridge and
so on, so I used to get out.
Q.    So you have told us about this Hutu woman who passed you off as her
carer.  Was it the same lady who told you that the man in question was
André Rwamakuba?
MR. HOOPER:
Sorry to interrupt.  She hadn't specified that the woman was a Hutu.
She described her, I believe, as just a lady.  Again, we're not --
well, not again --
MS. FALL:
Mr. Hooper, do you think it might be possible for us to check this in
the transcript?
MR. HOOPER:
Well, we can do that in the break, as we did last time.  And I was
right last time, so I may be right this time, too.  You just can see
that.
MS. FALL:
Mr. Hooper, you were not right the last time.  I think it is quite easy
for you to say this.  I didn't want to return to this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I think all remarks should be addressed to the Bench at this level.  I
don't really want this cut and thrust between the counsel.
Ms. Fall, when these matters arise, it's very easy to address them.
What we are interested in is the testimony of the witness, and it's
quite possible for just the question to be put again in a slightly
different way, and let's get on.  It doesn't need argument between the
lawyers.
MS. FALL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  The problem, however, is that Mr. Hooper
always says that the witness did not say that, and this calls to
question the way in which I put the questions.  Mr. President, the
transcripts are there.  That is why I asked whether it is possible to
verify this.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.  And you see, at the end of the day, as the Judges in the matter,
we are going to resolve these issues.  At this particular point in
time, it's not important.  What's important is extracting the witness's
testimony properly.  What we want to know is the witness's evidence.
So a simple way of addressing this is to just rephrase the question,
then we have the witness's testimony on record.
If we thought that counsel were -- were consciously or deliberately
abusing the rules, we would say so.  That's not what we think has
occurred.  And I don't think that's the suggestion that Mr. Hooper has
made.  Anybody makes errors from time to time, but we don't think that
what has happened warrants our intervention at this stage, so that's
why I'm not making a formal ruling.  If it was an important issue, then
we'll go back to the transcript and resolve it, but I don't think it's
necessary to resolve it.
MS. FALL:
Thank you, Mr. President.  I would, however, like to say that
Mr. Hooper should take some care in the way he makes his contributions,
which are sometimes difficult to explain.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, you mentioned a lady who passed you off as her carer.
Can you tell us what the ethnic origin of this lady was?
A.    This lady was a Hutu.
Q.    Can you tell us regarding the information that she gave you in
respect to André Rwamakuba what exactly it is that she said?
A.    She told me that the group of assailants that had attacked the
maternity, that is, the group composed of Dr. Gatera, André Rwamakuba,
and others, when the group came, they asked the patients to show their
identity cards.  And when Dr. Gatera hit my child when he got to my
level because I just told him that I did not have an identity card,
that is when I asked the lady to tell me the names of these people,
because I did not know them all.  She told me that there was
Dr. Gatera, Dr. André Rwamakuba.  The woman told me that the man who
accompanied Dr. Gatera was Dr. Rwamakuba, who was a member of the
interim government.  So it is this lady who told me the names of these
people before they left.
Q.    (No interpretation)
A.    Yes, that is when I learnt of it, but later on, someone else told me
the same thing.  There is a man I met in the corridors of the surgery
unit, and he told me, this man.  When I was looking -- when I looked
into that ward, I saw that they were taking patients out of the ward,
and so this man told me -- the man who -- the man told me that the man
who was doing this was called André Rwamakuba and he was a minister.
Q.    Madam, I shall return to the problem.  I asked you whether you stayed
in the ward for all the time, and you said you used to go out from time
to time.  Could --
A.    Yes, I used to go out from time to time to go and look for porridge
to give this woman.
Q.    Madam Witness, I am going to have to ask you to wait for me to finish
asking my question before you answer and not to make your answers too
long so that we can make some progress.
A.    All right.
Q.    So, you tell us that you used to go out often to go and get porridge
for this woman.
A.    Yes.
Q.    Can you tell us what used to happen when you got out to do so?
A.    So I went out, and when I was returning from the place from which I
had gone to get the porridge, I saw André Rwamakuba in the ward.  He
was with other doctors, and he was pulling out the drip sets from the
patients, and he was asking the patients to get up, and the workers
would take away the patients.  I asked -- I met someone and I asked
this person who these people were, and the person said, "That is André
Rwamakuba."  So that was the first time -- second time I had heard the
name.  The first time was when the lady told me about it.
Q.    I shall return to these matters, Madam Witness.  You have told us
that when you went to get porridge, you saw André Rwamakuba in a
maternity ward taking off the drips from the bodies of the patients.
Could you tell us in what maternity ward this happened?
A.    It was in the surgery ward.  That is where I saw them.
MR. HOOPER:
She didn't say maternity ward, as we know here.  That's why I rose to
my feet.  I'm sorry, it is -- it's quite difficult to follow.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, the Witness said that she was in the maternity in one of
these wards and that she used to leave from there to go and get food.
And when she was in one of the corridors of the maternity on her way to
go and fetch food, she saw, in a ward, André Rwamakuba in one of the
wards.  So this --
MR. HOOPER:
I'm sorry, this is significant, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes.
MR. HOOPER:
And if it's necessary, we can have the transcript read back.  And my
friend's at a disadvantage because she's having to carry a lot of facts
and information, I know, in her head, and on your feet it's difficult,
but my note reads, "So when I went out and when I was returning with
the porridge, I saw
André Rwamakuba in the ward.  He was with other doctors, was pulling
out the drips and telling them --" not sure about this bit " -- to get
out and workers taking out the patients.  So that was the second time I
heard the name.  The first was the woman."  So this relates to the
incident in -- as I understand it, when she met the man in the corridor
of surgery.  So you're compacting the two, and that's going to make
things, with respect, very confusing.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Now, I want to say this:  What we are interested in is the testimony of
the witness.  Now, even when matters are put to the witness that are
not completely accurate, what is of interest to us is what the witness
says about them.  So it's the witness's evidence that we want.
Now, the problem is in examination-in-chief one has to be careful about
asking leading questions.  So errors put in examination-in-chief are
more significant than errors put in cross-examination.  But as of now,
the witness has clarified her position, and if it's necessary, the
witness could be asked again.  Because what we're interested in knowing
is what the witness is saying about the situation.
So I think you can go on.  It's not necessary to argue with counsel in
this matter.  We're interested in what the witness has to say.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Witness, in exactly what ward -- let me rephrase, then.  After you
left the tent, where did you go to?  You had given the answer before
this.
A.    I went to the maternity ward.
Q.    You told us that when you saw André Rwamakuba for the second time,
you saw him in a ward pulling out drips from patients.  Can you tell us
where this ward was?
A.    It is the surgery ward.  You go through there when you're returning
from the place where we used to go and fetch porridge for the patients.
Q.    Can you tell us where this ward is in relation to the maternity?
A.    The ward is a little above the maternity.  It is not very far from
the maternity.
Q.    When you saw André Rwamakuba, can you tell us exactly where you were?
A.    I was in the corridor.  I was returning from the kitchen, and when I
looked into the ward, I saw him.  He was telling the patients to get up
in this surgery ward.
Q.    Can you estimate the distance that separated you from André
Rwamakuba, even approximately?
A.    The ward is just next to the corridor, and the doors were open, so I
was returning from the place where I had gone to look for porridge.  I
saw someone come out of a vehicle.  I saw him get into the ward.  I was
still a little far off, but when I got to the level of the ward, I saw
that this person was with other doctors and that they were telling the
patients to get up and leave the ward.  I went on my way, and that is
when I learnt -- I met this man who told me that the person who was in
the ward was
André Rwamakuba.
Q.    Can you tell us, Madam Witness, for that duration of time where you
in the ward and you saw
André Rwamakuba and the people accompanying him, what did you
actually see him personally doing?
A.    I saw him ask patients to get up -- first of all, I saw him removing
drips from patients.  And there was a man a plaster cast whom he told
to get up, and he took him to the corridor, and other patients I saw
that had been told to get up or taken out of bed, but I personally saw
him lead this man with a plaster cast.  He was someone from Matyazo,
and he took him out of ward.  I saw that with my own eyes.  I saw him
making patients in the surgical ward get out of bed.
Q.    Madam Witness, Madam Witness, there was patients that you saw André
Rwamakuba get out of bed.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The witness interrupts.
THE WITNESS:
Yes, I saw that.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Do you know what happened to them subsequently?  Can you tell us what
happened to them subsequently, if you know?
A.    They were gotten out of bed, and they were taken to a vehicle outside
the maternity ward.  It was a red pickup truck.  They were put aboard
that pickup truck.  And that person who had crutches was beaten, and
Dr. Gatera and Rwamakuba had the ID cards, and they tore them up, and
then they told -- the patients who had been put aboard the pickup truck
were told to look upon the world for the last time.  I saw that with my
own eyes.
Q.    Witness, I should like to come back to some things you have said.
You have said that that person who was taken away and who had a plaster
cast, someone struck him.  Can you tell us who struck him, if you know?
A.    It was André Rwamakuba who struck him.
Q.    You then told us that when they were taken away, Drs. Rwamakuba and
Gatera tore up the ID cards saying, "Look upon the world for the last
time."
A.    Yes, that is what I have stated.
Q.    Can you tell us, since it is a sentence you heard, who among
Drs. Gatera and Rwamakuba spoke that sentence?
A.    It was Gatera.  It was Gatera who uttered that phrase.  Dr. Gatera
uttered that sentence the first time, and then Rwamakuba also tore up
ID cards and uttered the same sentence, "Look upon the world for the
last time," and he threw the pieces of paper to the ground.
Q.    Madam Witness, when those events occurred, where exactly were you?
A.    I was -- I was standing near the maternity ward door in the direction
of where the vehicle was parked.  It was a large door.
Q.    Madam Witness, can you tell us where exactly, in relation to the
maternity ward, or the paediatric ward, where the vehicle was parked?
A.    The vehicle was parked in front of the maternity ward, in front of
the maternity ward door and not far from the door.
Q.    Could you give us a description of the vehicle?
A.    It was a red pickup truck.
Q.    Madam Witness, you tell us you were a carer, you would go out.  How --
inasmuch as there were problems, how could you move around so freely?
A.    I had a piece of paper with a stamp issued by the doctor.  It was a
document issued to carers.  The doctor of the department concerned
issued you with such a paper, and that's why I could move around
freely.
(Pages 16 to 23 by Sherri Knox)
H
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam, you spoke of the man who you met and who had given you
information regarding André Rwamakuba.  Can you remind us where exactly
you met him?
A.    I met him near the surgical ward in the corridor.
Q.    Can you tell us when he mentioned -- when he mentioned André
Rwamakuba to you?  Was it before or after the events you have narrated,
which you witnessed in that ward?
A.    He told me after I witnessed the events in the ward.
Q.    Concerning that man who informed you, was it someone you knew
beforehand?
A.    No, I made his acquaintance at the hospital.
Q.    Apart from that time, when you met him after the deeds committed by
Rwamakuba that you witnessed, did you meet that person again?
A.    No, I did not meet him again -- I did not see him again.
Q.    Madam Witness, after having witnessed -- observed those events, can
you tell us what you subsequently did?
A.    Subsequently, I was found, so I went to hide in a sorghum field not
far away, and the next morning I went to seek refuge at the préfectural
offices.
Q.    Before coming to that, you have told us that at one point your child
had been beaten.  Is that correct?
A.    That is correct.
Q.    Can you tell us under -- or in what circumstances that occurred?
A.    It was Dr. Gatera who beat him, and he was accompanied by Rwamakuba,
but it was Gatera who beat my child.  He asked me for my ID card, and I
told him that I had none.  He took a stake that someone else was
carrying and he beat my child with a stick saying he was an Inkotanyi,
that I was lying and that I was Tutsi.
Q.    Madam Witness, can you tell us -- can you specify, in respect of the
time when you saw Rwamakuba removing drips, did this occur before or
after having seen Rwamakuba?
A.    It happened after I saw Rwamakuba -- André Rwamakuba.
MR. HOOPER:
I am sorry, that may have been lost in translation.  I didn't
understand the question and subsequently I didn't understand the -- or
consequently, I didn't understand the answer.  What event is being
related to what event?  I am unclear.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    You told us that you saw André Rwamakuba in that ward removing drips,
tearing out drips from the patients and putting them outside, and you
told us that your child had been beaten, was beaten by Dr. Gatera, that
Dr. Rwamakuba was present but that it was Dr. Gatera who beat the
child, and I want to know whether the latter event occurred before the
events concerning Rwamakuba and the removal of the drips or after.
A.    After those events occurred, afterwards.
Q.    Thank you.  I hope it is clear now.
MR. HOOPER:
I am sorry, that doesn't make sense with the sequence of events that
this witness has related so far.  So it's not clear to me, no.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Hooper, that would probably be a matter for cross-examination.
MR. HOOPER:
I suppose that's right, but we have gone back and forward.  Anyway --
yes, that's right.
Sorry, Mr. President.
MS. FALL:
Counsel Hooper, I will not venture to make any judgemental values as to
your cross-examination, and you will be perfectly free in the course of
cross-examination to restate the chronological order of events.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, you have spoken to us of that group of people that you
saw on different occasions in different places.  Can you tell us
whether those people were armed?
A.    They were armed.
Q.    Can you tell us what sort of arms they bore?
MR. HOOPER:
I am sorry to keep getting up.  May I suggest that that may have been a
leading question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Fall, in the long run, when we are coming to assess the testimony,
that's when these matters will be given importance.  So it's in your
interests as well to take care of (inaudible).  Again, I don't think it
is necessary for me to make a ruling.  But you could proceed.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, I should like to come back to André Rwamakuba.  You
did not know him before.  According to your testimony, you saw him
twice, because you have related the incident in the tent and another
incident in the ward, in the surgical ward.
A.    I also saw him -- also saw him in the maternity ward.
Q.    Can you describe him to us?
A.    I don't recall him very well, but when I saw him -- well, it was some
time ago, he was dark skinned with a large nose, of medium height, and
he was somewhat -- quite corpulent, but not too fat.
Q.    Can you tell us how he was dressed?
A.    When I saw him, it was only once.  I could see what he was wearing,
and he was wearing boots and a short-sleeved shirt and dark trousers.
When I saw him in the maternity ward and in the surgical ward, that is
what he was wearing.
Q.    Can you tell us whether he was armed or not?
MR. HOOPER:
I am sorry, that is a leading question.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Ms. Fall, I have to intervene at this stage.  That was a patently
leading question, and it is quite improper.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, can you give us any other information as to what André
Rwamakuba was wearing or carrying?
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
The word porte in French can mean either wearing or carrying.
THE WITNESS:
Rwamakuba had a small sides (sic) attached to his belt.  All those
doctors had small sides -- small axes, sorry, at their belts, at their
waists.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, you have told us that you saw André Rwamakuba several
times at the tent, in the surgical ward, and you have added “in the
maternity ward,” and you have told us that at one point you had to
leave.  Can you tell us at what point you had to leave where -- the
place where you have sought refuge?
A.    I do not remember the exact moment, but I think it was probably at
the beginning of May or mid-May that I went to the préfecture offices.
Q.    When you went to the préfectural offices, were you alone?
A.    I left with my child, the child I have already mentioned to you.
Q.    You did indeed speak to us of a child.  Can you specify that child's
age?
A.    The child was one year and six months -- the child was 18 months old.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I don't know at what time we are supposed to break.  If
it is at 12, I think this would be a good moment for me to break,
unless you want to go on further -- later -- until later.
MR. PRESIDENT:
How much longer do you anticipate in your examination?
MS. FALL:
Perhaps one more hour, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Okay.  Thank you very much.
MR. HOOPER:
Sorry, Mr. President.  Mr. President, may I just say that I very much
doubt that there could be another hour of this -- of her story.  I know
the account.  I have had the advantage of it.  I would put it at
minutes, but --
MR. PRESIDENT:
We think it would be (inaudible) to complete the witness, if possible.
We think it may be better to complete the witness, if possible.  It's
just 12 o'clock.  We -- so let’s see what happens.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, is that to say that I should abridge my examination-in-
chief?  Mr. Hooper said he knows the events.  I don't know whether that
requires me to finish in 30 minutes.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Mr. Hooper is not part of the adjudication team and we have not made
any suggestion you should abridge your examination-in-chief.  You said
that you had estimated it would take about an hour.  That takes us up
to 1 o'clock.  We thought that we should continue as it's just
o'clock and we started about 9:30 this morning, and we want to
finish the case.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Madam Witness, before we move on to an event that we could consider
occurred after you left the hospital, I should like to come back to
some points.  While you were at the hospital, that entire period from –
let’s say from the 21st of April to, according to what you have said,
the 31st of May 1994 --
MR. HOOPER:
Sorry, the witness has never said 31st of May.  She said she thought
she left the hospital in early May to mid-May, please.  Thank you.
MS. FALL:
Quite right, Counsel Hooper.  It is a -- the 1st of May and mid-May.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Did you meet anybody you knew?
A.    You mean of people who were ill or wounded that I travelled with?  I
don't understand very well.  I need a clarification.
Q.    I shall, therefore, be more specific.  Apart from those wounded,
injured people, those refugees whom you travelled with, did you, among
other refugees, meet any people you knew?
A.    There were other people I met whom I didn't know, but that I had
occasion to meet at that time -- to get to know at that time, and we
met again after the war, and we cemented our acquaintance.
Q.    Madam Witness, you have told us that you thought you had to leave
because you had been discovered.  Can you tell us what you mean by
that?
A.    My identity had been discovered.  The people knew already I had --
that I had no ID card, and at that time it was considered to be
synonymous with being Tutsi.  When one did not have an ID card, one was
taken to be a Tutsi, and those are the circumstances in which I left
that place.
Q.    You told us it was between the 1st of May and mid-May.  Can you tell
us at what time of day did you leave the hospital?
A.    I spent the night in a sorghum field and the next morning I went to
the préfectural offices.  I took the opportunity of a group of people
passing to go with them to the préfectural office, but as to the date,
I really can't remember.
Q.    Madam Witness, when you left the hospital and went to that sorghum
field, can you tell us how long, if you can, it took you to reach the
sorghum fields?
A.    Not long at all.  There is a kitchen used by patients, and not far
from there was a sorghum field, and that is when I left the building,
the maternity ward building, to go there.  It is a short distance.
Q.    Thank you, Madam Witness.  I should like to come back to one point.
A while back I put a question to you regarding the people that you had
occasion to meet while you were at the hospital.  I should like to be
more precise.  Among -- and before going on to that other event, I
should like to ask you -- you have already confirmed regarding your
identity -- without giving any precise names, do you still work at the
place indicated, mentioned on your personal particulars form?
A.    Yes, I still work at the same place.
Q.    Can you tell us how long, approximately, you have been working there?
A.    Ten years.  No, wait, I am mistaken as to the number of years.
Unless I am mistaken, I have been working there for seven or eight
years.
Q.    Madam Witness, regarding the number of years you have been working in
that establishment, have you -- do you know of anyone else who was at
the hospital in 1994?  Have you had occasion to meet anyone who was at
the hospital in 1994?
A.    Yes.
Q.    Those people whom -- who you know were at the hospital in 1994, in
the intervening years have you had occasion to meet them?
A.    Although *********************, we do meet from time to time.
Q.    Madam, since you have told us that you meet from time to time, can
you tell us under what circumstances you meet?
A.    We meet, in particular, at church or at meetings.
Q.    When you speak of meetings, could you be more specific?
A.    Yes.  I am speaking of, for example, meetings.  It can happen at
meetings concerning Gacaca.
************************************************************************
********************************.  We meet and we greet each other; and
then, as I said, we meet at church and say good day, because we are
acquainted.
Q.    Madam Witness, with those people with whom you made acquaintance who
were refugees in 1994, have you had occasion to discuss with them or
talk with them about what happened to you in 1994?
A.    Of course.  We talk about it.  We discuss it because we met during
the war, and after the war we met again and spoke of -- we tell each
other our adventures and the circumstances, for example, whereby we
survived the killing.
Q.    Madam Witness, regarding those people, can you tell us whether they
are or are not witnesses in the present trial?
A.    I am not sure.
Q.    Madam Witness, you told us that you spoke of those events with those
people.  Can you tell us whether there were any particular
circumstances where you spoke of those events?
A.    No, we don't speak only about that when we meet.  It's not something
we speak of all the time.  If -- we perhaps spoke of it on one
occasion, but not all the time, every time we meet.
Q.    Madam, I shall continue, then, with regard to the events you have
told us of.
I notice that after the hospital you went to the préfectural offices,
and you told us that you spent the night in the sorghum field, if I am
not mistaken, and then in the company of other people you went to the
préfectural offices.  Is that correct?
A.    I spent the night in a sorghum field.  I was with my child, and the
next morning I went off in the direction to the préfectural offices.
There were people going to the market and I joined that group.  I went
among -- in among that group to the préfectural offices.
Q.    Those people going to market, did you know them?
A.    No, I did not know them.  They were just people going to the market,
but I had to pass a roadblock in front of the ESO with those people.  I
took the opportunity of that group of people to cross the roadblock,
and then I went on to the préfectural offices.
Q.    You have mentioned a roadblock.  Who was at the roadblock?
A.    Soldiers from the ESO.  And, indeed, the roadblock was in front of
the ESO camp.
Q.    Madam Witness, can you tell us if you know why that roadblock was in
front of the ESO camp?
A.    I noted that the roadblock was there, but as to why -- well, people
were intercepted so that their ID cards could be checked and those who
were discovered to be Tutsi -- that is why the roadblock was set up
there.
Q.    Madam Witness, were you checked at the roadblock?
A.    Yes, I was asked to show my ID card, and I showed them the document
certifying that I was a carer, and I told them that I was going to get
food for a patient, and they let me pass.
Q.    Madam Witness, having passed the roadblock -- the roadblock, what
subsequently occurred?
A.    I went on my way to the préfectural offices where I found many
refugees, and I stayed with them.
Q.    Madam Witness, in respect of the moment when you left the roadblock
and the moment when you arrived at the préfectural offices, can you
tell us how long it was?
A.    Not long.
Q.    Not long?  Can you give us an approximate idea?
A.    From the ESO to the préfectural offices, to someone walking quickly
it would take ten minutes.  As far as I was concerned, I had my child,
I was carrying my child, I think it took me about 15 minutes, but
that's only an estimate.
Q.    Madam, when you arrived at the préfectural offices, where did you go?
A.    Not far from the office there was a guava tree.  There were many
refugees lying on the ground, so I joined the refugees and stayed
there.
Q.    You tell us that there were many refugees lying around on the ground,
now, what refugees were those?  Do you know?  Were they wounded people
or were they merely people who had come there?
A.    Amongst these refugees, some were wounded, but in the main, these
were people who had come to seek refuge at that place and who were
Tutsis.
Q.    Witness, once more, how can you be certain that these people were
Tutsis?
A.    Generally, Hutus had identity cards identifying them as such.  But
people who had Tutsi identity cards identifying them as Tutsis did not
show them; some had even thrown theirs away.  Hutus could move about
freely without any constraints.
Q.    Witness, you said that there were people lying down, refugees you
said.  Could you, even approximately, give us an estimate or an idea of
how many people there were?
A.    There were many people.  There were some behind the préfecture
office.  Around the préfecture there was -- there were refugees
everywhere.  There were many people.  I really couldn't advance a
figure, however approximate?
Q.    So you were at the préfecture during that time.  You said that you
left the hospital round about mid-May.  After spending the night in a
sorghum field you went past the roadblock and managed to reach the
préfecture where you found many wounded persons.  And so you were
amongst these refugees.  Can you tell us what happened after that?
A.    Afterwards, the person who had been -- about whom I had been told
that he was called André Rwamakuba at the hospital, I saw this person
again at the préfecture office.
Q.    Witness, can you tell us -- can you tell us what time elapsed between
the moment when you arrived at the préfecture and the moment when you
saw André Rwamakuba around the préfecture, as you have said you did?
A.    I really cannot remember.  You know, when I was in the préfecture
office I noticed that day faded into night, and so on and so forth, but
it was difficult for me to note what date it was.
Q.    Can you tell us, Witness, how long you stayed at the préfecture
office?
A.    I stayed there for a long time.
Q.    I understand that it was a long time, but could you perhaps be a
little bit more specific as to this long time about which you have just
told us?  Could you estimate it, in terms of days or weeks?  Is it
possible, do you think?
A.    I cannot.  I stayed there for a long time and we left this place to
go elsewhere.  We went to Kansi and then we returned to the préfecture
office.  Afterwards, we were transferred to Rango.  So I really
couldn't tell you for how long I stayed at the préfecture office.  I
really couldn't give you an estimate.
Q.    I shan't insist, Madam Witness.  However, could you perhaps tell us
whether André Rwamakuba came just after you arrived at the préfecture
or towards the end of your stay at the préfecture, that is, when you
were about to leave the préfecture.
A.    When I think of it, I think he came to that place soon after I
arrived at the préfecture office.  I saw him when he was getting out of
his vehicle, then the préfet got out of his office, and I saw them
together.
Q.    Witness, you are telling us that you saw André Rwamakuba arrive.  Can
you tell us, if you know, from what direction he had arrived?
A.    I saw the vehicle drive up and stop there, but I do not know from
what direction it was coming.  I saw the préfet get out of his office,
and at the time, my child, who was walking, walked towards --
approached the vehicle.
Q.    Madam Witness, you say that he came on board the vehicle.  Can you
tell us -- can you describe this vehicle to us?
A.    I didn't go to observe the vehicle in question.  I was in trouble.  I
really wasn't inclined to note the colour, the shape of the vehicle.
The fact is that I saw him get out of the vehicle.  I realised that I
had seen him before at the hospital.
The préfet came out and they greeted each other.  My child wished to
approach -- tried to approach the vehicle and I went to catch him
quickly so he shouldn't.
Q.    So you are telling us about the préfet.  Did you know the name of the
préfet who was there at the time?
A.    Yes.  No, I don't know the name because at the -- I know the name,
but I didn't know it at the time.  But it is the people who were there
with me who told me what the préfet's name was.
Q.    Could you tell the Trial Chamber what the name of the préfet was?
A.    The préfet's name is Sylvain Nsabimana.
Q.    Do you have any news of this person today?
A.    I am afraid I didn't quite understand the question.
Q.    Do you know where Préfet Sylvain Nsabimana might be now?
A.    I heard that he is in detention in Arusha.
Q.    Witness, so you saw André Rwamakuba arrive, he got out of his car,
the préfet was going to -- went out of his office and approached André
Rwamakuba.  What happened then?
A.    As I said, my child tried to approach the vehicle and I went to get
him back, and I heard Rwamakuba ask the préfet why these people were
still there and that they were to be killed.  So I took the child back
and I went and joined the group of refugees, and I told them what this
gentleman had just said.  As to the two officials, they went into the
office.
Q.    Witness, you have told us that your child was going towards the
vehicle, which is why you followed him.  Can you indicate to us what
the distance was between where the vehicle was located and where the
group of refugees was?
A.    It was a short distance.  The refugees were near the guava tree that
is -- was in front of the préfecture office, and the vehicle was parked
in front of the préfet's office.
Q.    Madam Witness, could you repeat for our benefit the words you heard
André Rwamakuba repeat -- say?
A.    I heard him say, "What are these refugees doing here?  They are
Tutsis.  They must be killed.  They should not be seen here again."
Q.    Madam Witness, did you yourself hear these words?
A.    Yes, I heard these words myself.  It is when I was trying to pick up
my child to prevent him from approaching the vehicle.  So personally, I
personally heard these words.
Q.    Would you be able to give us even an approximation of the distance
between you and André Rwamakuba when you heard him say these words?
A.    It was a very short distance.  The vehicle was where this person was
sitting.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Witness points.
THE WITNESS:
And I went to fetch my child.  And he was saying, "What are these
refugees doing here?  They are Tutsis.  They must be killed."  He was
not speaking in a low voice.  He was audible, because he spoke while
gesticulating with his arm.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The court chart, could we use that to express the distance you just
pointed out, in terms of metres?
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Witness, as the President has requested, is it possible for you to
evaluate the term in metres?
MR. PRESIDENT:
I thought she pointed to a person.  I thought she pointed to a place in
the courtroom and we might have a chart to show what that distance
measures, so that might assist in agreeing on a distance.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Witness, I shall ask you to be more specific perhaps.  By using the
courtroom where you are, could you indicate the distance from Rwamakuba
when you heard him say these things?
A.    Let us suppose that this is the préfecture office --
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
Witness points.
THE WITNESS:
The vehicle is coming, and it is parked where that person is sitting,
and then I move to go and fetch my child.  So the person in front of
the office speaks out loud and says loudly, “What are these people
doing here?  These people are Tutsis.  They should be killed.  They
should no longer live in this country.”  I heard that and I was an
eyewitness.  And if you know the préfecture office, there is only a
small parking lot.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Yes, Madam Witness.  What we are trying to get you to do so that we
can have a firm estimate in terms of metres is the distance from where
you are to a precise point in this courtroom, and you will tell us this
is where I was, that is where André Rwamakuba was and this is where --
the distance that separates us when I heard him say these words.
Please use the courtroom as a reference -- any location in the
courtroom as a reference.  I hope you understand.
A.    I was moving to go and get my child.  I was not sitting:   My child
escaped my grasp and went towards the vehicle.  I went to get the
child.  There were people who were standing in front of the office.
Consider the person whom I have indicated.  You know, that person was --
take it that this person is where the vehicle would have been parked
and the people whom -- who were talking were in front of me near the
office talking out loud using gestures.
Q.    So, if I understand correctly, and I am going to try and summarise
what you have said, if I make a mistake, do please correct me.  So you
are pointing to this person who is in the back of the courtroom here.
A.    Yes.  Yes, that lady.
Q.    So this lady, where would she be in your estimate?
A.    That is the vehicle.  That is where the vehicle was.
Q.    So in relation to this lady, where were André Rwamakuba and the
préfet?
A.    Let's say that here is the préfecture office, so Rwamakuba was here
where I am showing you.  He got out of the vehicle and stopped at the
entrance to the office.
Q.    So, if we use the document, the courtroom sketch, the distance
between the Accused’s box --
MR. PRESIDENT:
The witness box.
THE ENGLISH INTERPRETER:
"Witness box", counsel corrects in English.
MS. FALL:
It is 8 metres and 40 centimetres, the distance.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Now, regarding this distance, can you tell us you -- where you
yourself were?
A.    Suppose that I was at the place where the vehicle was parked where
the lady that I showed was -- is, so since my child had approached the
vehicle, I went towards the child to get him and I heard this person
say out loud, "The Tutsis must be killed.  They must leave this
country.  "He was waving his arms about and speaking out quite loud.
After he said this, he went into the préfet's office fall
Mr. President, should is then be taken that the distance the witness
has mentioned is about 8 metres and 40 centimetres.
MR. PRESIDENT:
I think so because she indicated a personal at the back of the
courtroom and the chart shows that is 8 metres and -- so I think that
is -- Mr. Hooper, is that acceptable?
MR. HOOPER:
Yes, quite acceptable.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you.
MS. FALL:
Most obliged.
BY MS. FALL:
Q.    Witness, you tell us that afterwards, Dr. André Rwamakuba and the
préfet went into the préfecture office.  Did you hear anything else at
the time when he was getting into the office?
A.    I heard nothing else.  I joined the rest of the refugees after that?
Q.    Madam Witness, after this incident at the préfecture office, did you
see André Rwamakuba again?
A.    I never saw him again.
Q.    Witness, in the statements, prior statements that you made to the
investigators, did you refer to any other people?
A.    I don't quite understand your question.
Q.    You made statements in front of -- or to the investigators of the
Tribunal in Rwanda.  When you made these statements, did you only
mention the name of André Rwamakuba, Dr. Gatera and the persons whose
names you have called here, or did you mention any other names?
A.    I may have, but I don't remember any more.
Q.    Now, regarding the killings that occurred at the university hospital.
Apart from the names that you have mentioned here, do you know of any
other people who were responsible for killings?
A.    There are people whose names I didn't mention here that I will
mention in Gacaca courts.  I might also talk about other people who are
in detention in Rwanda.
Q.    These people who are currently in detention in Rwanda whom you saw
commit certain crimes in the hospital, regarding these people, can you
tell us -- can you give us their names?
A.    I do not finely it necessary because some of these people are
labourers who worked at the hospital who are in prison, some are
employees of the hospital yet others are in detention.  I do not think
that it is necessary to talk of them here.  I shall have the
opportunity to talk of them during Gacaca Court sessions.
Q.    Madam Witness, apart from the events that you have just recounted to
us, events involving Rwamakuba, André Rwamakuba, did you see him commit
any other acts?
A.    I have told you what I saw him do at the hospital.  I also saw him at
the préfecture office, but I never saw him again elsewhere.
Q.    Thank you, Madam Witness.
I have a series of questions regarding your testimony in other trials.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I do not know whether it would be appropriate for me to
continue, or perhaps this would be a good time to take a break.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, you have not fully used up your anticipated hour yet.  You have
ten minutes more.  How much more do you think you are going to take?
MS. FALL:
Forty minutes, perhaps.
MR. HOOPER:
Yes, and we can see what Ms. Fall can do what she sheets her mind to
it.  What concerns me though is that if there is going to be reference
to previous testimony this witness, I raised question of admissibility
in chief.
MS. FALL:
Mr. President, I can do what Mr. Hooper has always done up until now
regarding his cross-examination.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Not really, there are different rules in examination-in-chief and cross-
examination.  A witness's prior consistent statement is not evidence.
It's the inconsistent statements that are admissible.  So it's -- the
rule of the cross-examiner with regard to statements are quite
different with regard to the examination-in-chief.  So I don't think
that you would be allowed to do what the counsel for the Defence was
allowed to do.
THE WITNESS:
Mr. President, I have a problem.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, Madam Witness.
THE WITNESS:
Mr. President, Your Honours, please remember, I have a two-month-old
baby.  I have just spent a lot of time before you, and when we had a
break I went to see the baby, but it was sleeping.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.  We will take that into account.
Yes.  We will grant the adjournment now.  We resume at 2 o'clock on
Monday afternoon.
Madam Witness, we are going to take the adjournment now.  Normally, the
Court sets both in the morning and in the afternoon.  We have sessions,
all-day sessions, but at the Tribunal Friday is normally a half day
than means that the Tribunal usually shuts down at 2:00 p.m. you're
going to be free over the weekend, but I want to let you know that
during this adjournment, as on any other adjournment that occurs during
your tell, you are still a witness in the trial.  And as such, you are
not to discuss the case or your testimony with anybody.  Do you
understand that?
THE WITNESS:
Yes, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Thank you very much.  You are excused now and you will return to the
court at 2 p.m. on Monday.
THE WITNESS:
Thank you.
(Witness exited courtroom)
MR. HOOPER:
While that's being done can I just raise a matter that doesn't concern
our circumstances at all at the moment.  It's just that we wish to go
and visit the Accused in prison this afternoon, but it's closed to us
on a Friday afternoon unless we forewarned the commandant and we
haven’t, but the assistance of this Chamber will secure our entry into
the prison.
MR. PRESIDENT:
(Microphones overlapping)
MR. HOOPER:
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, I think it's reasonable in the circumstances that the Chamber
directs the registrar to inform the commandant to receive counsel for
the Accused Rwamakuba this afternoon.
MR. HOMETOWU:
Very well, Mr. President.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Yes, thank you very much.
MR. HOOPER:
And that will mean others in the team; they can be sticklers.
MR. PRESIDENT:
Well, the Defence team.
MR. HOOPER:
Thank you very much.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Defence team is what the order shall be.
Ms. Fall, the legal matter you wished to raise -- it's now 1 o'clock
and I don't think the time that you make to makes any difference, so we
will come to it on Monday afternoon.
MS. FALL:
Yes, Mr. President.  I thought you had said that we would raise those
matters after the examination-in-chief and the cross-examination.
Perhaps I have misunderstood.
MR. PRESIDENT:
No, I had not specified we would have done it.  I had thought that we
might have come to it later today, but I didn't anticipate the
examination-in-chief was going to be so long, but it's obvious we can't
do it now.  So we will come to it on Monday or we will come to it at a
convenient time next week.  It may be that after the examination and
cross-examination make appropriate.  So --
MS. FALL:
No problem for me, Mr. President.  But depending on the length of the
examination-in-chief -- as regards examination-in-chief, I think I have
always done my best for it not to be too long.
MR. PRESIDENT:
My comment was not intended to be a criticism, it was just -- we are
going to take the adjournment now and we resume at 2 o'clock on Monday
afternoon.
(Court adjourned at 1305H)
(Pages 24 to 37 by Judith Baverstock)
C E R T I F I C A T E
We, Ann Burum, Jean Baigent, Sheriffo Jammeh, Sherri Knox and Judith
Baverstock, Official Court Reporters for the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, do hereby certify that the foregoing proceedings
in the above-entitled cause were taken at the time and place as
stated; that it was taken in shorthand (stenotype) and thereafter
transcribed by computer; that the foregoing pages contain a true and
correct transcription of said proceedings to the best of our ability
and understanding.
We further certify that we are not of counsel nor related to any of
the parties to this cause and that we are in nowise interested in the
result of said cause.
___________________________      Ann Burum
___________________________      Jean Baigent
___________________________      Sheriffo Jammeh
___________________________       Sherri Knox
___________________________      Judith Baverstock
